<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN" [

<!ENTITY larr       CDATA "&#x2190;"            -- leftwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY rarr       CDATA "&#x2192;"            -- rightwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY glots      CDATA "&#x0294;"            -- glottal stop -->

<!ENTITY amacr      CDATA "&#x0101;"            -- a with macron -->
<!ENTITY imacr      CDATA "&#x012B;"            -- i with macron -->
<!ENTITY umacr      CDATA "&#x016B;"            -- u with macron -->

<!ENTITY amacrgra   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0300;"    -- a with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY imacrgra   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0300;"    -- i with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY umacrgra   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0300;"    -- u with macron and grave -->

<!ENTITY amacracu   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0301;"    -- a with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY imacracu   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0301;"    -- i with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY umacracu   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0301;"    -- u with macron and acute -->

<!ENTITY acaron     CDATA "a&#x030C;"           -- a with caron -->
<!ENTITY ucaron     CDATA "u&#x030C;"           -- u with caron -->
<!ENTITY icaron     CDATA "i&#x030C;"           -- i with caron -->

<!ENTITY schwa      CDATA "&#x0259;"            -- schwa (turned e) -->

]><TEI.2 lang=en>
<teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
        <titleStmt>
            <title>A Dictionary of Cebuano Visayan</title>
            <author>John U. Wolff</author>
        </titleStmt>
    </fileDesc>
    <profileDesc>
        <langUsage>
            <language id=en>English</language>
            <language id=en-US>English (United States)</language>
            <language id=ceb>Cebuano</language>
        </langUsage>
    </profileDesc>
</teiHeader>
<text>
<body>
<pb n=282>

<div1 n=H>
<head>H</head>

<p id=5691><form>ha</form> <number>1</number> particle at end of the sentence. <number>a</number> asking interlocutor if he understands. <i>Dì ni sabunan, ha?</i> Don&apos;t wash this with soap, do you understand? <number>b</number> asking interlocutor for his agreement. <i>Singku na lang, ha?</i> Just let me have it for five pesos, all right? <i>Adtu na lang ku, ha?</i> I&apos;ll be going now, O.K.? <i>Bálik unyà, ha?</i> Come back later, will you? <form>&mdash; ba</form> particle asking for interlocutor&apos;s agreement in particularly urgent tones. <i>Malígù ku, Mámi, ha ba?</i> May I take a bath, Mommy, please? O.K.? <form>salámat &mdash;</form> thanks a lot. <number>2</number> particle initial in a sentence. <number>2a</number> particle discussing s.t. as not worth thinking about: Humph. <i>Ha! Ábig mahadluk ku níya,</i> Humph, he thinks I&apos;m scared of him. <number>2b</number> particle asking the interlocutor to repeat (somewhat curt). <i>Ha? Muusab pa ka?</i> What? You mean you&apos;re going to do it again!

<p id=5692><form>ha-<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>HI-(&rarr;)</sc>, <i>1</i>.</xr>

<p id=5693><form>ha-<sub>2</sub></form> adjective forming affix added to adjectives referring to degree. It has no meaning other than to give a formal flavor to the style. <i>Hataas,</i> Tall. <i>Halayù,</i> Far. <i>Halapad,</i> Broad.

<p id=5694><form>háa</form> <xr>= <sc>HÁIN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5695><form>háb</form> <xr>= <sc>HÁLAB</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5696><form>hába</form> <pos>n</pos> low-quality corn grits which were sold in times of corn shortage in pre-war times.

<p id=5697><form>hábà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> take sides with. <i>Gihabáan siya sa íyang bána,</i> Her husband took her side. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> run to s.o. for sympathy and ask him to take sides. <i>Túa na pud magpahábà dáyun tung Máma níya,</i> There she goes, running to her Mama again. <number>2</number> say s.t. exaggerated to get a person to feel a certain way. <i>Nagpahábà siyag sulti sa íyang ámu nga maáyu siyang mutrabáhu maung giingkrísan,</i> He talked big to his boss to make him think he worked well and he got a raise. <pos>n</pos> action of running to s.o. for sympathy.

<p id=5698><form>hábag</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> round, black to greyish black, smooth stone found on beaches, used for bathing. <number>2</number> shore area where such stones are found in abundance.

<p id=5699><form>habágat</form> <pos>n</pos> strong wind that hits Cebu from the southwest, common from June to September. <pb n=283><pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> for the <ix>habágat</ix> to blow. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>southwest</tr>.

<p id=5700><form>habáhab</form> <pos>a</pos> having a bitter sour taste similar to that of unripe grapefruit. <i>Habáhab kaáyu ning buungúna,</i> This shaddock has a very biting and bitter taste. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> get a bitter, rancid taste. <i>Naghabáhab na ang sud-an,</i> The food tastes rancid.

<p id=5701><form>habak, hábak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear an amulet. <i>Way dautang mahitabù sa bátang gihabákan,</i> No harm can come to a child with an amulet. <pos>n</pos> <tr>amulet</tr>.

<p id=5702><form>hábak<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> an area of a farm, usually along its length, that is alloted to s.o. for him to till. <i>Gibáhin sa lima ka hábak ang baul,</i> The farm was divided into five portions.

<p id=5703><form>hábal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; b]</itype> for animals to mate. <i>Gihabálan ang ákung bigal kaduha,</i> My sow has been bred twice. <number>2</number> for people to fornicate (derogatory). <pos>n</pos> act of breeding. <form>pa-</form> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> breed animals. <form>pa-an</form> <pos>n</pos> male pig for breeding.

<p id=5704><form>hábas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a growth which develops in horses&apos; mouths which causes hardship in eating. It is removed by application of heated iron. <number>2</number> sores that develop on soft tissue: the tongue, corners of the mouth, palate. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A123P; a4b4]</itype> for horses to develop such a growth. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2; b4]</itype> develop sores on the tongue or in the corners of the mouth. <i>Mihábas (gihabásan) ákung dílà sa pagkináug pinya,</i> My tongue got sores on it from eating too much pineapple.

<p id=5705><form>hábas<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>HALÁBAS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5706><form>habasan</form> <pos>n</pos> general name for cone shells.

<p id=5707><form>habásan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. surgeon fish.

<p id=5708><form>hábaw</form> <xr>= <sc>HÁBAL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5709><form>habay</form> <pos>n</pos> pigs with yellowish or reddish-brown hair and skin. <number>2</number> person with a spot of lighter colored hair on the head (humorous).

<p id=5710><form>hábay</form> <xr>= <sc>HÁIN BAY</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>HÁIN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5711><form>habhab</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> for pigs to eat. <number>1a</number> for people to eat (derogatory). <i>Gihabhab sa mga bilat sa ílang ina ang ákung kík,</i> The bastards ate my cake. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; ab2]</itype> for pigs to snap at one in anger. <i>Ayaw pagdúul sa anay kay hihabhaban ka unyà,</i> Don&apos;t go too close to the sow because she&apos;ll bite you. <number>3</number> <itype>[A3; b5(1)]</itype> take out, eat away portions from, bit by bit. <i>Túbig ang mihabhab sa kílid sa kanal,</i> Water ate away bits from the side of the ditch. <i>Balud nga naghabhab sa pangpang,</i> Waves that are eating away at the cliff. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> intake of food of pigs or persons (derogatory). <form>-ag-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make the noise of pigs eating. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> eat with a loud noise like a pig. <form>-um-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> pig that will bite.

<p id=5712><form>hábi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hobby</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c6]</itype> have a hobby.

<p id=5713><form>habig</form> towards the side or direction of. <i>Paghalábas habig sa wala,</i> Cut down the weeds on the left side.

<p id=5714><form>habilhábil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> put up a temporary screen for shelter or in an unfinished house. <i>Naghabilhábil lang ug mga kartun ang mga nasunúgan didtu sa parki,</i> The fire victims just put up a temporary screen of empty boxes for shelter in the park.

<p id=5715><form>habitsuylas</form> <pos>n</pos> green or wax beans: <bio>Phaseolus vulgaris</bio>.

<p id=5716><form>habluk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a4]</itype> <tr>crave</tr>, yearn intensely for s.t. <i>Gihabluk ku sa ámung lugar,</i> I crave to see my homeland. <i>Hablúkun kag isdà sa bukid,</i> You will develop an intense craving for fish in the mountains. <pos>a</pos> having a strong craving or appetite.

<p id=5717><form>hablun</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>HABUL<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=5718><form>*hablus</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>HUMABLUS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5719><form>habù</form> <xr>= <sc>HALBÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5720><form>habubuyna</form> <xr>= <sc>HIRBUBUYNA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5721><form>hábug</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>high</tr>, <tr>lofty</tr>. <i>Hábug nga pangpang,</i> A tall cliff. <number>2</number> lofty in thoughts and aspirations. <i>Hábug kaáyu ang ákung mga damgu álang sa ákung mga anak,</i> I have high hopes for my children. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be high or towering, physically or in aspiration. <i>Naghábug lang ang hunàhúnà pagnigusyu apan way puhúnan,</i> He has great ideas of going into business but he doesn&apos;t have money. <form>&mdash; ug pamarug</form> tall in stature. <form>&mdash; manulti</form> talk as if one were s.o. important, of high standing. <i>Hábug kaáyung manulti mu rag dì kagíkag pubri,</i> He talks big as if he weren&apos;t from a poor family. <form>gi-un(&rarr;), ka-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>height</tr>, <tr>altitude</tr>.

<p id=5722><form>habuhábu</form> <pos>n</pos> light rain showers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>shower</tr>.

<p id=5723><form>hábuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> fertilize plants with compost. <i>Gihabúkan nákù ang mga tanum,</i> I fertilized my plants with humus. <number>2</number> do s.t. to make personal relations close (lit. nourish your friendship). <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>humus</tr>, matter made from a compost pile. <number>2</number> area made solid by a hardened mass of garbage. <i>Magbáy ka ibabaw sa habuk?</i> Are you going to build a house on the mound of hardened garbage?

<p id=5724><form>habul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>weave</tr> with a hand loom. <i>Habla ang lánut,</i> Weave the abaca fibers in a hand loom. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>HABLUN</sc>, <i>1</i>.</xr> <form>(&larr;)<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> blanket, sheet, or anything used as covering for sleeping. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> cover s.o. with a blanket. <i>Habúli ang bátà,</i> Cover the child with a blanket. <number>2</number> <tr>envelope</tr>, <tr>enshroud</tr> in an atmospheric condition. <i>Búkid nga gihabúlan ug gábun,</i> A mountain enshrouded in mist. <number>3</number> drink liquor before going to sleep. <pb n=284><i>Maáyu níyang pagkatúlug kay naghábul na nag tubà,</i> He slept soundly because he drank toddy before going to bed (lit. took toddy as a blanket). <form>hablun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> hand loom. <number>2</number> cloth woven in a hand loom. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>HABUL</sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> wear hand-woven cloth. <form>halablan, hagbanan, hagbunan, hablunan, hablanan, halabúlan</form> <xr>= <sc>HABLUN</sc>, <ix>n 1</ix>.</xr> <form>habulhabul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> thin membrane that separates the skin of the abdomen from the intestines and stomach. <number>2</number> thin membrane between the egg white and the shell.

<p id=5725><form>habul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>seriously injured</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be seriously injured.

<p id=5726><form>hábul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dull</tr>, not sharp. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB; a]</itype> make s.t. dull, be dull, not sharp. <i>Mahábul ang gunting ug gamítun pagputul ug sín,</i> The scissors will become dull if you use them to cut galvanized iron. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>HÁBUL</sc>, <i>a</i>.</xr> <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> of a dull sort. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become dull. <i>Nahabulan na man núun ning gilit,</i> This safety razor blade has become dull.

<p id=5727><form>habun</form> <pos>n</pos> toilet soap. <form>-íra</form> <corr><pos>n</pos> </corr>soap dish, container for toilet soap.

<p id=5728><form>habwà, habwas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> remove s.t. from a place, esp. from a container without tipping it. <i>Habwáa ang kargamintu sa trák,</i> Take the cargo out of the truck. <i>Bagul lay ihabwà sa túbig,</i> Use a coconut shell to bail the water out. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; ang kináun</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2P; c1]</itype> cause to vomit (remove what one ate from his stomach). <i>Habwáun (ihabwà) giyud ang átung kináun ug musakay tas barku ug tinghangin,</i> You surely will vomit if you sail in stormy weather. <number>3</number> <itype>[B124; b2]</itype> go away from s.w. in large numbers. <i>Nahabwà ming tanan ngadtu sa lungsud dihang may naghuramintádu,</i> We left the village and took refuge in town when s.o. ran <corr sic=amock>amok</corr>. <i>Nahabwaan na mi sa balay,</i> Only a few of us are left at home.

<p id=5729><form>habyug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> cast fishing line. <i>Dílì ku makahabyug ngadtu sa lalum kay mabà ákung pasul,</i> I cannot cast out into the deep water because my fishline is short. <i>Ihabyug ug kusug ímung pasul arun muabut sa layù,</i> Throw your line out hard so it will reach far out. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> fish by casting a line. <pos>n</pos> fishing by casting a line.

<p id=5730><form>hád</form> <xr>= <sc>HÁLAD</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5731><form>hadag</form> <xr>= <sc>HARAG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5732><form>hadaw</form> <xr>= <sc>HARAW</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5733><form>hadígi</form> <xr>= <sc>HALÍGI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5734><form>hadiyung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>whizzing</tr>, <tr>whistling</tr>, <tr>buzzing</tr> sound. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b2cP]</itype> whistle or whiz by. <i>Hángin nga naghadiyung,</i> Whistling wind. <i>Naghadiyung ang buyug,</i> The bee buzzed. <i>Nahadiyungan akug bála,</i> A bullet just barely missed me.

<p id=5735><form>hadlà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> play with a child to make it laugh or divert it. <i>Hadláa ang bátà arun dì muhílak,</i> Amuse the child so he won&apos;t cry. <number>2</number> engage in horseplay. <i>Naghadlà ang mga bátà sa sála,</i> The children ran around in the living room. <number>3</number> for circumstances to be annoyance, as if teasing. <i>Dagkung balud mihadlà sa barku,</i> The huge waves played with the ship. <number>4</number> <itype>[C]</itype> pet, engage in sexual foreplay. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> playful teasings. <i>Wà giyud pabangbang si Turyu sa mga hadlà sa íyang asáwa,</i> Toryo&apos;s wife failed to overcome his bad mood with her playful teasing. <i>Ang mga hadlà sa kapaláran,</i> The playful twists of fate. <number>2</number> <tr>foreplay</tr>. <i>Ang hadlà gikinahanglan sa dì pa manghiláwas,</i> Foreplay is necessary before the sex act. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>playful</tr>.

<p id=5736><form>hadluk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a1b3(1)c]</itype> <tr>scare</tr>, <tr>frighten</tr> s.o. <i>Kinsay mihadluk (nanghadluk) nímu?</i> Who frightened you? <i>Hadlúka arun muhílum,</i> Scare him to quiet him down. <i>Dì ku mahadluk ánang irúa,</i> I&apos;m not scared of that dog. <i>Ang táwu nga gikahadlúkan,</i> A man who is feared. <i>Ihadluk (ipanghadluk) ning bitin ni Manang,</i> Scare Big Sister with this snake. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be afraid. <i>Nagpanghadluk kung muadtu,</i> I am afraid to go there. <pos>n</pos> means to frighten s.o. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> easily frightened. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>fearful</tr>. <i>Mahadlúkun siyang musakayg ayruplánu,</i> She is afraid to ride planes. <form>maka-r-</form> <pos>a</pos> inspiring fear.

<p id=5737><form>hádung</form> <xr>= <sc>HÁRUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5738><form>hadus</form> <xr>= <sc>HARUS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5739><form>hág</form> <xr>= <sc>HÁLAG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5740><form>hagà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> for the body to be gaunt and unhealthy with no energy. <i>Nahagà siya sa pag-útas ug ínum,</i> He became gaunt and unhealthy from drinking too much. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> for the eyes to be deep-set with dark circles under them. <pos>a</pos> having deep-set eyes with dark circles. <i>Hagà ug mata ang mga Katsílà,</i> Spaniards have deep-set eyes with circles under them.

<p id=5741><form>hagabhab<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for a garment to be loose. <i>Hagabhab kaáyu ang íyang padyáma,</i> Her pajamas are very loose. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> for a garment to be, become loose.

<p id=5742><form>hagabhab<sub>2</sub></form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>HABHAB</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5743><form>hagad<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> defective coconut, the meat of which is loosely attached to the shell and which produces little oil.

<p id=5744><form>hagad<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> <number>1</number> offer to do s.t. <i>Mihagad ku paghatud níya sa íla,</i> I offered to take her home. <number>2</number> invite s.o. to do s.t. <i>Hagdun ta untà kag pamasíyu,</i> I would like to invite you to go for a walk. <pos>n</pos> offer to do s.t. <form>(&larr;)<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> challenge s.o. to a fight. <i>Ug <pb n=285>hagárun kag sinukmagay,</i> If you are challenged to a fight. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23; a]</itype> make first move, or touch off. <i>Nagbúlag mi ug akuy mihágad pagpakig-úlì,</i> We separated and I made the first move for reconciliation. <i>Ayaw ihágad sa mga laláki ang ímung pagkababáyi,</i> Do not make yourself cheap by making approaches to men. <pos>n</pos> <tr>challenge</tr>.

<p id=5745><form>hágad<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>highway patrolman</tr>.

<p id=5746><form>hagakhak</form> <pos>n</pos> loud, boisterous laughter. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3c1]</itype> laugh boisterously.

<p id=5747><form>hagal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> produce a rasping, guttural sound in the throat or chest in having a cough or breathing through mucous.

<p id=5748><form>hágal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S]</itype> pant noisily, making a sound in the throat. <i>Mihágal siya sa tantung dinágan,</i> She panted from running so much. <pos>n</pos> panting.

<p id=5749><form>hagálam</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>*GÁLAM</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5750><form>hagalhal</form> <pos>a</pos> wheezing sound produced in a throat full of mucus when air passes through. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a wheezing noise in the throat. <i>Mihagalhal ang himalatyun pagsulti sa íyang panúgun,</i> The dying man spoke his final wishes with a wheezing voice.

<p id=5751><form>hagánas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S]</itype> for water to make a rushing sound. <i>Naghaganas ang busay,</i> The waterfall makes a rushing sound. <pos>n</pos> rushing sound of water. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>HAGÁNAS</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> continuous rushing sound. <i>Hinagánas sa balud,</i> The swash of the waves.

<p id=5752><form>haganhágan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> do s.t. with reserve, not with full strength. <i>Dì ku muhaganhágan pagbúnal nímu,</i> I won&apos;t hold back in hitting you. <i>Maghaganhágan tag gastu kay layù pang tingswildu,</i> Let&apos;s be careful with our money because pay day is still a long way off. <i>Haganhagáni (haganhagána) nang bínu, kay ísug ra ba,</i> Go slow with that liquor because it is powerful stuff. <i>Haganhagána (haganhagáni) pagpadágan ang kutsi,</i> Drive the car slowly.

<p id=5753><form>hágard</form> <pos>n</pos> large motorcycle of the type used by the police. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> use this sort of motorcycle.

<p id=5754><form>hagas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B4]</itype> become gaunt and unhealthy. <i>Naghagas siya kay nag-abusar sa láwas,</i> He has become gaunt and sickly because he does things that are deleterious to his health. <number>2</number> <itype>[a4]</itype> for one&apos;s livelihood to fail as the result of a curse wished on him, or brought on in retribution for a failure to meet one&apos;s obligations. <i>Nalugnas ang átung kamanukan mu ra tag gihagas,</i> Our poultry business failed, as though we were under a curse. <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> do s.t. unpleasant to all without exception. <i>Gihagas mig latigu ni Tátay,</i> Father whipped us all.

<p id=5755><form>hag-as<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> remove water or s.t. watery from a place for the purpose of cleaning it. <i>Gihag-ásan nílag lápuk ang kanal,</i> They removed the mud from the canal.

<p id=5756><form>hag-as<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B246]</itype> for s.t. to happen for no apparent reason. <i>Mihag-as man lang kag kagìkì?</i> What made you giggle all of a sudden? <pos>a</pos> done suddenly for no reason.

<p id=5757><form>hagashas</form> <number>1</number> dry, swishing sound such as that produced by rubbing pieces of paper or by a well-starched dress. <number>2</number> for s.t. to be coarse to the touch such that rubbing the hands over it produces a swishing sound. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> producing a rustling sound. <i>Mihagashas ang dáhun pag-ági sa bitin,</i> The leaves rustled as the snake passed over them.

<p id=5758><form>hagawhaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> speak in a low, hardly audible voice. <i>Hagawháwa (ihagawhaw) lang pagsulti arun dì silang kadungug,</i> Say what you want to say very softly, so they can&apos;t hear. <pos>n</pos> s.t. said in a low voice. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> sounds of low talking.

<p id=5759><form>hagbà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26; c]</itype> fall heavily with a thud. <i>Nahisalibay siya sa kabáyù ug mihagbà (nahagbà) sa yútà,</i> She was thrown off her horse and fell to the ground with a thud. <i>Hihagbaan ug tikì ang lamísa,</i> A gecko fell with a thud on the table. <number>2</number> <itype>[APB26; a]</itype> fail a course, cause one to do so. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> thudding sound produced by a fall. <number>2</number> subject failed.

<p id=5760><form>hagbanan</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>HABUL<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=5761><form>hagbas</form> <xr>= <sc>HALÁBAS</sc>, <i>1</i>.</xr>

<p id=5762><form>hagbay, hagbáya</form> a long time ago, longer than one thinks. <i>Hagbay ra siyang migíkan,</i> Oh, he left some time ago. <i>Hagbay na tu siyang namatay,</i> He died a long time ago (not recently).

<p id=5763><form>hagbunan</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>HABUL<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=5764><form>hagbung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB2; c]</itype> <tr>drop</tr>, let s.t. heavy fall with a crash or thud, for s.t. heavy to do so. <i>Ayaw ihagbung ang sáku kay mabungkas,</i> Don&apos;t throw the sack down because it will burst open. <i>Nahagbung ang masítas,</i> The flower pot fell. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> fail s.o. in school. <i>Hagbúngun ta ka,</i> I&apos;ll fail you. <i>Pila ka sabdyik ímung nahagbúngan?</i> How many subjects did you fail? <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> subject failed. <i>Wà kuy hagbung uy!</i> I didn&apos;t fail anything! <number>2</number> person who failed s.t. <i>Dì makagradwit ang mga hagbung,</i> Failing students cannot graduate. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> crashing noise of things falling.

<p id=5765><form>hagdan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>stairs</tr>, <tr>ladder</tr>. <number>1a</number> ladder made of a bamboo pole with projections left at the nodes used as the footholds. <number>2</number> s.t. by means of which one climbs or improves. <i>Ang paningkámut hagdan sa kalampúsan,</i> Hard <pb n=286>work is the ladder to success. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b6(1)]</itype> climb a ladder. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make into, put a stair or ladder s.w. <form>&mdash; máya</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tufted grass. <form>&mdash; ug uwak</form> k.o. small tree with pinnate leaves, bearing foot-long beans. <form>hagdanhagdan</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>tiered</tr>, having a step-like arrangement. <i>Kík nga hagdanhagdan,</i> A tiered cake. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; c1]</itype> be made in tiers. <i>Naghagdanhagdan ímung tupi kay luhag ka man,</i> Your hair is cut unevenly (like steps) because you kept wiggling about. <form>-an, -an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stairs</tr>.

<p id=5766><form>hagdaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a2b2]</itype> <number>1</number> glean the leftovers after corn or rice harvest. <i>Wà na kitay hagdáwun,</i> There is nothing left for us to glean. <number>2</number> scavenge for leftovers. <i>Ang makililímus nagpanghagdaw intáwun ug íyang sarang makáun sa basurahan,</i> The beggar is scavenging for what he can find in the garbage cans. <number>3</number> glean information. <i>Impurmasiyung nahagdaw sa piryudiku,</i> Information gleaned from the newspapers. <form>-in-an(&rarr;)</form> gleanings. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> place gleaned.

<p id=5767><form>haghag</form> <xr>= <sc>HALAGHAG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5768><form>hagid</form> <xr>= <sc>HÁGUD</sc>, <ix>v 2</ix>.</xr>

<p id=5769><form>hagikhik</form> <xr>= <sc>AGIK-IK</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5770><form>hagílis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> make a high-pitched scream. <i>Mihagílis ang íyang tíngug sa túmang kalísang,</i> Her voice rose to a scream in her terrible fright.

<p id=5771><form>hagímit</form> <pos>n</pos> small tree of primary forest with rough leaves: <bio>Ficus sp.</bio>

<p id=5772><form>hagip-ut</form> <xr>= <sc>GIP-UT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5773><form>hágis</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; a2]</itype> threaten, terrorize people by making trouble for them. <i>Naghágis ang anak sa pulitiku kay nagsalig na,</i> The politician&apos;s son is running around threatening people because he knows he will escape punishment. <i>Gihágis ang ákung anak sa iskuyláhan,</i> My son was bullied around at school. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2N; b(1)]</itype> be the best in a group. <i>Siyay nanghágis sa burd,</i> He was the best in the board exam. <pos>a</pos> be a big bully. <i>Hágis kaáyu sa baylihan,</i> Acting like a bully, terrorizing everyone at the dance.

<p id=5774><form>hágit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[ANC12; b5]</itype> challenge to a fight or contest. <i>Nanghágit siya nákug sukmagay,</i> He challenged me to a fist fight. <number>2</number> <itype>[ANC12; c12]</itype> invite, tempt one to engage in an unwholesome activity. <i>Gihágit ku níyag ínum,</i> He tempted me to join him in a drinking spree. <number>3</number> tempt (literary). <i>Ang manggang hinug mihágit sa ákung kaíbug,</i> The ripe mangoes tempted me. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> provocative, challenging. <number>2</number> tempting one to engage in s.t. unwholesome. <form>mahagithagítun</form> <pos>a</pos> <xr>= <sc>MA-UN</sc>, 1.</xr>

<p id=5775><form>hagiyung, hagíyung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>whizzing</tr>, <tr>whistling</tr>, <tr>buzzing</tr> sound. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make such a sound.

<p id=5776><form>hagíyus</form> <pos>n</pos> a whistling, sibilant, swishing sound produced by a rapidly moving object. <i>Ang hagíyus sa bála,</i> The whizzing of the bullets. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> produce a whistling sound with rapid motion. <i>Mihagíyus siyag dágan,</i> He zoomed away.

<p id=5777><form>hagkik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hot cakes</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, have hot cakes.

<p id=5778><form>hagkut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sticky</tr>. <i>Ang latik hagkut,</i> Syrup is sticky. <i>Hagkut ang ákung kamut,</i> My hands are all sticky. <number>2</number> agreeing to s.t. with reluctance. <i>Dì ku sigúru adtung íyang sáad kay hagkut tu siyag tinubagan,</i> I can&apos;t rely on his promise, because he answered with some reluctance. <number>3</number> for the air to be humid and cool. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> be, make sticky. <i>Mihagkut na ang gwába dyíli,</i> The guava jelly has gotten sticky. <number>2</number> be, make reluctant. &dagger;

<p id=5779><form>hagmang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. wild yam having long edible tubers and thorny vines.

<p id=5780><form>hagmángun</form> <pos>n</pos> large blue-spotted fish similar to the grouper: <bio>Plectropomus spp.</bio>

<p id=5781><form>hagmun</form> <xr>= <sc>SAGMUN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5782><form>hagmuyù</form> <xr>= <sc>HASAGMUYÙ</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>SAGMUYÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5783><form>hagnaw</form> <pos>a</pos> uneasy feeling of coldness and emptiness in one&apos;s stomach. <i>Paimna kug ínit kay hagnaw kaáyu ning ákung tiyan sa pagkawalay káun,</i> Let me take s.t. hot because my stomach is cold and empty from not having eaten anything. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56]</itype> get this feeling. <i>Maung dílì ku ganáhan magswing kay muhagnaw (maghagnaw) lagi nang ákung tiyan iniglabyug gíkan sa táas,</i> That&apos;s why I don&apos;t like to play on the swing because I get a queasy feeling in the stomach when I swing high.

<p id=5784><form>hagnáya</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible, tiny, reddish fish.

<p id=5785><form>hagpà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB; b6]</itype> for tall and pliant things to fall flat on their base, cause them to do so. <i>Bagyu ang naghagpà (nagpahagpà) sa humay,</i> A typhoon flattened the rice plants. <i>Mihagpà ang mais nga gilanápan,</i> The corn was flooded and knocked flat.

<p id=5786><form>hagpak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB456; c1]</itype> slam with a loud bang. <i>Kinsa tung naghagpak sa sira? Nangítà tug áway?</i> Who slammed the door? Is he looking for a fight? <i>Muhagpak ang sira ug hampákun sa hángin,</i> The door slams when the wind blows it.

<p id=5787><form>hagpat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> <number>1</number> pick out s.t. from a larger group. <i>Usa ra ang nahagpatan sa mga nagdimunstrít nga kastigúhun,</i> They singled out one of the demonstrators for punishment. <i>Hagpáta ang mga dikulur nga mga sinínà,</i> Separate out the colored dresses. <number>2</number> remove, separate s.t. useless from the good. <i>Ákù nang gihagpátan ang isdà sa mga bukug,</i> I have removed the bones from the fish. <number>3</number> count ballots. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> pick out <pb n=287>things from the past to remember and reminisce over (literary). <i>Gitagsatagsa níya paghagpat ang mga hitabù,</i> He recalled the various events, one at a time, as they happened. <pos>n</pos> counting of votes. <i>Daghang maniubra sa katapusang hagpat sa balúta,</i> There was lots of chicanery in the final tally of the ballots. <form>-íru</form> <pos>n</pos> person in charge of classifying abaca fibers into different grades. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a2]</itype> be, become a classifier of abaca fibers.

<p id=5788><form>hagpik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> slap s.o. fairly hard on the shoulders. <i>Ayaw kug hagpíka kay dúnay pasù ákung abága,</i> Don&apos;t slap me on the shoulders because I&apos;ve got a sunburn.

<p id=5789><form>hagpù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> for a line or rope to break under tension. <i>Mihagpù ang pasul paglugnut sa dakung subad nga isdà,</i> The fishing line broke when the big fish struggled to get free.

<p id=5790><form>hagsà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> fall heavily onto s.t. hard, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Nahagsà ang ayruplánu,</i> The airplane crashed. <i>Kinsay naghagsà íning mga libru?</i> Who slammed these books down? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for a younger person to call an older person by his name without a title of respect. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> fail s.o. in school. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> things that have fallen. <number>2</number> subject failed. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> crashing sound. <i>Hinagsà sa dagkung káhuy,</i> The crashing sound of the falling trees.

<p id=5791><form>hagsak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2; c]</itype> fall down hard, but usually not onto s.t. hard. <i>Ihagsak nang mga pinusù sa tápuk,</i> Throw the ears of corn onto the pile.

<p id=5792><form>hagtak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make a cracking or banging sound of objects on colliding or falling, drop s.t. making such a sound. <i>Mihagtak ang íyang úlu pagkaigù sa búla,</i> His head went bang when the ball hit it. <i>Ayaw ihagtak ang mga kinúhang mangga arun dì mabuak,</i> Don&apos;t bang the mangoes we picked so that they won&apos;t split open. <number>2</number> <itype>[B246]</itype> spend, lose a big amount in a single instance. <i>Mihagtak ang íyang usa ka líbu sa búwang,</i> He lost his one thousand in a single bet in a cockfight.

<p id=5793><form>hagtik</form> <pos>n</pos> sharp clicking sound. <i>Ang hagtik sa íyang mga tudlù,</i> The clicking sound of his fingers. <i>Ang hagtik sa gátu,</i> The click of the trigger. <i>Ang hagtik sa kandádu,</i> The clicking of the lock. <pos>a</pos> for new paper bills to be crisp. <i>Bag-u pa ning gipagawas kwartáha kay hagtik pa man,</i> This must be a new bill because it is still crisp (lit. still clicks). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> make a clicking, ticking sound. <i>Mihagtik ang íyang nawung sa ákung suntuk,</i> His face made a clicking sound when I hit him. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> continuous clicking sound. <i>Ang hinagtik sa makinilya,</i> The clicking of the typewriter keys.

<p id=5794><form>hagtub</form> <pos>n</pos> loud thumping sound, sound produced by a blow on a hollow object. <i>Ang hagtub sa bumbu,</i> The thumping sound of the bass drum. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> produce a loud thumping sound. <i>Muhagtub ug maáyu ang báhu sa istiryu,</i> The bass of the stereophonic record player makes a loud thumping sound. <i>Muhagtub ka giyud run dihà ug dì ka muhílum,</i> You&apos;ll get it (lit. you&apos;ll go thump) if you don&apos;t shut up.

<p id=5795><form>hagtuk</form> <pos>n</pos> loud knocking sound. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> produce a loud knocking sound. <i>Naghagtuk ang urasan katulu,</i> The clock struck three times. <number>2</number> make loud footfalls on the stairs. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23P]</itype> spend, release a large amount of money at once. <i>Pag-usa ka úras nihagtuk dáyun ang tris sa abangan,</i> At the end of one hour I coughed up three bucks for the rent.

<p id=5796><form>hagtus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB23(1)]</itype> for a line, rope to break under tension, cause it to do so. <i>Mihagtus ang íyang tabánug dihang mikusug ang huyup sa hángin,</i> His kite string broke in the heavy gust of wind. <i>Dì makahagtus ning barútu sa íyang pundu,</i> This boat can&apos;t break away from its moorings. <number>2</number> for emotional feelings to give way. <i>Nahagtus na ang tumuy sa íyang paílub,</i> His last ounce of patience finally gave way.

<p id=5797><form>hagu</form> exclamation of disgust. <i>Hagu, kakápuy ba ning trabahúa,</i> My! This work is so tiresome.

<p id=5798><form>hágù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> exert effort. <i>Naghágù kug limpiyu sa báy,</i> I went to a lot of trouble to clean the house. <i>Ayaw nag hagúi pagbása,</i> Don&apos;t bother reading that. <number>2</number> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> expend one&apos;s effort uselessly. <i>Naghágù lang kag kupya. Ipasíruks man nà,</i> You&apos;re wasting your effort in copying that. We&apos;re going to xerox it. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> exhaust s.o. with overwork. <i>Nahágù ku pagpangarga,</i> I got exhausted loading the cargo. <i>Nahágù hinúun kag hatud íni dà!</i> Thanks! You went to so much trouble to bring this to me. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> requiring effort. <number>2</number> tired from overwork. <i>Hágù kaáyu siya gíkan sa upisína,</i> He arrived home from work exhausted. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> penalty imposed on the loser in a children&apos;s game. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>HATSUY</sc>.</xr> <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <xr>= <sc>HÁGÙ</sc>.</xr> <pos>n</pos> <form>walay &mdash;</form> failing to put s.t. to good use. <i>Gawía ning sapátus. Díay ákung way hagù,</i> Use these shoes. I have some here that I&apos;m not using anyway. <form>ka-</form> <number>1</number> effort. <number>2</number> exhaustion. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> fruits of one&apos;s efforts.

<p id=5799><form>hagubhub</form> <pos>n</pos> prolonged, low, booming sound. <i>Hagubhub ug báhu ang íyang sista,</i> The bass string on his guitar produces a prolonged, <pb n=288>hollow sound. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make a prolonged, booming sound. <i>Ang naghagubhub nga mga tíngug sa píkas kwartu,</i> The booming sound of voices in the next room.

<p id=5800><form>hágud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> rub material onto strings to impart a desired property. <i>Hagúri ug kandílà ang hílu nga itahì sa sapátus,</i> Rub wax onto the thread you will repair the shoes with. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; ac]</itype> make s.t. smooth and pliable by rubbing it over the edge of s.t. <i>Naghágud kug buli arun laláhun,</i> I am softening buri leaves to weave. <number>2a</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> for rope or similar things to get worn out from use. <i>Nahágud ang higut sa bábuy sa tantung bag-idbag-id,</i> The pig&apos;s rope got worn from being rubbed so much. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> for males to masturbate. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> substance to coat strings and lines to impart a desired property. <number>2</number> a mixture of pulverized glass used as a coating for kite strings. <form>hinagúran</form> <pos>a</pos> possessing the desired property as a result of having been rubbed with s.t.

<p id=5801><form>hagudilà</form> <xr>= <sc>HAGURILÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5802><form>hagugma</form> <xr>= <sc>HIGUGMA</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>GUGMA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5803><form>háguk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S]</itype> <tr>snore</tr>. <i>Muháguk ka bang matúlug?</i> Do you snore when you sleep? <pos>n</pos> <tr>snores</tr>.

<p id=5804><form>hagukà</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> poorly built. <i>Dalì rang matumba ang balay nga hagukà pagkagamà,</i> A poorly built house will quickly collapse. <number>2</number> loosely bound, fastened, tied, etc. <i>Hagukà ang pagkahikut sa kátig,</i> The outrigger of the boat is loosely tied. <number>3</number> not firmly packed, flabby. <i>Hagukang láwas nga naghíting sa katambuk,</i> A flabby body with hanging folds of fat. <i>Hagukà rang pag-impáki sa paldu,</i> The bale was not tightly packed. <number>4</number> for plans or ideas not to be well thought out. <i>Hagukang mga plánu sa pagdibisiyun sa ílang balay,</i> The layout of their house was poorly thought out. <number>5</number> for boiled staple to be cooked very soft. <number>6</number> for promises, words to be empty or insincere. <i>Dì na katuhúan ang hagukà nga mga sáad sa pulitiku,</i> You can&apos;t trust the empty promises of a politician. <number>7</number> weak, having little resistance to disease. <i>Kay hagukà ka man kaáyug láwas ayaw pagpaduas sa úlan,</i> You get sick so easily, so don&apos;t expose yourself to the rain.

<p id=5805><form>hagulhul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sound of sobbing combined with crying. <number>2</number> sound of barking. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> sob and cry. <number>2</number> make a barking sound. <i>Nakamata ku dáyun dihang mihagulhul ang irù,</i> I woke up instantly at the first growls of the dog.

<p id=5806><form>hagumáa</form> <xr>= <sc>AGUMÁA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5807><form>hagung, hágung</form> <pos>n</pos> continuous humming, high-pitched sound. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> give out a humming sound. <i>Kusug kaáyung muhágung ang ímung tip rikurdir,</i> Your tape recorder makes a loud, buzzing noise. <i>Hagúnga (ihágung) ang pagpatúyuk sa kasing,</i> Make the top spin with a hum. <i>Maáyu pag ilábay ang kwarta kay muhagung pa kay sa ipalit ánang butánga,</i> You&apos;d do better to throw your money away than to buy that, because at least you&apos;ll get the benefit of hearing it hum.

<p id=5808><form>hagúnub</form> <pos>n</pos> thundering sound that is loud and prolonged. <i>Ang hagúnub sa makina sa barku makabúngul,</i> The roar of the ship&apos;s engine is deafening. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make a thundering sound. <i>Naghagunub ang panun sa dyit nga milabay,</i> The jet planes roared by.

<p id=5809><form>hagúnus</form> <xr>= <sc>HAGÚRUS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5810><form>hagúnuy</form> <pos>n</pos> a coarse, herbaceous vine found along tidal streams, the roots, flowers, and leaves of which are put to various medicinal uses: <bio>Wedelia biflora</bio>.

<p id=5811><form>hagupaas</form> <pos>n</pos> rustling sound produced by s.t. moving through tall grass or similar growths. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> produce such a sound. <i>Naghagupaas ang kamaisan nga gisuútan sa kábaw,</i> The leaves rustled as the water buffalo moved through the field.

<p id=5812><form>hagupit</form> <pos>n</pos> tree with small coarse leaves: <bio>Ficus sp</bio>.

<p id=5813><form>hagurilà</form> <pos>n</pos> pancreas of pigs.

<p id=5814><form>hagúrub</form> <pos>n</pos> a low but steady roar, as of a motor. <i>Hagúrub sa mutur nga milabay,</i> The roar of a passing motorcycle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make a steady roar.

<p id=5815><form>hagúrus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wooshing</tr>; low, hissing sound of wind, water, vehicles. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S]</itype> make a wooshing sound. <i>Mihagúrus ang pitrumaks,</i> The lantern made a low hissing sound. <i>Naghagurus ang kusug nga hángin,</i> The wind roared. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> move fast so as to produce a rushing sound. <i>Gihagurúsan ku sa kutsi,</i> The car zoomed by me. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> prolonged wooshing sound.

<p id=5816><form>hagus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> polish rough rice or corn grits by pounding. <i>Hagusi (hagusa) ang mais ug tigúma ang tiktik,</i> Polish the corn grits and save the corn powder.

<p id=5817><form>hágus</form> <xr>= <sc>BÁGUS<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=5818><form>hagusáhis</form> <xr>= <sc>AGUSAHIS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5819><form>hag-ut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> for s.t. to get worn out through constant rubbing, esp. said of rope. <i>Nagkahag-ut na ang písì sa pundu. Lagmit mabugtù na nà,</i> The anchor line is getting worn out. One of these days it&apos;s going to break. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> strip the outer part of abaca to get the fibers. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>HÁGUD</sc>, <ix>n</ix> 2.</xr> <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> abaca stripper. <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> a person who earns his living by stripping abaca.

<p id=5820><form>haguyag</form> <xr>= <sc>HÁGUD</sc>, <ix>v</ix> 2.</xr>

<pb n=289>

<p id=5821><form>hagwà</form> <xr>= <sc>HADLÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5822><form>hagwásun</form> <xr>= <sc>AGWÁSUN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5823><form>hagyung</form> <xr>= <sc>HADIYUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5824><form>ha ha</form> written representation of laughter.

<p id=5825><form>háhay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sound uttered when yawning or stretching. <i>Háhay, kakápuy!</i> Ho-hum, how tired I am! <number>2</number> sound uttered when sighing in dejection. <i>Háhay, kapait ning ákung kinabúhì,</i> Oh, what a miserable life I lead.

<p id=5826><form>hái</form> <xr>= <sc>HÁIN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5827><form>háil</form> <pos>a</pos> for skin to be hard and rough on the surface and soft on the inside. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> come out hard on the surface. <i>Miháil (naháil) ang bugas sa ibábaw nga wà tabúni,</i> The top portion of the rice turned out hard because it wasn&apos;t covered. <i>Nangháil ang íyang pánit kay gikagid,</i> The skin turned hard and rough because of her skin infection.

<p id=5828><form>háin</form> <number>1</number> where is, are, does? <i>Háin ka magpuyù?</i> Where do you live? <number>2</number> where (past or future). <i>Háin ibutang ang libru?</i> Where did they put the book? <i>Háin ka punta?</i> Where are you headed to? <number>3</number> which of several. <i>Háin sa duruha ang ímung palabihun?</i> Which of the two would you prefer? <i>Bísag háin niíni ang ákung dad-un,</i> I&apos;ll take any one of these. <number>4</number> whoever. <i>Háin ang labing makalulúuy mauy hatágag hinábang,</i> Whoever is the most needy will be given aid. <form>&mdash; bay</form> who says [so-and-so] is the case, when it&apos;s not at all the case. <i>Háin bay alkansi nga dakù man núun ang ganansiya,</i> Who says you lost, when you made a huge profit? <form>&mdash; pay <r>[noun]</r>-un</form> there&apos;s no [noun], much as one would expect there to be one. <i>Háin pay Timyúngun nga hagbáya ra mang milakaw,</i> No Temyong could be found, for he had already left some time before. <i>Háin bay radiyúhung dúgay nang nadáut?</i> What radio? It&apos;s been broken for ages.

<p id=5829><form>háit</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sharp-edged</tr>. <i>Háit nga kutsilyu,</i> A sharp knife. <number>2</number> <tr>sharp-pointed</tr>. <i>Háit nga mga batu,</i> Sharp-pointed rocks. <i>Háit kaáyu ang tumuy sa ayis pik,</i> The ice pick has a sharp point. <number>3</number> sharp of intelligence. <i>Háit ug salabútan,</i> Having a quick mind. <number>4</number> easily discerning. <i>Háit kaáyug mga mata,</i> Having sharp eyes. <number>5</number> biting in language. <i>Háit nga mga púlung,</i> Sharp words. <i>Háit nga tinutukan,</i> Piercing stare. <number>6</number> shrill, piercing in voice. <i>Háit ug tíngug,</i> Shrill-voiced. <number>7</number> blinding, glaring light. <i>Háit nga kaháyag,</i> Blinding light. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> sharpen s.t., make one&apos;s language sharp, one&apos;s voice shrill, make a light blinding.

<p id=5830><form>hákà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; b12]</itype> <number>1</number> for animals to copulate. <i>Gihakáan ang ákung bigal ug Dyirsi,</i> I had my sow bred to a Jersey boar. <number>2</number> for people to fornicate (coarse).

<p id=5831><form>hákà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> boasting loudly. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become a braggart; consider s.o. as such. <i>Nagkahákà siya human makadaug sa amatyur,</i> He has been doing nothing but boasting ever since he won the singing contest.

<p id=5832><form>hákab</form> <xr>= <sc>ABHAK</sc>.</xr> <form>hakabhakab</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>HAK-ABHAK-AB</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> eat s.t. ravenously with great eagerness. <i>Kun gigútum pa nà maghakabhakab untà nag káun,</i> If he were hungry he would have eaten ravenously. <number>3</number> anticipate s.t. with great eagerness. <i>Naghakabhakab ang ákung ginháwa pagtan-aw sa ákung pinaskúhan,</i> I was very anxious to see what I got for Christmas.

<p id=5833><form>hak-ab</form> <xr>= <sc>ABHAK</sc>.</xr> <form>hak-abhak-ab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b5c1]</itype> take a little food from a variety of dishes. <i>Ayaw hak-abhak-ábi (hak-abhak-ába, ihak-abhak-ab) kanang mga pagkáun kay wà pa muabut ang bisíta,</i> Don&apos;t nibble at that food because the visitors haven&apos;t arrived.

<p id=5834><form>hakad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> spread s.t. over s.t. <i>Unsa may hakaran nímu sa pagkáun nga walà may lamísa?</i> What will you put the food on when we don&apos;t have a table? <i>Tapdási únà ang tihíras únà ihakad ang bidsyit,</i> Dust the cot first before you lay the sheet over it. <number>2</number> display one&apos;s goods to the public. <i>Dihà ra ihakad níya sa asíras, natumban lagi hinúus mga táwu,</i> He displayed his wares on the pavement, so the people stepped on them.

<p id=5835><form>hákad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab]</itype> take s.t. solid out from inside s.t. <i>Átung hakárun ang sulud kay limpiyúhan ang kahun,</i> Let&apos;s take the contents out because we are going to clean the box.

<p id=5836><form>hak-ang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> set a vessel over a fire for cooking. <i>Siyay mihak-ang sa kaldíru sa sug-ang,</i> She set the kettle on the stove.

<p id=5837><form>hakap</form> <xr>= <sc>HAKLAP</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5838><form>hakayhakay</form> <pos>a</pos> somewhat relieved. <i>Hakayhakay na ang ákung sakit sa tiyan,</i> My stomachache is a bit better now. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> get somewhat alleviated. <i>Muhakayhakay ang pamuyù sa mag-uúma kun ting-ani,</i> The farmers are not so badly off during the harvest season<corr>.</corr>

<p id=5839><form>hakbang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> bite with a quick snapping motion. <i>Gihakbang sa irù ang ákung tiil,</i> The dog snapped at my foot.

<p id=5840><form>hakgum</form> (from <ix>kugum<sub>1</sub></ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> clasp in one&apos;s fist. <i>Gihakgum níya ang kwarta kay nahadluk siyag mawálà,</i> He clutched the money because he was afraid it might get lost. <i>Dílì na mahakgum ang ímung buktun tungud sa kadakù,</i> I cannot get my fingers around your arm any more because it has gotten to be so big. <pos>n</pos> a fistful of s.t. <i>Usa ka hakgum balas,</i> A fistful of sand.

<p id=5841><form>hakhak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> notches cut into the trunk of a <pb n=290>coconut tree. <number>2</number> <formx>tubà nga way &mdash;, way &mdash;</formx> <pos>n</pos> ersatz palm toddy (made by mixing water, lime, and coloring). (Lit. Palm toddy gotten without climbing the notches in the trunk.) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> cut notches on coconut trees. <i>Hakháki ang lubi arun sayun sak-un,</i> Cut notches in the coconut tree so it will be easy to climb.

<p id=5842><form>hakhak<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> eat food greedily and in a hasty, unrefined manner. <i>Kusug kaáyung mihakhak ang bábuy sa lawug,</i> The pig greedily gobbled down the slop.

<p id=5843><form>haklap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> lay out, spread s.t. on top of s.t. <i>Kinsay naghaklap ug sáku áring pahiran?</i> Who laid a sack over the doormat? <i>Dáhun sa tabákù ang ihaklap sa hubag,</i> Cover your boil with a tobacco leaf.

<p id=5844><form>haklup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> lay s.t. on s.t. for medicinal purposes. <i>Haklúpi ug ayisbag ang ímung agtang,</i> Put an icebag on your forehead. <i>Hinálub dáhun ang ihaklup sa ímung hubag,</i> Apply softened leaves to your boil. <pos>n</pos> s.t. to lay over s.t. for medicinal purposes.

<p id=5845><form>hakmal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> stuff s.t. into the mouth or an analogous opening. <i>Ang táwu nga makahakmal sa íyang kinúmù datuun,</i> A man that can put his fist in his mouth is likely to become rich. <i>Hakmálig kamúti ang bàbà sa bátà,</i> Stuff a sweet potato into the child&apos;s mouth.

<p id=5846><form>haknut</form> <pos>a</pos> not slippery, offering hindrance to sliding. <i>Way kaláking baylíhan ang sawug haknut kay dì ta makapaanud-ánud,</i> A rough floor is no good to dance on because you cannot glide nicely. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> offer resistance to slipping. <i>Butangig brilyantín arun dì muhaknut pagsulud,</i> Put vaseline on it so that it won&apos;t be hard to insert. <i>Gámit ug tísas kun maghaknut na ang táku,</i> Use chalk when the cue gets sticky.

<p id=5847><form>hakùhakù</form> <xr>= <sc>HATÙHATÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5848><form>hakug</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>selfish</tr>, <tr>greedy</tr>, unwilling to share and wanting s.t. for oneself. <i>Hakug siya kay dílì manghátag bísan diyútay,</i> He is selfish because he doesn&apos;t give even a little. <i>Hakug kaáyu siya kay gustu iyáhung tanan,</i> He&apos;s very selfish because he wants everything for himself. <number>2</number> overly fond of s.t. <i>Hakug siyag bayli,</i> He is exceedingly fond of dancing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be selfish, greedy. <i>Ang kangihit mauy makahakug (makapahakug) sa mga táwu,</i> Scarcity makes people greedy. <form>hakughakug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> do s.t. greedily, esp. eating. <i>Hilabihan giyud tingáli níyang gutúma kay naghakughakug ug káun,</i> He must be very hungry because he eats so greedily. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> greedy. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> of a greedy sort.

<p id=5849><form>hakuhak</form> <pos>a</pos> eating or drinking s.t. greedily, as fast as possible. <i>Hakuhak kaáyu nang mga batáa kay sígig hungit bísag ínit,</i> Those children are very greedy. They shove the food into their mouths, even if it is too hot. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> get to be ravenous.

<p id=5850><form>hakup<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> scoop up with one hand. <i>Mihakup kug usa ka kumkum nga mais,</i> I scooped a handful of corn. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> clasp s.t. with one hand. <i>Gihakup níya ang ákung kamut ug gilamánu,</i> He took my hand and shook it. <number>3</number> embrace, seize or hold s.t. by encircling it with the arms. <i>Gihakup níya ang bátag midágan,</i> He gathered the child in his arms and ran. <number>4</number> <itype>[A23; b5]</itype> be gripped by an emotion or by a condition. <i>Ang katálaw mihakup sa íyang galamhan,</i> Cowardice gripped him. <i>Gihakup (gihakpan) ang balángay sa kangitngit,</i> Darkness enveloped the village. <pos>n</pos> handful of s.t.

<p id=5851><form>hakup<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>HAKLUP</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5852><form>hakut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large, black ant which inflicts a painful sting, usually found on coconut trees.

<p id=5853><form>hákut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> carry or haul s.t. in several trips. <i>Muhákut siyag túbig sa mga silíngan,</i> He fetches water for the neighbors. <i>Dyip mauy naghákut sa mga táwu sa simbahan,</i> A jeep took the people to the church in several trips. <i>Hakúta nang mga batu ngadtu sa gardin,</i> Take those stones to the garden. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> amount taken in one haul. <number>2</number> action of hauling. <i>Usa ka hákut diyis písus,</i> It is ten pesos per truckful or ten pesos each trip. <form>-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> place where s.t. one hauls is obtained. <number>2</number> place where things are hauled. <number>3</number> s.t. used in hauling things. <form>-un(&rarr;), -únun</form> <pos>n</pos> things to be hauled. &dagger;

<p id=5854><form>hakwat</form> <xr>= <sc>SAKWAT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5855><form><corr sic=hal.>Hal.</corr></form> <pos>n</pos> abbreviation for <ix>Halangdun,</ix> &lsquo;Honorable&rsquo;. <i>Ang Hal. Gubirnadur,</i> The Hon. Governor.

<p id=5856><form>hala</form> expression telling s.o. to do s.t. <number>a</number> urging. <i>Hala, káun na,</i> Come on. Eat now. <i>Hala, sumbága,</i> Come on! Sock him. <number>b</number> acquiescing. <i>Na hala, sígi,</i> O.K., go ahead. <i>Hala, bayinti na lang,</i> O.K., twenty is O.K. c urging in a satirical way. <i>Hala, sígig bilar, arun matísis nang ímung ubu,</i> Go on, keep on staying up late, so your cough develops into T.B. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> <number>1</number> go along with s.t. unhesitatingly. <i>Ug hangyúun, muhala dáyun,</i> If you ask him, he agrees to do it right away. <i>Ug hagdun, muhala dáyun,</i> If you ask him to join you, he agrees right away. <number>2</number> urge s.o. into immediate action. <i>Walay naghala nímu sa kaminyúun ug karun magbásul ka na,</i> Nobody urged you to get married, and now you are sorry. <form>halla</form> <number>1</number> expression of helplessness, <pb n=291>upon watching s.t. happen. <i>Halla, natumba,</i> There, it&apos;s falling. <number>2</number> expression chiding s.o. <i>Halla, káun, bisag gisakitag tiyan,</i> Go ahead, eat some more even if you got a stomach-ache from it.

<p id=5857><form>halá</form> warning of s.t. unpleasant impending. <i>Halá, gibuak nà nímung básu,</i> Watch out! You broke that glass.

<p id=5858><form>hálà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> gather ears of corn that are maturing ahead of the rest of the crop. <i>Muhálà kug mais kay nahurut nang bugas,</i> I&apos;ll gather ears of corn that are already ripe ahead of the rest of the crop because we have run out of food.

<p id=5859><form>halab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> for the stomach to throb with intense hunger pangs. <i>Ikahumpay ni sa naghalab nímung tiyan,</i> This will appease your hunger pangs.

<p id=5860><form>hálab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> for a fish to strike at another fish that is hooked. <i>Mamsà giyuy naghálab sa ímung kuhà kay largu giyung pagkaputul,</i> It must have been a large fish that attacked the fish on your hook because he bit it clear through.

<p id=5861><form>halábas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> cut down s.t. tall with a long swing of a blade. <i>Habásun ku ning mga sagbut,</i> I&apos;ll cut down these weeds. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> wipe out of existence. <i>Habásun sa Diyus ang tanang dautan sa kalibútan,</i> God will wipe out all evil on earth. <number>3</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> win an election with a sweeping victory. <i>Si Iyù Hantuy nanghábas sa iliksyun,</i> Uncle Hantoy won a sweeping victory at the polls.

<p id=5862><form>hálad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> present s.t. as an offering to spirits, the dead. <i>Unsay átung ihálad sa Adlaw sa Minatay?</i> What shall we make as an offering on All Souls&apos; Day? <number>2</number> offer, give up s.t. as a sacrifice. <i>Ákung gihálad ang ákung panahun ug kahágù álang sa kalampúsan niíni,</i> I offered all my time and effort for its success. <i>Ihálad níya ang tibuuk níyang kinabúhì sa pag-alágad sa Diyus,</i> He will offer his life to serving God. <number>3</number> offer s.o. his love. <i>Ang babáying íyang gihaláran,</i> The woman he adores. <pos>n</pos> offering, gift. <form>mag-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> suitor. <form>hinaláran</form> <pos>n</pos> woman courted.

<p id=5863><form>hálag</form> <pos>n</pos> line connecting a bamboo fish trap to an anchor which holds it in place. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6(1)]</itype> attach an anchor line to a fish trap. <i>Gihalágan na ang panggal sa lambay,</i> An anchor line has been attached to the crab trap.

<p id=5864><form>halaghag</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>loosely woven</tr>. <i>Halaghag ra kaáyu ang muskitíru. Makasulud na ang lamuk,</i> The mosquito net has gotten <corr>very loosely woven </corr>so its fibers are far apart and the mosquitoes can get in. <number>2</number> for hair or s.t. analogous to be thin. <i>Haghag na ang iskúba,</i> The brush has lost lots of its bristles. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> for a weave to get to be loose. <i>Ang sagúran haghágun pagtúyù,</i> An abaca mat is purposely woven loosely.

<p id=5865><form>hálang</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1a</number> having a hot, biting taste. <i>Hálang kaáyu ang síling kulikut,</i> Red peppers are very hot. <number>1b</number> for the eyes to sting. <i>Hálang ákung mata sa asu,</i> My eyes are smarting from the smoke. <number>2</number> for words to be stinging, hurting. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S; a]</itype> <number>1</number> get to be hot with a biting taste, for the eyes to smart. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> be hurt by stinging words. <i>Gihalángan ku sa íyang mga pasángil,</i> I was stung by her accusations. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> stinging sensation. <number>2</number> biting quality of words.

<p id=5866><form>halanghag</form> <xr>= <sc>DANGHAG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5867><form>halangdun</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>HANGAD</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5868><form>halanggup</form> thin gruel cooked from grains of rice or ground corn. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make thin gruel. <i>Hanggúpi ang masakitun,</i> Just make a thin gruel for the patient. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> eat gruel. <form>-in-</form> <xr>= <sc>HALANGGUP</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5869><form>halanguhag</form> <xr>= <sc>DANGHAG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5870><form>halap</form> <pos>a</pos> for the eyesight to be weak, blurred. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S; b6]</itype> for the eyesight to get weak. <i>Dì na ku makabasa ug mga gagmayng títik tungud ning naghalap nákung panan-aw,</i> I can no longer read small print because my eyes are so weak. <form>halaphálap</form> <pos>n</pos> blind man&apos;s buff. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12C2; b(1)]</itype> play blind man&apos;s buff.

<p id=5871><form>hálas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> snake. <form>patay ug &mdash;</form> <number>1</number> urinate (slang). <number>2</number> for males to masturbate (slang).

<p id=5872><form>*hálas<sub>2</sub></form> <form>i-</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>IHÁLAS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5873><form>haláwig</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. moray eel.

<p id=5874><form>halay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> hang clothes on the line or s.t. analogous. <i>Ihalay dáyun ning mga basang lampin,</i> Hang these wet diapers out right away. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> clothesline.

<p id=5875><form>halayhálay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> spend leisure time, going out. <i>Dì ku makahalayhálay magabíi kay mag-ubirtayim ku,</i> I can&apos;t go out to relax in the evening because I work overtime. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> gallivant about instead of working. <i>Naghalayhálay ka lang mu rag way pamilyang gipakáun,</i> You just gallivant around as though you don&apos;t have a family to feed. <i>May andirtayim ka kay gihalayhaláyan lang nímu ang trabáhu,</i> You haven&apos;t put in enough hours because you&apos;re taking time off from work to gallivant around.

<p id=5876><form>halayhay</form> <xr>= <sc>HALAY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5877><form>halbù</form> <pos>a</pos> full of quicksand, mire; for a place to be muddy such that the feet get stuck if one tries to walk through it. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126; b(1)]</itype> sink into quicksand, become enmired. <i>Ang kábaw nahalbù sa subà,</i> The carabao got enmired in the creek. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, <pb n=292>become a mire. <i>Nagkahalbù na ni dinhi tungud sa ulan,</i> This place is becoming a quagmire because of the rain.

<p id=5878><form>halhag</form> <xr>= <sc>HALAGHAG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5879><form>halhal<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for clothing to be loose and oversized. <i>Naníwang na giyud diay ku kay nahalhal na man ning ákung sinínà,</i> I must have grown thin because my clothes are hanging loose on me now. <number>2</number> be scatterbrained, have a dopey expression. <i>Nalímut ka sa ímung túyù kay naghalhal ka man lang,</i> You forgot what you went there for because you are scatterbrained. <i>Halhálan kaáyu ku níyang musulti, mu rag way buut,</i> I think she talks like a scatterbrain. <i>Naghalhal lang nang nawung mu,</i> You have an idiotic expression on your face. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> loose and oversized. <number>2</number> brainless talk or expression.

<p id=5880><form>halhal<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for animals to pant with their mouth open. <i>Naghalhal ang kabáyù nga gikutasan,</i> The horse panted because it was out of breath.

<p id=5881><form>háli</form> <xr>= <sc>SÁLI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5882><form>halígi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> post. <i>Ang halígi sa balay,</i> House post. <i>Halígi sa pinsa,</i> Fence post. <number>2a</number> pillar or strong member of an organization. <i>Usa siya sa mga halígi sa átung partídu,</i> He is one of the mainstays of our political party. <number>2b</number> head, mainstay on which a group rests. <i>Ang amahan mauy halígi sa panimalay,</i> The father is the head of the family. <number>3</number> outstanding person in a specific field of endeavor. <i>Si Ayinstayin usa ka dakung halígi sa syinsiya,</i> Einstein is one of the outstanding men in science. <number>4</number> penis (humorous). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> use as a post. <i>Ang yakal maáyung haligíun (ihalígi),</i> <ix>Yakal</ix> lumber makes good posts.

<p id=5883><form>halìhalì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> when the same food is served in several dishes, to take a portion from more than one of them. <i>Ayaw halìhalia (ihalìhalì) ang mga pagkáun arun dì mangil-ad tan-áwun,</i> Take food from just one or two of the serving dishes, not all of them, so they won&apos;t look like leftovers.

<p id=5884><form>halíli</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> occupy a place or position just vacated. <i>Way makahalíli sa usa ka inahan,</i> There is nothing that can replace a mother. <i>Ug mutindug ka, halilíhan dáyun ang ímung lingkuránan,</i> If you get up, s.o. will occupy your seat immediately. <number>2</number> appear in the place of s.t. else, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Mihalíli ang pagdumut sa gugmang inayran,</i> Hatred replaced the love which had been spurned. <i>Kwarta ihalíli sa primyung walà ikahátag,</i> Money takes the place of the prize they couldn&apos;t award. <number>3</number> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> exchange. <i>Nagkahalíli ang ámung pitáka,</i> We accidentally took each other&apos;s purses. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. which takes the place of s.t. else. <number>2</number> s.t. given in exchange.

<p id=5885><form>halimbawà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2N]</itype> borrow s.t. to relieve a pressing problem. <i>Nanghalimbawà si Pidru nákug diyis písus ipalit kunug bugas,</i> Pedro borrowed ten pesos from me to buy rice. <number>2</number> <itype>[b3]</itype> be relieved from s.t. pressing. <i>Nahalimbawà na ákung pamínaw,</i> I feel much better now. <i>Karun nga nakatrabahu nas Pidru nakahalimbawà na ang bánay,</i> Now that Pedro has a job, his family is not so badly pressed.

<p id=5886><form>halilib-un</form> <xr>= <sc>GABUN<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=5887><form>halin</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2P; b(1)]</itype> move away from a place permanently. <i>Dúgay na silang mihalin sa Mindanaw,</i> They moved to Mindanao a long time ago. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> pass away, <tr>die</tr>. <i>Dúgay nang mihalin si Máma,</i> Mother passed away many years ago. <pos>n</pos> immigrant. <i>Mga halin sila sa Yútà sa mga Sáad,</i> They are immigrants to the Land of Promise (Mindanao).

<p id=5888><form>hálin</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> sell s.t. at a certain price. <i>Ug halínun mug míl,</i> If you sell it for a thousand. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> for s.t. to sell. <i>Ang ákung yútà muhálin na karun ug labaw pa sa dubli,</i> My lot will sell for more than double the buying price. <number>3</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> for women to be married (humorous). <i>Mahálin dáyun íyang anak,</i> He&apos;ll have no trouble finding a husband for his daughter. <number>4</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> come to an untimely end. <i>Kun magpadáyun ka ánang ímung pag-ínum, mahálin ka,</i> You&apos;ll come to an untimely end if you keep on drinking like that. <i>Mahálin giyud nang plátu ug matambug sa simintu,</i> That will be the end of the plate if you drop it on the cement. <pos>n</pos> highly salable. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> sales, amount of money realized from a sale. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> quick, fast-selling. <i>Halin kaáyu ang pinirítung ságing sa mga iskuyla,</i> Fried bananas sell fast among schoolchildren. <number>2</number> <tr>marriageable</tr>. <number>2a</number> <formx>&mdash; pa ba</formx> in answer to questions about how s.t. is: same as ever. <i>&lsquo;Kumusta?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Halin pa ba,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;How are you?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Just the same.&rsquo; (Lit. Can I still be sold?)<corr sic="&rsquo;"></corr>

<p id=5889><form>halindánaw</form> (from <ix>dánaw</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>dragonfly</tr>.

<p id=5890><form>haling</form> <xr>= <sc>HALIN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5891><form>háling</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> build a fire. <i>Magháling ku kay mag-ínit kug túbig,</i> I will build a fire because I am going to heat some water. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> stimulate an emotion. <i>Mga púlung nga nakaháling sa ákung kalágut,</i> Words that aroused my anger. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> lighted fire.

<p id=5892><form>halinub-un</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>TÚBÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5893><form>haliphip</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> mend holes in woven materials, esp. by reweaving the holes. <i>Maáyu kay gihaliphipan na ang búyut masudlan nag humay,</i> Now that the holes in the bag have been mended, we can put rice in it.

<pb n=293>

<p id=5894><form>halithálit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> do s.t. hurriedly as time permits one to do it. <i>Muhalithálit kug buwad ug humay mintras náay ínit,</i> I&apos;ll dry rice as quick as I can while there is sunlight. <i>Halithalítan (halithalítun, ihalithálit) ku lang paglútù ang sud-an inigkatúlug sa bátà,</i> I&apos;ll cook the food hurriedly as soon as the baby goes to sleep.

<p id=5895><form>halla</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>HALA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5896><form>halsi</form> <pos>n</pos> Hulsey, a breed of fighting cock.

<p id=5897><form>halu</form> <pos>n</pos> monitor lizard. a acting nonchalant yet ready to seize every opportunity, no matter who might get hurt (like the monitor lizard who stays immobile waiting to seize a prey). <i>Ayawg sálig níya kay háwu kaáyu nà sa babáyi,</i> Don&apos;t trust him because he is dangerous to women.

<p id=5898><form>halù</form> <pos>a</pos> fitting loosely. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> <tr>fit loosely</tr> in. <i>Naghalù ang lansang kay dakù ang bangag,</i> The nail was loose because the hole was too big. <i>Naghalù ang sapátus sa íyang tiil,</i> The shoes fit her feet too loosely.

<p id=5899><form>hálù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> mix things together in a liquid. <i>Halúa ang tahup ug kinagud lubi,</i> Mix corn husks and shredded coconut in water. <form>halùhálù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. fruit cocktail made up of grated ice, milk, sugar and several k.o. fruit cut to pieces or grated. <number>2</number> be a mixture of several things. <i>Halùhálù ang íyang sinultihan. May Ininsik, may Binisayà, may Ininglis,</i> She speaks a mixture of languages all at once: Chinese, Visayan, and English. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make, make into <ix>halùhálù.</ix> <form>panghalùhálù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> go s.w. to eat <ix>halùhálù.</ix> <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> a weapon made from an egg shell which has been emptied of its contents through a small hole into which a mixture of various itchy plants (from land or water) has been put and then resealed.

<p id=5900><form>hal-u</form> <xr>= <sc>ALHU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5901><form>haluan</form> <pos>n</pos> snakehead, edible fresh-water fish: <bio><corr sic=Ophiocepahlus>Ophiocephalus</corr> spp</bio>. <form>&mdash; tásik</form> <pos>n</pos> fish similar to the snakehead but found in the sea.

<p id=5902><form>halub<sub>1</sub>, hálub<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. skin disease characterized by white, shiny splotches on the affected area. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a4b4]</itype> be afflicted with this k.o. skin disease.

<p id=5903><form>halub<sub>2</sub>, hálub<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make leaves pliable by heating them. <i>Maghálub kug dáhun sa ságing nga pustan sa kan-un,</i> I will soften up a banana leaf to wrap the rice in. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> singe, burn slightly. <i>Nahálub ang íyang pánit sa adlaw,</i> His skin was scorched by the sun. <number>2a</number> for the lungs to be destroyed by drinking too much alcohol. <i>Makahálub (makapahálub) sa bágà ang bínu,</i> Liquor will destroy the lungs. <number>3</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for leaves to yellow prior to drying up. <i>Muhalub (mahalub) ang tanum kun ulúrun ang gamut,</i> The leaves of plants will yellow when the roots are eaten by worms.

<p id=5904><form>hálu blak</form> <pos>n</pos> hollow cement blocks for structures. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make, make into hollow blocks.

<p id=5905><form>halug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; a2b2]</itype> <tr>embrace</tr>, <tr>hug</tr>. <i>Bulága ang buksidur ug maghálug,</i> Separate the boxers if they start hugging. <i>Makighálug siya sa íyang trátu,</i> He wants to embrace his sweetheart. <i>Ug wà pa ku makahalug sa kátig ...<corr>,</corr></i> Had I not clung to the outriggers ...<corr>.</corr> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hug</tr>.

<p id=5906><form>halughug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>drawstring</tr> in the waistline of clothing to hold it up. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <number>1</number> put a drawstring at the waist. <i>Muhalughug lang kug kurdun sa panti,</i> I&apos;ll put a drawstring in the waist of my panties. <number>2</number> pass a thread in and out loosely through the edge of cloth in shirring or basting. <i>Ímu pa bítaw nang usbun pagtahì sa makina. Hughúga lang nà,</i> You&apos;re going to sew it anyway on the machine again. Just baste it.

<p id=5907><form>halughug<sub>2</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> <tr>search thoroughly</tr>. <i>Dúna giyuy mihalughug (nanghalughug) sa ákung kaban. Nangabungkag man ang sulud niíni,</i> S.o. must have ransacked my trunk. The contents are all in disorder. <i>Halughugun nátù ang tibuuk plása arun makit-an ang nawálang pitáka,</i> We&apos;ll search the whole plaza thoroughly to find the lost money.

<p id=5908><form>haluk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>kiss</tr>, sniff, putting the nose next to the person kissed. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; b]</itype> <tr>kiss</tr>. <i>Nagháluk sila sa ngitngit,</i> They kissed in the dark. <i>Gihagkan (gihadkan, gihawkan) níya ang bátà,</i> She kissed the child. <i>Ayawg ihawuk nang bahù nímung bàbà nákù,</i> Don&apos;t kiss me with your smelly mouth! <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> drop by s.w. briefly. <i>Ígù ra siyang mihaluk sa ámù,</i> He dropped by our house for only a short time. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> do s.t. on a short and insignificant scale. <i>Gihalukan lang ni Pidru ang sawug. Walà tiwasag lampásu,</i> Pedro just touched the floor for a while. He did not really polish all of it. <form>halukháluk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; b]</itype> sniff. <i>Naghalukháluk ang irù sa ákung tiil, mu rag akuy íyang ámu,</i> The dog sniffed my feet as if I were his master. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> do s.t. lightly and intermittently. <form>hagkanan</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. in a place, traditionally kissed by people who come to the place for the first time. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> go s.w. to kiss s.t. as part of tradition.

<p id=5909><form>halukhuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> insert s.t. into s.t. so it is tight, wedge into. <i>Wà makahalukhuk sa daghang táwu ang bátà,</i> The child was not able to squeeze into the crowd. <i>Halukhukan ug <pb n=294>kwarta ang ímung bulsa,</i> S.o. will thrust a bill into your pocket. <i>Ihalukhuk sa sakuban ang sundang,</i> Insert the bolo into its scabbard. <pos>a</pos> tightly wedged together.

<p id=5910><form>halukhuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small biting insects of cornfields which make their appearance at the same time as the corn tassels. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be beset with these insects.

<p id=5911><form>hálum</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. herbaceous, ornamental herb bearing dull purplish leaves which are used medicinally and sometimes eaten as vegetables: <bio>Amaranthus tricolor</bio>.

<p id=5912><form>halumhum</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; c6]</itype> put solid food into the mouth in a bulk. <i>Gihumhum sa dawù nga bátà ang pán kay nahadluk man nga dúnay mangáyù níya,</i> The greedy child stuffed the whole piece of bread into his mouth because he was afraid s.o. would ask him for some. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> secretly keep s.t. for oneself which is supposed to be shared. <i>Ang kurnáwu nga limbungan kusug muhumhum sa ganansiya,</i> A dishonest partner keeps part of the profits for himself.

<p id=5913><form>halung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> reach a door or gate. <i>Sa naghawung pa lang ku sa nátad, pagsúgat sa mga irù,</i> The dogs ran toward me as soon as I stepped inside the yard.

<p id=5914><form>halung<sub>2</sub>, hálung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> cast shade over plants so as to stunt their growth. <i>Wà mutúbù ang rúsas kay gihalúngan (gihalungan) sa dakung káhuy,</i> The roses didn&apos;t grow because they were in the shade of the large tree. <number>2</number> overshadow in some desirable trait. <i>Ang kaanyag sa rayna nahawngan sa dáma,</i> The beauty queen was far overshadowed by the runner-up. <number>2a</number> <formx>nadaug sa &mdash;</formx> be overcome by a feeling of inferiority when approaching s.o. <i>Wà siya makapadayag sa íyang túyù kay nadaug siya sa háwung,</i> He couldn&apos;t speak out because he was overcome by a feeling of inferiority.

<p id=5915><form>halung<sub>3</sub>, hálung<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> not burning readily. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> <tr>burn poorly</tr>. <i>Naháwung ang puspuru human kaumgi,</i> The matches got so that they didn&apos;t burn well because they got wet.

<p id=5916><form>halup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> take s.t. by scooping it in the hands. <i>Ayawg halupa ang kan-un, kutsaráha,</i> Don&apos;t scoop up the food with your hands. Use a spoon. <number>2</number> pick s.t. up with both hands to take it s.w. <i>Gihalup níya ang bátà ug gibalhin sa katri,</i> He scooped up the child and moved it to the bed. <pos>n</pos> amount which can be scooped up with the hands. <i>Usa ka halup nga bugas,</i> Amount of rice held in both hands.

<p id=5917><form>hal-up</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> fit s.t. over s.t. <i>Dintista ang maghal-up sa úru sa ngípun,</i> The dentist puts gold caps on teeth. <i>Hal-úpi ug láta ang pusti,</i> Put a tin can over the post. <number>2</number> stuff s.t. into s.t. <i>Nahal-upan ang grípu ug papil,</i> The faucet had paper stuffed into it. <i>Ayaw ihal-up ímung tudlù sa ímung ilung,</i> Don&apos;t stick your fingers in your nose.

<p id=5918><form>halupúwint</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bullet</tr> shaped like a pointed capsule and hollow inside.

<p id=5919><form>hálus</form> <number>1</number> can barely do s.t. <i>Hálus (hálus dílì) na siya makaginháwa sa kakutas,</i> He could hardly breathe from sheer exhaustion. <i>Hálus (hálus dílì) na makakità ning ákung mga mata,</i> My eyes can hardly see. <number>2</number> come close to having s.t. happen, to doing s.t. <i>Hálus luparun níya ang ang-ang,</i> He fairly flew down the stairs. <i>Hálus ku mamatay,</i> I pretty near died. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; tanan</formx> nearly all. <i>Bag-u hálus tanan ang íyang mga ginamitun,</i> Almost all of his equipment is new. <number>4</number> <formx>&mdash; dílì</formx> <xr>= <sc>HÁLUS</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p id=5920><form>halushus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> remove the leaflets from a palm frond with a bladed tool. <i>Halushúsi ang langkay sa lukay,</i> Strip the leaflets off the frond.

<p id=5921><form>hálut</form> <xr>= <sc>HALWUT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5922><form>haluthut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> eat fast with a slurping sound. <i>Ang anay kusug muhaluthut sa pasaw,</i> The sow gobbles its food. <number>2</number> eat s.t. fast (derogatory). <i>Gihaluthut sa way úlaw ang kan-un,</i> The shameless s.o.b. gobbled up the rice.

<p id=5923><form>halwa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cage</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> put in a cage. <i>Ihalwa (halwáhun) ang piríku,</i> Put the parrot in a cage. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make a cage.

<p id=5924><form>halwan</form> <xr>= <sc>HALUAN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5925><form>halwut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having great <corr sic=tensil>tensile</corr> strength, hard to break. <i>Halwut kaáyu ang pánit sa litsun,</i> The pigskin is very tough. <i>Halwut ang lastiku, dílì mabugtù,</i> The rubber band is very strong. It won&apos;t break. <number>2</number> <tr>viscous</tr>, <tr>sticky</tr>. <i>Halwut kaáyung ákung kamut sa arníbal,</i> My hands are all sticky with syrup. <number>3</number> of a mellow, smooth texture without being soggy. <i>Halwut nga kamúti,</i> Smooth-textured sweet potatoes. <number>3a</number> for drinks to be smooth. <number>4</number> for music to be sweet and smooth. <i>Nagbayli sila inubanan sa halwut nga sunáta,</i> They danced to the mellow music. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> <number>1</number> be, become tough, with great <corr sic=tensil>tensile</corr> strength. <i>Ayaw halwúta paglútù ang tiratíra,</i> Don&apos;t cook the taffy so hard. <number>2</number> be, become viscous and sticky. <number>3</number> get a smooth, mellow texture.

<p id=5926><form>hámag</form> <xr>= <sc>HAMLAG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5927><form>ham-ak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put things down in a disorderly way. <i>Nagkayamúkat ang ákung lamísa kay giham-ákan nímu sa ímung mga basahun,</i> My desk is a mess because you just threw your books on it. <number>2</number> <itype>[c]</itype> put the blame on s.o. <i>Aku mauy giham-ákan sa tanang pasángil,</i> <pb n=295>All the blame was laid on me.

<p id=5928><form>hamangpang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. bush of the seashore, of the <bio>Boraginaceae</bio> family.

<p id=5929><form>hamayhámay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> estimation of a quantity. <i>Dì madala ug hamayhámay ang ímung sukud,</i> We can&apos;t just estimate your measurements. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab]</itype> make an estimate. <i>Gihamayhamáyan ang tulay nga mukábat sa usa ka miliyun,</i> It is estimated that the bridge will come to one million pesos.

<p id=5930><form>hamayhámay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> do s.t. casually and slowly, with no sense of urgency. <i>Ayawg hamayhamáyi (hamayhamáya) ang trabáhu kay nag-agpas ta sa panahun,</i> Don&apos;t work so slowly because we are racing against time.

<p id=5931><form>hambabálud</form> <pos>n</pos> medium-sized tree: <bio>Neonauclea spp</bio>.

<p id=5932><form>hambabayaw</form> <pos>n</pos> a small to medium-sized tree with aromatic and velvety leaves which are used to scent bath water.

<p id=5933><form>hambag</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>handbag</tr>, <tr>satchel</tr> carried <corr sic="in by">in</corr> hand or slung over the shoulder. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> use a handbag or satchel. <i>Naghambag siyang nagdala sa mga libru,</i> He carried his books in a satchel. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make into a satchel.

<p id=5934><form>hambat</form> <xr>= <sc>HANGBAT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5935><form>hambaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> strike s.o. with s.t. light in a sweeping motion. <i>Hambáwa sa silhig ang irù,</i> Shoo the dog away with the broom.

<p id=5936><form>hambil<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> use s.t. as a temporary cover or protection. <form>hambilhambil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> utilize miscellaneous things to cover parts of s.t. open or exposed. <i>Dáhun ray naghambilhambil sa láwas ni Íbà,</i> Nothing but leaves covered parts of Eve&apos;s body. <i>Kartun nga ihambilhambil sa nagkagusbat nílang balungbálung,</i> Cardboard to patch up their dilapidated shanty. <pos>n</pos> miscellaneous things used as a protective cover.

<p id=5937><form>hambil<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> stack s.t. neatly such that the edges are even. <i>Hambíla (ihambil) ang mga plátu sa aparadur,</i> Stack the plates neatly in the cupboard.

<p id=5938><form>hambilika</form> <xr>= <sc>ANGHILIKA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5939><form>hambin</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> carry s.t. by folding up the front part of one&apos;s skirt or shirt and putting it in the folds. <i>Namansa ang palda nga gihambínan sa lumbuy,</i> Her skirt got stains from the <ix>lumbuy</ix> fruits she carried in it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a2]</itype> bear s.t. inside of it. <i>Mga búngang naghambin ug mga lísu,</i> Fruits bearing seeds. <i>Kinabúhì nga íyang gihambin,</i> The life she carried within her. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> have a feeling, condition within oneself. <i>Kasákit nga ákung gihambin,</i> The grief I bear. <i>Dúna siyay gihambin nga kayugut,</i> She is nursing a grudge.

<p id=5940><form>hambubúkag</form> <i>n</i> small flying lizard of dragon-like appearance, but bright green and dwelling in trees: <bio>Draco sp</bio>. <pos>n</pos> liquid drink for treating asthma which is made from the ashes of this lizard.

<p id=5941><form>hambubuyna</form> <xr>= <sc>HIRBUBUYNA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5942><form>hambug</form> <pos>n</pos> big talk, most often not quite true. <i>Hambug lang kadtung mga pasálig. Sa pagkatinúud wà siyay púl,</i> Those promises were pure big talk. She actually has no pull. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12N; c]</itype> engage in big talk. <i>Nanghambug siyang maprumútid íyang bána. Túu ka?</i> She&apos;s bragging her husband is going to be promoted. Do you believe it? <i>Mau nang kagangkagánga ímung ipanghambug nákù?</i> Is that jalopy the car you&apos;re showing off? a boasting, engaging in big talk. <form>-in-</form> <pos>a</pos> done in a showy, braggart way. <i>Hinambug nga sinayawan,</i> Dancing in such a way as to show off. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> doing s.t. in a showy way. <i>Naghinambug siyag pangasábà sa suluguun,</i> She is showing off, cussing out the servants. <pos>n</pos> things said in bragging. <form>-íra</form> <xr>= <sc>-ÍRU</sc> (female).</xr> <form>-íru</form> <pos>a</pos> given to engaging in big talk, showing off. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become a braggart, show-off. <form>-iruun, -iruhun</form> of a sort that tends to show off.

<p id=5943><form>hambugírit</form> <pos>a</pos> given to talking big, braggart (euphemism for <ix>hambugíru</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become a show-off.

<p id=5944><form>hambuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> loosen or soften soil around the base of plants or put loose soil or fertilizer at the base. <i>Hambúkan ta ang mga tanum arun mulípang,</i> We&apos;ll loosen the soil around the plants to make them sturdy.

<p id=5945><form>hambun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>well-rested</tr>, fresh from not having been worked. <number>a</number> frisky. <i>Hambun ang kabáyù nga dílì kúlang sa pahúway,</i> A horse that doesn&apos;t lack rest is frisky. <number>b</number> highly ready for sex after not having indulged for some time. <number>c</number> virgin, land or sea that hasn&apos;t been used much. <i>Hambun pa kaáyu ang kadagátan didtu,</i> The seas there haven&apos;t been fished very much yet. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> get fresh and rested.

<p id=5946><form>hamburdyir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hamburger sandwich</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make hamburgers.

<p id=5947><form>hambuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2NB; a2]</itype> keep the catch submerged so it stays fresh for a period of time. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> hang fish above the stove or fire to dry. <i>Walà ni ibulad sa adlaw. Gihambuy lang ni sa abúhan,</i> We did not dry this in the sun. We just hung it over the fireplace. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fish submerged in water for a period of time. <i>Prisku tan-áwun apan hinambuy diay,</i> They look fresh but actually they were submerged in the water. <number>2</number> fish dried at the fireplace.

<p id=5948><form>hamì</form> <pos>n</pos> sores at the corners of the mouth. <pos>v</pos> <pb n=296><itype>[A123P; a4b4]</itype> have sores at the corners of the mouth. <i>Gihamì ang táwung hinabákù,</i> The man developed sores in the corners of his mouth because he smoked too much. <form>hamiun</form> <pos>a</pos> having these sores.

<p id=5949><form>hamil</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> smooth out abaca fibers and sort them into strands preparatory to making rope. <i>Naghamil siya ug lánut pára himúung písì,</i> He is sorting out the abaca fibers to make into rope. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> for plants to be flattened, bent completely at the base. <i>Hamilun (ihamil) sa kusug nga hángin ang kamaisan,</i> Strong winds will bend and flatten the corn. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>HAMIL</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr> <pos>a</pos> smooth, velvety to the touch. <i>Hámil kaáyu ang sídang sinínà,</i> A silk dress is very smooth. <form>hamilhámil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> stroke gently. <i>Hamilhamíla (ihamilhámil) ang tíyan sa bábuy,</i> Stroke the pig&apos;s stomach gently.

<p id=5950><form>hamílì</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PÍLÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5951><form>hamilsing<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>HAMÍLÌ</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PÍLÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5952><form>hámir</form> <pos>n</pos> the hammer of firearms.

<p id=5953><form>hámis</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>smooth</tr>, velvety to the touch. <i>Hámis nga pánit,</i> Smooth skin. <i>Hámis kaáyu ang balhíbu sa kabáyù,</i> The horse has velvety hair. <number>2</number> even-textured surface. <i>Hámis nga kútis,</i> Skin without a blemish. <number>3</number> for the sky to be completely cloudless. <pos>n</pos> outermost layer of skin. <i>Nalúkut ang hámis sa íyang buktun nga nabanggud sa batu,</i> He smashed his arm against a rock and the skin was scraped off. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a]</itype> be, become smooth.

<p id=5954><form>hamlag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12C2; b5]</itype> jump playfully on s.o. or on one another. <i>Natumba ang usa ka bátang gihamlágan (gihamlag) sa usa,</i> One of the children fell when the other jumped on him. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> lunge at in an attack. <i>Ug hamlagan (hamlagun) ka sa irù, ayaw ug dágan,</i> If a dog lunges at you, don&apos;t run.

<p id=5955><form>hamlig, hamlug</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>damp</tr> and <tr>moist</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B6; b6]</itype> become damp and moist. <i>Nahamug ang panaptun nga gipabuntagan sa gawas,</i> The cloth that was left outside overnight got wet. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB; b6(1)]</itype> moisten by sprinkling. <i>Ang pila ka lugas nga ulan ígù lang mihamug (naghamug) sa yútà,</i> The few drops of rain just barely moistened the earth. <pos>n</pos> action of <tr>moistening</tr>.

<p id=5956><form>hamluy</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> smooth and <tr>slippery</tr>. <i>Hamluy ang halwan,</i> The snakehead is a slippery fish. <number>2</number> for a variety of s.t. to be esp. smooth and easier to eat or drink than the ordinary. <i>Hamluy kaúnun ang mímis,</i> <ix>Mímis</ix> rice goes down easily. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> pass through easily due to smoothness and slipperiness. <i>Mihamluy lang sa íyang tutunlan ang lísu sa santul,</i> The santol seed just slipped down his throat.

<p id=5957><form>hampak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>strike</tr>, <tr>slam</tr> with force making a noisy impact. <i>Natukyas ang atup kay gihampak sa hángin,</i> The roof came off under the battering of the wind. <i>Kining puthaw mauy ihampak sa úlu sa bitin,</i> Smash the snake&apos;s head with this iron rod. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; ang (sa) hángin nga itum</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a12b2]</itype> get a stroke, severe illness (thought to be brought about by an evil wind). <i>Ayawg hukashúkas tingálig dúnay muhampak nímung hángin,</i> Don&apos;t go about without your shirt. You might suffer a stroke. <i>Hampákun ka pa untà sa hángin nga itum,</i> May you get a stroke! <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>blow</tr>. <number>2</number> blow of <tr>fate</tr>, <tr>calamity</tr>, or the like. <i>Ug mapildi, agwantáhun kay hampak nà sa katarúngan,</i> If you lose, just take it. That&apos;s the way it is. (Lit. That is the blow of logic.) <i>Ang bagyu mauy hampak sa kapaláran,</i> The typhoon is what fate has brought us. <form>-in- sa hángin</form> (usually shortened to <form>-in-</form>) <pos>a</pos> mild <tr>curse</tr> to refer to the object of one&apos;s wrath: &lsquo;darned&rsquo;. <i>Ang mga hinampak! Wà giyud mi imbitaha,</i> Darn them! They didn&apos;t invite us! <number>2</number> a mild <tr>curse</tr> of annoyance or anger. <i>Hinampak! Nakalimut ku sa ákung pitáka!</i> Darn! I forgot to take my pocketbook!

<p id=5958><form>hampang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; a2]</itype> play (dialectal). <number>2</number> <itype>[AC; abc]</itype> <tr>have intercourse</tr> (euphemism). <i>Kadaghan ku na siya ikahampang,</i> I&apos;ve had intercourse with her so many times. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>game</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>sexual intercourse</tr>.

<p id=5959><form>hampid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put things of the same size with a flat surface neatly on top of one another. <i>Akuy muhampid sa mga inutaw nga dayapir,</i> I&apos;ll pile the ironed diapers neatly. <i>Hampíra (ihampid) nang mga libru sa lamísa,</i> Stack those books neatly on the table.

<p id=5960><form>hampil<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> <number>1</number> attach s.t. to s.t. solid as a patch or sign. <i>Kinsa may naghampil sa lungag sa salug?</i> Who put a cover over the hole in the floor? <i>Hampíli nag bandids ang ímung samad,</i> Put a bandage on your wound. <i>Ihampil ni sa bungbung arung makit-an sa tanan,</i> Put this up on the wall so that everybody can see it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> spread s.t. on top of s.t. else or between two objects as a protection. <i>Hampíli ug hábul ang banig únà higdái,</i> Spread a blanket over the mat before you lie on it. <pos>n</pos> s.t. attached as a cover or patch. <form>hampilhampil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put up a temporary structure. <pos>a</pos> makeshift, made of temporary patchings. <i>Hampilhampil lang úsà ning ákung balay,</i> This house of mine is just a makeshift structure.

<p id=5961><form>hampil<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> pile flat, flexible things neatly in layers, one on top of the other. <i>Hampíla (ihampil) ang mga dáhun sa tabákù <pb n=297>únà pusta,</i> Pile the tobacco leaves neatly one on top of the other before you pack them.

<p id=5962><form>hampílù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>saddle blanket</tr>. <number>2</number> s.t. used to cover a horse&apos;s back when riding without a saddle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put a saddle blanket on the back of a horse.

<p id=5963><form>hampul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6(1)]</itype> put leaves on s.t. for medicinal purposes. <i>Ang dáhun sa átis maáyung ihampul sa piang,</i> The leaves of the <ix>atis</ix> make a good compress for sprains. <pos>n</pos> leaves prepared to lay over an afflicted area.

<p id=5964><form>hampuug</form> <xr>= <sc>DAMPUUG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5965><form>hamtang</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PAHAMTANG</sc></xr> <ix>under</ix> <sc>BUTANG<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p id=5966><form>hamtung</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>middle-aged</tr>, between forty and sixty years of age. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become middle-aged. <i>Ang kaguul makahamtung (makapahamtung) sa panagway sa táwu,</i> Worry causes one to look middle-aged.

<p id=5967><form>hamù</form> <xr>= <sc>GAM-UL</sc>, <ix>1.</ix></xr>

<p id=5968><form>hamug</form> <xr>= <sc>HAMLUG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5969><form>hámug</form> <xr>= <sc>YÁMUG</sc>, <ix>n1, 1a,</ix> <i>v</i>.</xr>

<p id=5970><form>ham-ug</form> <xr>= <sc>HAMLUG</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr>

<p id=5971><form>hamugáway</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> large and <tr>spacious</tr> enough to afford ease of movement. <i>Hamugáway ang kwartu pára sa upat,</i> The room is ample for four people. <number>2</number> for living conditions to be comfortable, with ample financial resources. <i>Hamugáway ang ílang pamuyù kay dakug swildu ang bána,</i> They live comfortably because the husband earns a good salary. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> get to be wide and spacious. <number>2</number> for living conditions to become comfortable.

<p id=5972><form>hamuk</form> <xr>= <sc>DAGHAN</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p id=5973><form>hámuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>supernatural beings</tr> that harass people by frightening them. They usually assume the form of oversized animals if they show themselves or may just indicate their presence without showing themselves. They may be found in any lonely place. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; a4]</itype> for these spirits to frighten one. <i>Pangadyì arun dì ka hamúkun,</i> Recite a prayer so the spirits cannot harass you. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> place infested with these spirits. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> susceptible to having experiences with <ix>hámuk.</ix>

<p id=5974><form>hamun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ham</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> have, make into ham. <form>-áda</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. meat dish, usually beef, cooked by browning in fat and simmering it in a covered pan in its own juice. This is served with a sauce. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC12; c1]</itype> cook <ix>hamunáda.</ix>

<p id=5975><form>hamun<sub>2</sub>, hámun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> take s.t. big and shove it in one&apos;s mouth to eat it. <i>Ihamun lang níya ang kík arun dì siya pangayúan,</i> He&apos;ll shove the whole piece of cake into his mouth so no one can ask him for any.

<p id=5976><form>*hamung<sub>1</sub></form> <form>walay &mdash;</form> without a stitch on. <i>Wà siyay hamung nga nagdúlà,</i> He was playing without a stitch on. <form>way hamunghamung</form> <xr>= <sc>WAY HAMUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5977><form>hamung<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>HAMUN<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=5978><form>hámus</form> <pos>a</pos> messy and dirty with s.t. wet. <i>Hámus ang bátang tan-áwun kay nagkasip-un,</i> The child looks messy with his nasal discharge all over him. <i>Hámus ang salug sa kusína,</i> The kitchen floor is wet and grimy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> get messy and grimy. <i>Nahámus ang íyang nawung kay nagkaun ug mangga,</i> His face got all messy with the mangoes.

<p id=5979><form>hamútan</form> <xr>= <sc>HUMÚTAN</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>HUMUT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5980><form>hamuy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> stick s.t. in the mouth to lick it. <i>Ayaw ihamuy (hamuya) ímung tudlù kay húgaw,</i> Don&apos;t suck your finger because it is dirty. <form>&mdash; sa tudlù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be so poor as to have nothing to eat. <i>Mawad-an gánì kag trabáhu maghamuy na lang ka sa tudlù,</i> If you lose your job you&apos;ll have nothing to eat but your fingers (lit. you&apos;ll be sucking your fingers). <form>hamuyhámuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lollipop</tr>.

<p id=5981><form>hamyang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> spread out in the open. <i>Naghamyang siya sa mga baligyà dihà sa asíras,</i> He is displaying his wares on the sidewalk. <i>Nakahamyang na siya sa humay nga igbubúwad,</i> She has laid out the unhusked rice outside to dry. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> throw cloth or anything pliable carelessly s.w. <i>Kinsay naghamyang áring amirkána sa supa?</i> Who threw this coat on the sofa? <i>Ihamyang lang nang mga bulingun sa katri,</i> Just dump those dirty clothes on the bed.

<p id=5982><form>haN-</form> <xr>= <sc>HIN-<sub>1</sub></sc>, <i>4.</i></xr>

<p id=5983><form>hana</form> (from <ix>hanu na</ix>) <number>1</number> how about it? how is it now? <i>Hana? Wà ka pa mahubug? Ganína ka ra mang inum<corr sic=.>,</corr></i> How about it? Aren&apos;t you drunk yet? You&apos;ve been drinking for hours. <number>2</number> there, that&apos;s what you get. <i>Hana. Dì nahúlug ka kay wà ka man mamátì nga gibuyag,</i> There. Now you fell because you didn&apos;t listen when I reprimanded you.

<p id=5984><form>hanà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> get ready to start doing s.t., make motions to do s.t. <i>Mihanà siyag pátid nákù,</i> He made a move to kick me. <i>Dílì gánì ta makahanà ug tindug pangutan-un tag ása ta,</i> We can&apos;t even make a move to get up before he asks us where we&apos;re going. <i>Ayaw ihanà ang pusil kay mubutu,</i> Don&apos;t aim the gun, because it might go off. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> threaten to happen. <i>Mihanag kapálung ang pitrumaks,</i> The lantern was threatening to go out.

<p id=5985><form>hanab</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. heavy bolo with a pointed tip and curved blade. 12&ndash;14&Prime; long.

<p id=5986><form>hanagdung</form> <xr>= <sc>HINAGDUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5987><form>hanap</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>hazy</tr>, difficult to discern. <i>Hanap ang mga litra,</i> The letters are very faint (or blurred). <i>Hanap ang kaháyag sa bitúun,</i> The <pb n=298>star gives off a faint light. <i>Hanap nga pahíyum,</i> A faint smile. <number>1a</number> for s.t. in relief to be so worn that it can hardly be distinguished. <i>Hanap nga dyís,</i> A worn-out dime. <number>2</number> <tr>vague</tr>, uncertain. <i>Hanap nga kaugmáun,</i> An uncertain future. <i>Hanap nga pagtúu sa Diyus,</i> A not very strong belief in God. <number>3</number> for one&apos;s vision to be dim. <i>Hanap ákung panan-aw,</i> My eyes are dim. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> become faint, blurred, do s.t. in a blurred way. <i>Muhanap ang ági sa lápis ug dílì nímu iduut,</i> The pencil makes a very weak mark if you don&apos;t press down on it. <i>Ang naghanap níyang mga sáad,</i> His uncertain promises.

<p id=5988><form>hanas</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>proficient</tr>, <tr>skillful</tr>. <i>Hanas na kaáyu siyang mugámit sa pusil,</i> He handles a gun proficiently now. <i>Hanas siyang musultig Binisayà,</i> He speaks Visayan fluently. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> be, become proficient, skillful. <i>Nagkahanas na siyang mudráyib,</i> He is becoming more skilled in driving. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> make oneself proficient. <i>Maghanas ku sa ákung panapuy sa sista,</i> I will make myself proficient in playing the guitar. <form>hanashánas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> keep practicing to make oneself proficient. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> proficiency, skill.

<p id=5989><form>hánaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> <tr>disappear</tr>, <tr>vanish</tr>. <i>Unsang tambála ang nakahánaw (nakapahánaw) sa ímung bugas?</i> What did you use to make your pimples vanish? <i>Ang ákung kasukù kalit rang nahánaw,</i> My anger quickly faded away. <form>&mdash; sa mápa</form> for s.t. to be wiped out of existence, disappear from the place one would expect it to be. <i>Humag bumba sa balay nahánaw sa mápa,</i> The house was bombed and wiped out of existence.

<p id=5990><form>hánaw<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <form>way &mdash;</form> have no awareness of s.t. or notion of how. <i>Wà siyay hánaw kun unsay nanghitabù líbut kaníya,</i> She has no notion of what&apos;s happening around her. <i>Dì ku makaáyu niánà. Wà kuy hánaw niánà,</i> I can&apos;t fix that. I have no notion of that. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> knowledge of s.t., awareness. <i>Unsay panghánaw nákù ánà?</i> What should I know about that?

<p id=5991><form>hanay</form> expression uttered with a warning. <i>Hanay, maigù gánì ku, hilatiguhan ta giyud ka,</i> Watch out! If you hit me, you&apos;ll get it.

<p id=5992><form>han-ay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> string the warp threads in the loom. <number>2a</number> lay out the format of s.t. to be printed. <number>2b</number> lay out the plot of a story. <number>3</number> compose s.t. literary. <i>Si anhing Bin Subíri mauy naghan-ay sa áwit Mátud Níla,</i> <ix>Mátud Níla</ix> was composed by Ben Zubiri. <number>4</number> arrange, put in order. <i>Han-áyang mga libru,</i> Put the books in order. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>warp threads</tr>. <number>2</number> amount of thread used for the warp. <form>-in-</form> <number>1</number> threads that have been strung. <number>2</number> s.t. arranged.

<p id=5993><form>hanayak</form> <xr>= <sc>HINAYAK</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5994><form>hanayhay</form> <pos>a</pos> rolling land; hilly, but not having a steep angle of elevation. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B5; b6]</itype> be, become rolling. <i>Muhanayhay ang bungtud áning dapíta,</i> The countryside becomes rolling at this point. <i>Naghanayhay nga dálan nga dílì kápuyng laktun,</i> A trail that rises slowly and not tiring to walk over.

<p id=5995><form>hanayun</form> <xr>= <sc>HINAYUN</sc></xr>, <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>DÁYUN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5996><form>hanbag</form> <xr>= <sc>HAMBAG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5997><form>handà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> plan to do s.t. <i>Naghandà ming mangalígù sa dágat rung Duminggu,</i> We are planning to go swimming on Sunday. <i>Gihandáan ka nga iprumut,</i> You are under consideration for promotion. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b4]</itype> be about to do s.t., for s.t. almost to happen to one. <i>Mau giyuy pagbundak sa ulan sa dihang mihandà na untà ku paglakaw,</i> The rain suddenly started pouring down just as I was about to go out. <i>Kapila na siya handái nga mamatay sa dágat,</i> Several times he came close to dying on the sea. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> try placing s.t. on s.t. to find out how it fits. <i>Walà pa gánì mahuman ang íyang sinínà íya nang gihandà,</i> Her dress was not finished yet she already tried putting it on. <form>handàhandà</form> <pos>n</pos> plans for an action. <i>Pulus lang giyud handàhandà ang tanan; wà giyuy aksiyun,</i> It&apos;s all plans, no action.

<p id=5998><form>handag</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>slanting</tr>, <tr>leaning</tr>. <i>Handag ra kaáyu ang ímung sinuwatan,</i> Your handwriting slants too much. <i>Handag ang túri sa Písa,</i> The Tower of Pisa leans to one side. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for s.t. tall to be leaning to one side. <i>Mihandag siya sa sandigánan sa lingkuránan,</i> She leaned back in the chair with her buttocks forward. <i>Handága (ihandag) pagsandig ang hagdan,</i> Set the ladder in a slanting position.

<p id=5999><form>handalamay, handalámay</form> <pos>n</pos> small tree: <bio>Pipturus arborescens</bio>. The white part of its bark is scraped and placed over dislocated bones to prevent swelling. The leaves are applied to eczemas.

<p id=6000><form>handalanaw</form> <xr>= <sc>ALINDÁNAW</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6001><form>handalas</form> <pos>a</pos> steep and slippery. <i>Handalas ang dálan padúlung sa walug,</i> The path to the valley is steep and slippery. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> glide swiftly down an incline. <i>Mihandalas ang mga bátà sa bakilid,</i> The children slid down the side of the hill. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23; b(1)]</itype> run downwards, half sliding, half running. <i>Mihandalas ang mga bátà sa hagdan,</i> The children rushed down the stairs. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> move out of a place at top speed. <i>Naghandalas mig panágan pag-ulan,</i> We got out of there as fast as we could when it started to rain.

<pb n=299>

<p id=6002><form>handalítik</form> <xr>= <sc>HANDILÍTIK</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6003><form>handámay</form> <xr>= <sc>HANDALÁMAY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6004><form>handánaw</form> <xr>= <sc>ALINDÁNAW</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6005><form>handay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> place s.t. long athwart s.t. long. <i>Akuy muhanday sa ímung buktun sa unlan,</i> I&apos;ll rest your arm on the pillow. <i>Sanga ang gihandayan sa sumbuhan sa pagtumung,</i> He rested the barrel of the gun on the branch as he took aim. <i>Ákung ihanday ang ákung mga tiil sa ímung páa,</i> Let me rest my legs on your thighs. <number>2</number> rest one&apos;s upper back on s.t. <i>Muhanday ku sa unlan,</i> I&apos;ll rest my back on the pillows.

<p id=6006><form>handig</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> lean, cause s.t. to lean against s.t. <i>Gustung muhandig ang masakitun sa unlan,</i> The patient wants to rest his back on the pillows. <i>Ayaw handígi ang basang pintal,</i> Don&apos;t lean on the wet paint. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> get to be steep. <i>Ug mahandig ang karsáda, iprimíra ang kambyu,</i> When the road gets steep, shift to first gear. <pos>a</pos> <tr>steep</tr>, sloping sharply. <i>Kápuyng tangásun nang bungtúra kay handig,</i> It&apos;s tiring to climb that hill because it&apos;s so steep. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>steepness</tr>.

<p id=6007><form>handilib-un</form> <xr>= <sc>GABUN<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=6008><form>handilika</form> <xr>= <sc>ANGHILIKA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6009><form>handilítik</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. shrimp around 6&Prime;, with small claws and of scorpion-like appearance. Edible, but not highly esteemed.

<p id=6010><form>handul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> handle, take care of a case in court. <number>2</number> teach, handle a class. <i>Pila ka sabdyik ímung handúlun?</i> How many subjects are you going to handle? <number>3</number> handle, deal with s.o. younger or of lower status. <i>Maáyu siyang muhandul sa íyang mga sákup,</i> He handles his tenants well. <i>Dì ka kamaung muhandul sa ímung manghud,</i> You don&apos;t know how to handle your little brother.

<p id=6011><form>handul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> handle of a handbag, satchel. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a handle for s.t.

<p id=6012><form>handum</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> recall and think fondly about s.t. memorable, but forever past. <i>Naghandum ku sa ákung kabatan-un,</i> I remember my youth. <i>Handúmun ku ikaw kanúnay,</i> I shall always think of you and remember you with fondness. <number>2</number> recall and yearn for s.t. <i>Muhandum ang bátà sa inahan,</i> A child recalls and yearns for its mother. <i>Ngánung nanarútut man ka? Naghandum kang magdaut?</i> Why are you blowing that horn? Do you long to get sick? <number>3</number> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> for s.t. to cross one&apos;s mind, entertain a thought. <i>Wà ku maghandum nga maduktur siya,</i> I never thought that he would become a doctor. <i>Walà kuy ikahandum dautang hunàhúnà níya,</i> Nothing bad has ever crossed my mind. <number>4</number> <corr sic="["></corr><formx>-i</formx><corr sic="]"></corr> think on it, consider! <i>Handúmi kun unsay dangátan nímug wà ku dinhi,</i> Consider what will become of you if I am not here. <form>-anan</form> <number>1</number> <tr>souvenir</tr>. <i>Handumánan ni sa ákung pag-adtu sa Ispanya,</i> This is a souvenir from my visit to Spain. <number>2</number> token, symbol of mutual affection. <form>-in-</form> <pos>a</pos> word of salutation in letters. <i>Hinandum kung Nína,</i> Dear Nena. <form>-l-un</form> <pos>a</pos> memorable. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become memorable. <form>-l-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. which is remembered periodically. <i>Ang Santa Krus halandumun námù káda tris di Máyu,</i> We remember to perform the prayers of the Holy Cross every May 3.

<p id=6013><form>handunguy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P]</itype> be weak with the head drooping. <i>Hubug na kaáyu siya. Naghandunguy nang galakaw,</i> He was drunk, and he was all tuckered out, walking with his head drooping.

<p id=6014><form>handúraw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> picture s.t. in one&apos;s mind. <i>Naghandúraw kug unsay kadangátan sa mga bátà,</i> I can just picture what will happen to the children. <form>-an</form> <number>1</number> picture formed in the mind. <number>2</number> the mind where pictures are formed.

<p id=6015><form>handus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> push, thrust s.t. long forward. <i>Kun kita lang duha dì giyud ta makahandus niíning awtúha,</i> The two of us cannot push this car. <i>Gihandúsan siyag kalit sa usa ka maháit nga kutsilyu,</i> S.o. thrust a sharp knife at him. <number>2</number> submit, pass on for action. <i>Ihandus ang aplikisyun ngadtu sa pangúlung buhatan,</i> Forward the application to the head office. <number>3</number> carry s.t. sizeable s.w. to deliver it. <i>Ása ninyu ihandus ning grába?</i> Where are you delivering this gravel? <number>4</number> send food or drinks to a celebration to supplement what is offered by the host. <i>Naghandus akug usa ka litsun sa ílang kasal,</i> I contributed a roast pig to their wedding. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> push given to s.t. long. <number>2</number> haul, delivery. <number>3</number> s.t. contributed to a party.

<p id=6016><form>hang</form> short for <xr><sc>HILABIHAN NGA</sc></xr> how very! <i>Hang lisúra ning iksamína!</i> What a difficult examination!

<p id=6017><form>háng</form> <xr>= <sc>HÁLANG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6018><form>hangad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>look up</tr>, turn the head up. <i>Dì ku kahangad kay mitikig ákung líug,</i> I cannot bend my head upwards because I have a stiff neck. <i>Hangda kunu kun náa bay hinug nga búnga,</i> Look up at the tree and see if there are any ripe fruits. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> depend, rely upon for support, help, etc. <i>Nía kanákù siya maghangad sa íyang adlaw-adlaw nga mga kinahanglanun,</i> He looks to me for all his daily needs. <number>3</number> <itype>[B]</itype> for s.t. usually level to tilt upwards. <i>Naghangad ang sakayan kay nabug-atan sa ulin,</i> The boat has its bow up high because it is loaded down at <pb n=300>the stern. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> look to God in prayer. <i>Ihangad sa lángit ang ímung mga suliran,</i> Bring your problems to the Lord in prayer. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> look upward for a mischievous purpose. <i>Túa siya sa sílung sa hagdan nanghangad samtang nanáug si Pitra,</i> He&apos;s at the foot of the stairs looking up while Petra is coming down. <form>hangdanan</form> <pos>n</pos> place which one looks through for a mischievous purpose, e.g. a gap in the flooring. <form>tagi-(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> one who is fond of asking for help when he is in need, but keeps to himself when he is in a position to help. <i>Way hinungdan nang mga tawhánang tagihángad kun walà apan tagidúkù kun adúna,</i> Those people are no good because they are quick to ask for help when they need it, but otherwise just keep to themselves. <form>halangdun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> title of respect: honorable. <i>Ang Halangdung Mayur,</i> The Honorable Mayor. <number>2</number> royal, occupying a high office.

<p id=6019><form>hangag</form> <xr>= <sc>DANGHAG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6020><form>hangahang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> be ignorant of s.t. important and be unconcerned. <i>Maistra ka apan naghangahang ka sa baláud,</i> You&apos;re a teacher, but you&apos;re ignorant of the law. <i>Wà hangahangi sa mga istudiyanti ang mga prublíma sa gubyirnu,</i> The students are aware of and concerned about the problems of the government.

<p id=6021><form>hángak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; a4b6]</itype> <tr>pant</tr>, be out of breath from exertion. <i>Naghangak siya sa kabug-at sa íyang dala,</i> He was panting because of the weight of what he was carrying. <i>Gihángak (gihangákan) na lang kug linakaw,</i> I am already out of breath from walking.

<p id=6022><form>hangal</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>inattentive</tr> to what one is about. <i>Hangal ka giyud. Unsa man ruy ákung gisulti?</i> You are not with it. Now what did I say? <i>Wà nímu ipha ang suklì. Hangal ka giyung batáa ka,</i> You didn&apos;t count the change, you stupid child. <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> do s.t. in a careless, inattentive way. <pos>n</pos> s.t. done in a careless, wrong way. <form>ka-</form> <tr>carelessness</tr>, <tr>inattentiveness</tr>.

<p id=6023><form>hangas</form> <xr>= <sc>HANGLAS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6024><form>hangáwa</form> <xr>= <sc>HINGÁWA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6025><form>hangay, hángay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b8]</itype> do s.t. for no reason, more than is necessary. <i>Muhángay lang siyag kasukù,</i> He just suddenly gets angry for no reason. <i>Naharus ang twirka kay gikahayngan nímu ug hugut,</i> You stripped the nut because you tightened it much too much.

<p id=6026><form>hangbat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> take a large bite with a snapping action. <i>Gihambat ang ákung páa sa íhu,</i> The shark snapped at my leg. <form>-um-r-</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to bite. <form>ka-un</form> <pos>a</pos> raring to bite at s.t.

<p id=6027><form>hanggà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chickenpox</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> get chickenpox. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> having chickenpox.

<p id=6028><form>hanggab</form> <xr>= <sc>HANGGAP</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6029><form>hanggap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> <tr>breathe</tr> in, <tr>inhale deeply</tr>. <i>Naghanggap siya sa alimyun sa búlak,</i> She is breathing in the fragrance of the flowers. <i>Nahanggap nákù ang báhù sa patayng irù,</i> I got a deep whiff of the smell of the dead dog. <pos>n</pos> deep inhalation.

<p id=6030><form>hanggat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> have s.o. join in an activity. <i>Hanggáta siya pagpanihápun sa átù,</i> Bring him home for supper. <i>Hanggáta siyag sinumbagay,</i> Challenge him to a fight.

<p id=6031><form>hanggaw</form> <pos>a</pos> be a jerk, without common sense. <i>Hanggaw giyung bayhána. Bísag kulatáhun sa íyang bána mudukut lang gihápun,</i> What a stupid fool that woman is. No matter how her husband mistreats her she sticks to him anyway. <i>Gisugal sa hanggaw ang kwartang igpapálit ug pán,</i> The jerk gambled away the money he was given to buy bread with. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> get to be a jerk.

<p id=6032><form>hanggrinid</form> <xr>= <sc>HAN-GRINID</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6033><form>hanggup<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> take a hot drink. <i>Mihanggup kug ínit nga kapi antis kung milakaw,</i> I took a drink of hot coffee before I went out.

<p id=6034><form>hanggup<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>HALANGGUP</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6035><form>hanggus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> for s.t. to be abraded due to friction. <i>Ang lamísang gigúruy mauy nakahanggus (nakapahanggus) sa sáwug,</i> The table scratched the floor because you dragged it. <i>Nahanggus ang ákung bitíis nga nabwásut sa salug,</i> My foot slipped into an opening on the floor and I suffered abrasions on my leg. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b1c]</itype> smooth a piece of wood, bamboo strip, coconut midrib, or the like by scraping. <i>Hanggúsi ang tukug ug gílit,</i> Smooth the coconut midrib with a razor blade.

<p id=6036><form>hanghang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> for infants to have their mouth open, yearning for food. <i>Naghanghang ang gutum nga pisù,</i> The hungry nestlings have their mouths open. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>HALHAL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6037><form>hángin</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>air</tr>. <i>Wà nay hángin ang hásag,</i> The pressure lantern has no more air. <number>2</number> wind, breeze. <i>Mibulhut ang hángin gíkan sa dágat,</i> The wind blew in from the sea. <number>3</number> breath or air as necessary for the body, <tr>stamina</tr>. <i>Daling malúya kay kúlang sa hángin,</i> He tires easily because he has no stamina. <number>4</number> mere talk, idle words. <i>Kargádug hángin ang íyang sinulat,</i> His article is mostly hot air. <number>5</number> force, agency that carries s.t. along or influences s.t. <i>Unsang hangínay nagdala nímu dinhi?</i> What brought you here? <number>6</number> <xr>= <sc>BINTUS</sc>.</xr> <number>7</number> <ix>in phrases:</ix> <formx>birdi nga &mdash;</formx> <pos>n</pos> a draft that <corr sic=make>makes</corr> a <pb n=301>person ill when his back is exposed to it, esp. when perspiring. <form>dautan nga &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> an ill wind that carries with it certain evil effects. <i>Muhurus gánì ang dautang hángin, dúnay balatían nga muabut,</i> When an ill wind blows, an epidemic will break out. <form>itum nga &mdash;</form> ill wind that brings serious pestilence or death. <form>pabur sa &mdash;</form> for a sail to be square before the wind, so as to catch the full force. <i>Túlin ang sakayan kay pabur sa hángin,</i> The boat is moving fast because it is catching the full force of the wind. <form>may &mdash;</form> crackpot, full of crazy ideas. a windy. <i>Hángin kaáyu rung adláwa,</i> It is very windy today. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> become windy. <i>Mulawud siya bísag maghángin,</i> He goes out to sea even if it is windy. <number>2</number> <itype>[a2]</itype> be blown by the wind. <i>Dat-úgi nang mga papil kay hangínun unyà,</i> Put a weight on the papers because the wind might blow them away. <number>3</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> get puffed up, conceited. <i>Nagkahangin siya sukad marayna,</i> She has been puffed up ever since she was made a beauty queen. <number>4</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> be missed by a hairbreadth. <i>Nahanginan ang ákung úlu sa bála,</i> A bullet missed my head by a hairbreadth. <number>5</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> be crazy. <i>Kubad siyang musulti, mu rag gihanginan siya,</i> He speaks off the subject as if he were crazy. <form>pa-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b4]</itype> expose oneself to the wind draft. <i>Magpahangin ta sa baybáyun,</i> Let&apos;s get some air at the seashore. <i>Giubu ang bátà nga gipahanginan,</i> The child was exposed to the draft and caught a cold. <form>-an(&rarr;), balat -an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. sea cucumber that shrinks greatly when taken out of the water. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> atmosphere, air space. <form>pwirsa sa ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> Air Force. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> crackpot, characterized by silly and impractical ideas. <i>Hangínun kaáyu siyag mga plánu. Anus-a gud nà musalir?</i> He&apos;s full of batty ideas. How could that ever succeed? <form>-un(&rarr;) ug útuk</form> <pos>a</pos> boastful. <i>Lábung manulti kay hanginug útuk,</i> He exaggerates because he is boastful.

<p id=6038><form>hángir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>clothes hanger</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put clothes on a hanger. <i>Hangíra (ihángir) ang tanang bláwus,</i> Hang all the blouses up. <i>Gustu ku sa plastik nga mauy hangíran,</i> I prefer to hang my clothes on plastic hangers.

<p id=6039><form>hangit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> get irked or irritated to the point of anger. <i>Nahangit ku kadugáyan sa íyang paggaugau,</i> His derision finally got my goat. <pos>a</pos> annoying, maddening. <i>Hangit kaáyu ning maglimpiyu ta sa báy unyà ang uban maglingkudlingkud lang,</i> It is certainly maddening to clean the house while the others just sit around.

<p id=6040><form>hangitan</form> <pos>n</pos> selvage edge of s.t. woven, special weave at edge of s.t. woven to keep it from getting undone.

<p id=6041><form>hangkab</form> <xr>= <sc>ANGKAB</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6042><form>hangkub<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>keen</tr> about s.t.<corr>,</corr> much interested in s.t. <i>Dílì kaáyu ku hangkub sa mga babáyi,</i> I&apos;m not terribly interested in women. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B23(1)]</itype> be eager to do s.t., enthusiastic about s.t. <i>Muhangkub pa untà sa trabáhu nang íyang mga anak,</i> If only his sons would interest themselves in the work. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23P]</itype> inspire enthusiasm. <i>Talagsang kadásig paggámit sa bag-u níyang prupyidad nihangkub kaníya,</i> A tremendous desire to use his new acquisition inspired him.

<p id=6043><form>hangkub<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> fitting well into s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> fit well into s.t. <i>Muhangkub (mahangkub) ning sapatúsa níya kay paríha mag numiru,</i> These shoes will fit him well, for they are the right size. <i>Ang luag kung sinínà nagkahangkub na kay mitambuk man ku,</i> My shirt was loose, but it is getting snug on me because I&apos;m gaining weight.

<p id=6044><form>hanglas</form> <pos>a</pos> very smooth to the point of being <tr>slippery</tr>. <i>Hanglas ang salug nga bag-ung giispirmáhan,</i> The floor has just been waxed and is very smooth and slippery. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> become <tr>slippery</tr>. <i>Naghanglas ang ákung kamut tungud sa armirul,</i> My hands are slippery because of the starch.

<p id=6045><form>han-grinid</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hand grenade</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> throw a hand grenade at. <i>Gihan-grinid ang mga tápuk ug daghang namatay,</i> A hand grenade was thrown into the crowd, and many people died.

<p id=6046><form>hangtud</form> <tr>until</tr>, <tr>up to</tr> a point in space or time. <i>Hangtud sa pusti mga bayinti mitrus,</i> It is about twenty meters up to the post. <i>Mutrabáhu ku hangtud sa alas dus,</i> I will work up to two o&apos;clock. <i>Gitursi ku íyang kamut hangtud nga mihílak siya,</i> I twisted his arm until he cried. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; <r>[<ix>noun</ix>], [<ix>pronoun</ix>]</r></formx> even, including [noun], [pronoun]. <i>Hangtud ikaw, nawad-an sa pagtáhud kanákù?</i> Have you lost your respect for me too? <form>&mdash; sa &mdash;, kahangtúran</form> forever, till the end of time (said of things that could terminate but will not). <i>Higugmáun ku siya hangtud sa hangtud (hangtud sa kahangtúran),</i> I will love her till the end of time. <form>sa &mdash;</form> <tr>forever</tr> (said of things that cannot terminate). <i>Mipahúlay siya sa hangtud,</i> He was laid to his eternal rest. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> stay, last long. <i>Ang baratung klási dílì muhangtud,</i> The cheap kind doesn&apos;t last. <i>Dì ka hangtúran ug mutsatsa ug mauy ímung dinad-an,</i> No maid will stay long with you if that&apos;s how you handle them. <form>sa kahangtúran</form> to eternity. <i>Sa <pb n=302>usa ka butu ang kinabúhì nabanlud sa kahangtúran,</i> He was blasted to eternity with one explosion. <form>walay kahangtúran</form> endless, eternal. <i>Ang gugma ku nímu walay kahangtúran,</i> My love for you is endless. <i>Kasábà nga way kahangtúran,</i> Scoldings without end.

<p id=6047><form>hanguhag</form> <xr>= <sc>DANGHAG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6048><form>hangul</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> be overly desirous of eating s.t. <i>Hangul siyag mangga,</i> He is crazy about mangoes. <number>1a</number> fond of an activity. <i>Hangul siya ug bayli,</i> He is fond of dancing. <number>2</number> <tr>selfish</tr>, <tr>greedy</tr>. <i>Hangul kaáyu. Gustu iyáhun tanan,</i> He is so greedy. He wants everything for himself. <i>Hangul kaáyu ka, dílì manghátag bísag gamay,</i> You&apos;re very selfish. You don&apos;t even give a little piece. <number>3</number> <tr>destitute</tr>, <tr>needy</tr> (Biblical). <i>Ang mga hangul natigayun,</i> The poor were ministered unto. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>begrudge</tr>, not want s.o. to have s.t. one might have for himself. <i>Kun náa pa lang kuy sápì, dílì ku muhángul nímu,</i> If I had money I wouldn&apos;t begrudge you any. <i>Gihangúlan ta ba ka sa ímung gipangáyù?</i> Did I ever begrudge you anything you asked for? <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; b3]</itype> be <tr>greedy</tr>, <tr>gluttonous</tr>. <i>Ang pagdilì makahángul (makapahángul) sa táwu,</i> Not allowing s.o. to have s.t. makes him more desirous for it than ever. <i>Kanà lay ákung kahangúlan?</i> Would I ever have a great desire for that? Who wants that? <form>walay na-</form> who cares about that (lit. no one has ever gotten overly desirous for that). <i>Nía rag ímung bisiklíta, way nahángul,</i> Here, you can have your old bicycle. Who wants it? <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> greediness. <number>2</number> poverty-stricken (Biblical). <form>kahangulhangul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> take to s.t. greedily. <i>Nagkahangulhangul kug káun ug pán kay wà ni sa ámù,</i> I just love to eat bread because we don&apos;t have it at home. <i>Kining mga tagabaryu magkahangulhangul ug sini,</i> Those country hicks are avid about movies. <ix>See also</ix> <xr><sc>KINAHANGLAN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6049><form>hangup</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2C; a12]</itype> <tr>embrace</tr> or <tr>greet</tr> with joy, esp. upon arriving. <i>Muhangup ang bátà nákù inig-abut nákù sa balay,</i> The child greets me with joy as soon as I get home. <i>Naghángup dáyun sila sa ílang panagkítà,</i> They immediately rushed into each other&apos;s arms when they saw each other. <i>Ayaw ku hangpa kay gisip-un ku,</i> Don&apos;t embrace me. I have a cold. <number>2</number> <corr sic="["></corr><formx>gi-</formx><corr sic="["></corr> be affected by the sickness <ix>hangup.</ix> <pos>n</pos> ailment brought on by the spirit of a deceased relative whom one failed to remember with a prayer, mass, or the like. <pos>a</pos> affectionate in one&apos;s greeting. <i>Kinasingkásing ug hangup gayud nga pagdáwat,</i> Sincere and joyous reception. <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; c5]</itype> be <tr>pleased</tr> by some action. <i>Nahinangup aku sa íyang gibúhat,</i> What he did pleased me. <i>Gikahinangup námù ang ímung sulat,</i> Your letter pleased us. <form>kahinangup</form> <pos>n</pos> pleasure at some action. <form>hinalangpun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>welcome</tr>. <i>Ang balintayins dí mauy usa ka hinalangpun nga higayun,</i> Valentine&apos;s Day is a welcome occasion. <form>mahinalangpun, mahinangpánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>with pleasure</tr>, <tr>enthusiasm</tr>. <i>Mahinalangpun kaáyu siyang miúyun sa plánu,</i> He agreed to the plan enthusiastically.

<p id=6050><form>hángus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S3P; a4]</itype> <tr>breathe heavily</tr> or with difficulty. <i>Minghángus siya, dáyun namatay,</i> He labored for breath and died. <i>Naghangus (gihángus) siyang nagtungas sa bakilid,</i> She was breathing hard and heavily as she climbed the hill. <pos>n</pos> heavy breathing.

<p id=6051><form>hangut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> <tr>bite</tr> at, <tr>chew</tr> s.t. rubbery or sinewy. <i>Milugnut ang baktin, nagpanghangut sa láang,</i> The wild pig struggled, chewing at the noose. <i>Hangtun ang sinílas sa ituy,</i> The puppy will chew the slippers up. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b5c]</itype> <tr>endure</tr>, <tr>put up with</tr>. <i>Dì muhángut ning sapatúsa nímu kay dagkù kag tiil,</i> This pair of shoes will not last long with your big feet. <i>Hangútun (hangútan) ku na lang ning klasíhas trabáhu kay wà kuy láing kapaingnan,</i> I have to endure this kind of work because I have nothing else to turn to.

<p id=6052><form>hangwat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>lift</tr> s.t. heavy from the top. <i>Naghangwat akug baldi nga punù sa kinálut nga yútà,</i> I lifted the pail of soil. <number>1a</number> lift s.t. to dispose of it. <i>Gihangwátan ang nátad sa mga sagbut,</i> The trash which littered the yard was taken away. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>gather</tr> s.t. to dispose of it. <i>Átung hangwátun kining mga tái,</i> Let&apos;s get rid of all this manure.

<p id=6053><form>hangyù</form> (from <ix>káyù</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <i>1</i> <itype>[A; b5c]</itype> <tr>ask</tr> for s.t., request as a favor. <i>Hangyúa lang siyang muhulam kag kwarta,</i> Ask him to let you borrow money. <i>Kinsay átung hangyúan sa kwarta?</i> Who shall we ask for the money? <i>Dúna kuy ihangyù nímu,</i> I have s.t. to request of you. <number>1a</number> <tr>beseech</tr>, <tr>plead for</tr>. <i>Mihangyù ang inahan nga luwasun ang íyang anak,</i> The mother pleaded for her son&apos;s life. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>haggle</tr> the price down, ask the seller to let one have s.t. at a lower price. <i>Hangyúa ug písus ang búlig,</i> Offer a peso for the whole bunch. <i>Lisud hangyúan nang babayhána kay dì musíbug sa íyang prisyu,</i> That woman is difficult to bargain with because she never lowers her price. <i>Pilay ímung ihangyù?</i> How much will you offer for it? <number>3</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> <tr>propose</tr> to a girl. <i>Giáhak na! Manghangyù kag bálu!</i> Are you crazy, proposing to a widow? <number>4</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> for the ball in basketball <pb n=303>to make it into the basket after bouncing off the ring and threatening to miss (as if the ball begged to be allowed in). <i>Miuntul ang búla sa ring unyà milígid kini ug misúd. Mihangyù pa giyud,</i> The ball bounced off the ring then rolled into the basket. It scored, but only after begging to be let in. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> request. <number>2</number> price offered. <form>&mdash; lúbù</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>LÚBÙ</sc>.</xr> <form>-ánan</form> <pos>n</pos> person from whom one habitually buys small things on credit. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. acquired or accomplished in bargaining. <i>Paubsi ug písus ang prisyu pára may hinangyúan ku,</i> Take a peso off the price so I have s.t. to show for my pains in bargaining. <form>-únun</form> <pos>n</pos> of one who needs to be approached and talked into giving approval or favors. <i>Dì dáyun nà siya musugut sa ímung pangáyù, hangyuúnun pa,</i> He does not easily grant requests. He needs to be begged.

<p id=6054><form>háni<sub>1</sub></form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>UNSA</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> exclamation of discomfiture upon finding s.t. out. <i>Háni ba wà na man diay kuy kwarta sa ákung pitáka,</i> Heavens! I have no more money in my purse.

<p id=6055><form>háni<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> honey, endearing term of address.

<p id=6056><form>hánib</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> gather things together in a neat pile. <i>Haníba ang mga papílis nga napasapása,</i> Stack up the papers that have been scattered. <form>-in-</form> <number>1</number> s.t. gathered in a neat pile. <number>2</number> accomplice in doing s.t. <i>Mga hinánib ku sa parigla,</i> My accomplices in attacking passers-by.

<p id=6057><form>hanig</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> when s.t. is put on top of s.t. else, put s.t. between the two things as a protection for the thing on top or the thing on the bottom. <i>Úsà nímu plantsáha, hanigi ug panaptun,</i> Protect it with a piece of cloth before you iron it. <i>Waks pípar ang ihanig arun dílì mupilit,</i> Line the bottom with wax paper so it won&apos;t stick. <i>Ug mupahuut ka sa íhi, hanigig tabla arun way dinukdukan,</i> If you force the shaft in, buffer it with a piece of wood so there won&apos;t be any hammer marks. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> take food along with drinks as a buffer. <i>Hanigi ug adúbu ang ram,</i> Eat some pork before you drink rum. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. put between two things as a protection. <number>2</number> food taken along with drinks to line the stomach. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; sa impiyirnu</formx> <number>a</number> one who leads s.o. to do wrong, from the notion that when the wrongdoer lands in hell, he will be there first to be, so to speak, the buffer. <i>Ikaw muy hanig sa impiyirnu, kay ikaw may nagtudlù níya pagpangáwat,</i> You&apos;re his buffer in hell because you taught him to steal. <number>b</number> matchmaker between illicit lovers who will go to hell first to act as a buffer for the couple which will end up in hell. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; c1]</itype> be made a buffer in hell. <i>Ang pagtitatíta muy makahanig (makapahanig) sa táwu sa impiyirnu basta may kabilinggan,</i> Acting as a go-between will land you in hell if one of the two is married.

<p id=6058><form>hanimun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>honeymoon</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> spend a honeymoon.

<p id=6059><form>hánip</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> neatly arranged in stacks according to size. <i>Ayg bungkága nang mga inutaw kay hánip na nà,</i> Don&apos;t mess up that clothing because it&apos;s been all piled neatly. <number>2</number> for a surface to be flat and even. <i>Hánip gáning pagkapintal sa átù pa way bugdubugdu,</i> If it is painted evenly there will be no thick spots. <i>Hánip kaáyu ang pagsimintu basta may palíta,</i> If you use a trowel, the cementing will be even and flat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> stack s.t. neatly by size. <number>2</number> make a surface flat and even.

<p id=6060><form>haníti</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>skillful</tr>, <tr>proficient</tr> in s.t. <i>Haníti siya sa iskríma,</i> He is expert in fencing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become proficient in some activity. <i>Mahaníti ka na gánì niíning trabahúa,</i> When you become proficient in this job. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>proficiency</tr>.

<p id=6061><form>hanlag</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>floor joists</tr> (<ix>busaug</ix>) made of bamboo.

<p id=6062><form>hanlas</form> <xr>= <sc>HANGLAS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6063><form>hanlilibun</form> <xr>= <sc>GABUN<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=6064><form>hanlilika</form> <xr>= <sc>ANGHILIKA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6065><form>hanlilítik</form> <xr>= <sc>HANDILÍTIK</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6066><form>hanlulúkay</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. harmless garden snake, light yellow-green in color, about a meter long and around 1&frac14; cm. in diameter. It resembles a coconut palm leaflet (<ix>lukay</ix>).

<p id=6067><form>hansak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> thrust, drive s.t. into s.t. with force such that it penetrates, using a downward motion. <i>Gihansákan níya ang kaáway sa bayuníta,</i> He shoved a bayonet into the enemy. <number>2</number> hit with a strong thrust (figuratively). <i>Gihansákan ang íyang kílid ug usa ka makabúngug nga kúmù,</i> A staggering blow of the fist hit his side. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> spike a ball. <number>a</number> put a ball in the basket from above. <i>Dì siya makahansak sa búla kay mubù,</i> He can&apos;t just put the ball in the basket because he is too small. <number>b</number> spike a volleyball.

<p id=6068><form>hantak</form> <pos>n</pos> gambling game played with three of the old, large one-centavo coins which are tossed down simultaneously on a stone (<ix>antugan</ix>). The one who tosses bets all heads against s.o. who bets all tails. Bystanders may join in. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; b6]</itype> play <ix>hantak.</ix> <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> stone to throw the coins on. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> place where a game of <ix>hantak</ix> is held. <number>2</number> temporary place of abode. <i>Inig-anhi námù sa Sibu hutil muy ámung hantakan,</i> When <pb n=304>we come to Cebu we stay in a hotel. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> hang around a place. <i>Adtu maghantakan ang mga buguy sa íyang tindáhan,</i> The loafers hang around her store. <i>Ang ámung nataran mauy gihantakanan sa mga pidikab,</i> The pedicabs park in our yard. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> stay, put s.w. temporarily. <i>Átù lang ning ihantakan dinhig balíkun unyà,</i> We&apos;ll just leave this here temporarily and come back for it later. <form>-anan(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>-AN</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr> <form>-íru</form> <pos>n</pos> one who plays <ix>hantak.</ix>

<p id=6069><form>hantánà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12C3]</itype> confront each other and get ready for a fistfight. <i>Naghantánà na ang duha apan wà mahinayun ug sumbagay kay miabut ang pulis,</i> The two were about to exchange blows when the policeman arrived.

<p id=6070><form>hantatalu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. green caterpillar, esp. fond of calladium and taro plants, and also found on citrus, turning into a butterfly.

<p id=6071><form>hantatamsi, hantatansi</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large shrub of the secondary forest.

<p id=6072><form>hantik</form> <xr>= <sc>AMIMITAS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6073><form>hanting</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. pointed, sharp knife 6&ndash;7&Prime; long, thick at the upper edge. <form>&mdash; náyip</form> <xr>= <sc>HANTING</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6074><form>hantuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3N; a2b2]</itype> in a game of <ix>sungkà,</ix> to hit the jackpot landing in a hole opposite the hole in which the opponent has a large number of pieces, thus winning all of his pieces. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12N; a2]</itype> hit the jackpot by marrying s.o. rich. <i>Magminyù ku apan manghantuk giyud kug anak ug asyindíru,</i> I&apos;ll get married, but it&apos;ll have to be the jackpot&mdash;a planter&apos;s daughter. <pos>n</pos> stones gotten from the opponent when one hits the jackpot in <ix>sungkà.</ix>

<p id=6075><form>hantung</form> <xr>= <sc>HAMTUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6076><form>hanu</form> <number>1</number> exclamation of joy preceding a statement which relates a discovery. <i>Hanu, nakakità kug singsing,</i> Guess what? I found a ring. <number>2</number> exclamation of reprimand at s.o. who failed to follow orders. <i>Hanu, giingnan tikawng ayawg hilabti. Nabuak hinúun,</i> See! I told you not to touch it. Now it broke. <number>3</number> <formx>kay &mdash;</formx> because you know what I mean.... <i>Pirmi siyang ubirtayim kay hanu, <corr sic=ag>ang</corr> íyang mga kabit,</i> He always works overtime because you know, his concubines. <i>Mitúman siya kay hanu, <corr sic=ag>ang</corr> íyang útang nákù,</i> He did as he was told because you know, his debts to me. <number>4</number> how are you doing? How is it going? <i>Hanu, nakakità ka na bag trabáhu?</i> How is it going now? Have you found a job?

<p id=6077><form>hanubuy</form> <pos>a</pos> for trees, legs, and the like to grow smooth and straight. <i>Hanubuy nga káhuy ang ihalígi,</i> Get a straight tree for the post. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> consider a tree or leg straight.

<p id=6078><form>hanúgun</form> <xr>= <sc>HINÚGUN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6079><form>han-uk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>dump s.t.</tr> into a corner, or in an enclosed space. <i>Ayaw han-úka (ihan-uk) sa daplin ang sinilhig mung sagbut,</i> Do not just dump the trash in the corner. <number>1a</number> dump, assign people to a place. <i>Ang íyang dalágang gúwang mauy gihan-úkan sa mga pag-umangkung nangaílu,</i> They dumped the orphaned nieces and nephews on their spinster aunt. <i>Ihan-uk ang mga makililímus sa mga asílu,</i> They dump beggars into the poorhouse. <number>1b</number> shower affection on s.o. <i>Han-úkan sa pagpanggà ang bugtung anak,</i> An only child gets affection showered on him. <number>1c</number> lay all blame, suspicion on s.o. <i>Gihan-úkan siya sa tanang pasángil,</i> All the blame was put on him. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> flock, crowd into a place. <i>Anhà giyud muhan-uk ang mga trabahadur ug káun sa íyang tindáhan,</i> The laborers flock to her store to eat. <form>-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> hang-out, usual place of assembly. <i>Nayitklab kanà nga han-ukánan sa mga dátù,</i> It&apos;s a night club frequented by the rich.

<p id=6080><form>hanum-u</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. shrub.

<p id=6081><form>hanunum-u</form> <pos>n</pos> small tree of secondary forest.

<p id=6082><form>hanut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> for a dying person to be gasping for breath. <i>Naghanut siya kay hápit na mamatay,</i> He was gasping because he was about to die.

<p id=6083><form>hanut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> thin out a cluster of fruits, leaves, plants. <i>Hanuti ang mga dáwa nga nanuruk kay bagà ra,</i> Thin the sprouting millet because it is much too thick.

<p id=6084><form>hanuy, hánuy</form> <pos>a</pos> smooth, gentle in flow or movement due to the absence of obstacles. <i>Hánuy kaáyu ang ámung pagbiyáhi,</i> We had a smooth trip. <i>Hanuy kaáyu imnun nang wiski,</i> That whiskey is smooth to drink. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> move or flow easily without obstacle. <i>Nagkahanuy na ang dágan sa awtu nga maáyu na ang dálan,</i> The car is running more smoothly now that the road is better.

<p id=6085><form>hanyag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>offer s.t.</tr> for s.o.&apos;s consideration. <i>Naghanyag siya nákug yútà,</i> He offered to sell me some land. <i>Gihanyágan ku níyag trabáhu,</i> He offered me a job.

<p id=6086><form>hanyù</form> <xr>= <sc>HANGYÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6087><form>h&amacracu;p</form> <xr>= <sc>HÁLAP</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6088><form>hapà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> throw oneself onto one&apos;s stomach. <i>Mihapà siya sa tiilan sa hárì,</i> He prostrated himself at the king&apos;s feet.

<p id=6089><form>hapag</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a round shallow tray made of woven thin strips of bamboo or rattan used by peddlers of food. <number>2</number> flat or only slightly sloping roof of <ix>nípà</ix> or cogon. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> make a <ix>nípà</ix> or cogon roofing flat or slightly sloping.

<pb n=305>

<p id=6090><form>hapak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1b28]</itype> strike s.t. forcefully, with a slapping sound. <i>Hapaka ang búla inigsirbi nímu,</i> Strike the ball hard when you serve. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> invest most or all of a sum right off on s.t. <i>Hapakan ku giyud nang yutáa sa ákung bakpi,</i> I will invest all my back pay on that land. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> forceful slap. <i>Ang hapak sa lapdus sa íyang láwas,</i> The stroke of the whip on his body. <number>2</number> bat in a ball game. <number>3</number> sound made by forceful striking.

<p id=6091><form>hapas</form> <xr>= <sc>HAPLAS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6092><form>hapathapat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> move fast with long strides. <i>Hapathapatun lang sa tagabúkid ang lungsud,</i> Mountain people come to town just by walking fast.

<p id=6093><form>hapaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> take the uppermost layer off of s.t. <i>Hapawun ku ang síbu sa sabaw,</i> I will skim the fat off the soup. <i>Íya nang gihapawan ang kan-un,</i> He took the rice off the top. <number>2</number> pass lightly over the top of s.t. <i>Ígù lang mihapaw ang bála sa íyang úlu,</i> The bullet just grazed the top of his head. <pos>a</pos> superficial. <i>Hapaw ang íyang katarúngan,</i> His reasoning is shallow. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. taken off the top, esp. the top portion of rice or hominy.

<p id=6094><form>hápay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> for a thick cluster of s.t. long and standing to fall or be bent at its base. <i>Nahápay ang mga humay,</i> The rice plants were bent over. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> comb s.o.&apos;s hair flat to the head. <i>Díay pamáda. Hapáya ang íyang buhuk,</i> Here&apos;s some pomade. Comb his hair flat. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> go bankrupt. <i>Nahápay ang ílang nigusyu kay gigastu man hasta puhúnan,</i> Their business went bankrupt because he spent every penny of it, even the capital. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> bent over flat. <number>2</number> for a man&apos;s hair to be neatly groomed flat on the head. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> man&apos;s combed hair. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN]</itype> <number>1</number> comb the hair. <number>2</number> be a man (be one who combs his hair flat) (humorous). <i>Bulagi siya. Maáyu mag siya ray naghinápay<corr sic=.>,</corr></i> Leave him. He&apos;s not the only fish in the sea (lit. the only one who combs his hair flat).

<p id=6095><form>hapdus</form> <pos>a</pos> stinging, burning pain in a wound, pangs of hunger. <pos>n</pos> stinging pain, gnawing from hunger. <i>Hapdus ang tintúra yúdu,</i> Iodine stings. <number>2</number> for words to be stinging. <i>Kahapdus sa ímung mga púlung,</i> Your words are so painful to me. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> <tr>sting</tr>, <tr>burn</tr>. <i>Mihapdus (nahapdus) ang ákung samad nga gidapátag tintúra yúdu,</i> My wound stings because iodine was put on it. <i>Ang kagútum makahapdus (makapahapdus) sa átung tiyan,</i> Hunger can make you get a gnawing pain in your stomach. <form>ka-</form> <xr>= <sc>HAPDUS</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=6096><form>hápì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> for plants to bend flat to the ground. <i>Ang mga mais nahápì sa kusug nga hángin,</i> The corn was bent flat to the ground by the strong wind.

<p id=6097><form>hapihápi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> engage in merry-making. <i>Díay ákung gidáng rám. Maghapihápi ta,</i> Here&apos;s some rum I brought. Let&apos;s have some fun. <pos>n</pos> <tr>merry-making</tr>.

<p id=6098><form>hapíhip</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> fill a rigid container up to the brim, be full to the brim. <i>Pagsulud ug asin nga ígù lang muhapíhip sa láta,</i> Fill the can with salt up to the brim. <i>Wà gánì mahapíhip ang táru. Hapihípa ra gud,</i> The can isn&apos;t even filled to the brim. Fill it up. <pos>a</pos> full to the brim.

<p id=6099><form>hapin</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. that is laid over or under s.t. <i>Hapin sa lamísa,</i> Tablecloth. <i>Hapin sa bátà,</i> Baby&apos;s diaper. <i>Hapin sa piryudiku,</i> The magazine cover. <number>2</number> food taken along with drinks as a digestive buffer (slang). <i>Way ulsir basta dúnay hapin inig-ínum,</i> You won&apos;t get ulcers if you take in some food before a drinking spree. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b2c1]</itype> lay s.t. over s.t. <i>Hapinun (ihapin) ku ning dáhun sa ságing sa baskit,</i> I will line the bottom of the basket with this banana leaf. <i>Gihapinan nákù ang katri ug putì nga hábul,</i> I covered the bed with a white sheet. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> take in food as a buffer.

<p id=6100><form>hapit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>drop by</tr>, <tr>stop in</tr> for a short while. <i>Hapit úsà mu sa balay,</i> Stop in the house for a while. <i>Ang ayruplánu mihapit úsà sa Haway,</i> Their plane made a stopover in Hawaii. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> get or bring s.t. on the way. <i>Akuy muhapit níya sa íla,</i> I will stop in her house and fetch her on the way. <i>Kinsay maghapit sa libru sa ámù?</i> Who will stop by our place to deliver (or get) the book? <i>Wà bay nakahapit sa libru sa inyu?</i> Hasn&apos;t anybody stopped by your place to get (or deliver) the book? <i>Hapitun níya ang búlù pagkanáug,</i> He will pick up the bolo on his way out. <i>Gihapitan aku níyag palit ug búwak,</i> He stopped in s.w. on his way to buy me some flowers. <i>Ihapit kining kwarta pagdipusitu sa bangku,</i> Stop in the bank on your way to deposit this money. <pos>n</pos> <tr>stopover</tr>. <form>hapithapit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> make stopovers. <i>Lángan kaáyu ang barkung maghapithapit ug daghang pwirtu,</i> It takes a long time if a boat keeps making stopovers in lots of ports. <form>-ánan</form> <pos>n</pos> place where stopovers are made.

<p id=6101><form>hápit</form> <tr>almost</tr>, almost at the point of. <i>Hápit na malútù ang kan-un,</i> The food is almost done. <i>Hápit na siya muhílak,</i> She is on the verge of tears. <i>Hápit na mugíkan ang trák,</i> The truck is about to leave. <form>dílì &mdash;</form> <tr>hardly</tr>, <tr>barely</tr>. <i>Dílì hápit (Hápit dílì) madungug ang íyang tíngug,</i> You can barely hear his voice. <pb n=306><form>&mdash; madúgay</form> for s.t. expected to be completed later than the expected time (lit. it is almost going to be a long time). Usually used as a reply to a query (humorous). <i>&lsquo;Hápit na ba malútù ang kan-un?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Hápit na madúgay.&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Is the food ready?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;It still needs several minutes.<corr>&rsquo;</corr>

<p id=6102><form>haplà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> throw oneself down on the stomach. <i>Midágan siya ug mihaplà (mipahaplà) sa katri,</i> She ran out and threw herself flat on the bed. <i>Nahaplà (mihaplà) siya kay nakatunub ug pánit sa ságing,</i> She fell when she stepped on a banana peel. <i>Átung hapláun (ihaplà) pagbutang ang banig sa salug,</i> Let&apos;s lay the mat flat on the floor. <number>2</number> defeat s.t., bring it to its downfall. <i>Gihaplà ang indipindinti sa pulitikanhung makinarya,</i> The political machinery defeated the independent candidates. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> fail s.o. in school completely. <i>Kaduha aku mahaplà sa Aldyibra,</i> I failed Algebra twice. <pos>a</pos> flat, not bulging. <i>Haplà siyag súsu,</i> She has flat breasts.

<p id=6103><form>haplak</form> <xr>= <sc>HAKLAP</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6104><form>haplas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> apply a liquid or viscous material with broad strokes. <i>Kinsay naghaplas ug lápuk sa bungbung?</i> Who rubbed mud over the wall? <i>Haplási ang ímung bukubuku ug alkuhul,</i> Rub alcohol on your back. <pos>n</pos> s.t. rubbed onto s.t. <number>2</number> medicinal rub. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> rub s.t. on oneself. <i>Nanghaplas siyag kríma sa íyang nawung,</i> She rubbed cream on her face.

<p id=6105><form>haplù</form> <pos>a</pos> fit loosely inside of s.t. <i>Haplù ning ákung sapátus,</i> These shoes are very loose on me. <i>Haplù nga pagkalansang,</i> Nailed so that the nail wiggles. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[BN]</itype> be loose inside of s.t. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> for the string of the top to fly off because of not being tied firmly enough. <i>Nahaplù ang apus,</i> The top string came off.

<p id=6106><form>haplus</form> (from <ix>palus</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB12; a]</itype> for s.t. which is tied to s.t. or holds it to come off, cause it to do so. <i>Nahaplus ang íyang sapátus pagdinágan,</i> His shoes came off as he ran. <i>Nahaplus ákung kamut sa sanga ug nahúlug ku,</i> I lost my grip on the branch, and I fell. <i>Nahaplus ang ubud sa ákung kamut,</i> The eel slipped out of my hand. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> escape from restraint. <i>Ang bábuy nakahaplus sa hukut,</i> The pig got loose from its tether. <i>Haplúsa ang písì sa tiil sa bábuy,</i> Slip the rope off from the pig&apos;s feet. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> run the hand over the length of s.t. to remove s.t. from it, or squeeze s.t. out of it, or just massage it. <i>Siyay mihaplus sa alambri,</i> He ran his hands over the wire to straighten it. <i>Haplusa ímung nawung ug katulgun ka,</i> Run your hand over your face if you feel sleepy.

<p id=6107><form>haplut</form> <xr>= <sc>HAPLUS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6108><form>hapluy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> rub the flat palm over s.t. <i>Naghapluy siya sa palpag níyang buhuk,</i> She is smoothening her dishevelled hair. <i>Haplúya ang ímung nawung ug tulgun ka,</i> Run your hand over your face if you feel sleepy.

<p id=6109><form>hapnig</form> (from <ix>panig</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> stack flat things in a neat pile. <i>Ihapnig (hapníga) ang inutaw sa aparadur,</i> Stack the ironed clothes in the wardrobe.

<p id=6110><form>hapnut</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>SAPNUT</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> &dagger;.

<p id=6111><form>hapsà</form> <xr>= <sc>HAGSÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6112><form>hapsay</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> smooth and without blemish. <i>Hapsay ang pánit sa mangga,</i> The mango has smooth and unblemished skin. <number>2</number> neat and orderly. <i>Hapsay kaáyung pagkaarigl&acaron;r ang ímung lawak,</i> Your room is orderly. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB2; a]</itype> be smooth and glossy, make s.t. so. <i>Hapsáyun ta ning ímung buhuk,</i> Let&apos;s make your hair smooth and glossy. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; a]</itype> make, be neatly arranged, make s.t. so. <i>Hapsáya ang ímung pamisti,</i> Wear clothing that is simple and neat.

<p id=6113><form>hapslip</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>half slip</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> wear, make into a half slip.

<p id=6114><form>hapù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> comb the hair straight backward. <i>Hapua (ihapù) ang ímung buhuk kay limpiyung tan-áwun,</i> Comb your hair straight backward because it looks neat.

<p id=6115><form>hápù</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>fatiguing</tr>. <i>Hápù kaáyu ning pagpangarga,</i> The job of a stevedore is very tiring. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1PB26; a4b4c1]</itype> <tr>fatigue</tr>, get fatigued. <i>Kanang sayáwa naghápù (nagpahápù) sa átung láwas,</i> That dance wears you out completely. <i>Gihápù (gihapúan, nahápù) kug linanguy sa dágat,</i> I am exhausted from swimming in the sea. <i>Ayaw hapúa (ihápù) nang ímung láwas,</i> Don&apos;t tire yourself out too much. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>fatigued</tr>. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> weariness.

<p id=6116><form>hapúhap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> stroke gently back and forth with little pressure. <i>Mihapúhap siya sa ákung bukubuku sa paghumpay sa kasakit,</i> He stroked my back to relieve the pain. <pos>n</pos> gentle strokes back and forth. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> a gentle stroke back and forth. <i>Ang hinapúhap sa huyúhuy sa íyang hubù nga láwas,</i> The gentle caresses of the breeze on her nude body.

<p id=6117><form>hapúlas</form> (from <ix>púlas</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> smear s.t. over a large area with the hand. <i>Gihapulásan ang bungbung ug lápuk,</i> The wall had mud smeared all over it. <number>2</number> eat s.t. fast. <i>Mihapúlas lang siya ug tulu ka plátung tsapsuy,</i> He gobbled down three platefuls of chop suey (as if he was just smearing it on his mouth).

<p id=6118><form>hapun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>Japan</tr>. <number>2</number> Japanese person. <number>3</number> fishing <pb n=307>line. <form>isda sa &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>SÚLID<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr> <form>papil nga, sa, di-</form> colored tissue paper. <form>hapunánun</form> <pos>n</pos> Japanese citizen. <form>-in-</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> in the Japanese way. <number>2</number> name given to various methods of fishing introduced by the Japanese. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> speak Japanese, do s.t. the Japanese way. <form>-is</form> Japanese (plural).

<p id=6119><form>hápun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>afternoon</tr>, <tr>early evening</tr>. <i>Bag-ung hápun,</i> Early afternoon. <form>&mdash; na</form> it is late (in the afternoon or early evening). <i>Hápun na kaáyu. Adtu na ku,</i> It is already very late. I&apos;m going now. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B5]</itype> get to be afternoon. <i>Nahápun na lang wà pa siya maulì,</i> It was evening already and he still hadn&apos;t come home. <number>1a</number> <note n=12>]</note> do s.t. in the afternoon. <i>Hapúna ang bunyag,</i> Have the baptism held in the afternoon. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> do s.t. until afternoon. <i>Maghápun siyag paninda,</i> She is in the store until afternoon. <number>3</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> be overtaken by afternoon. <i>Hihapunan ku ug panáud sa bumbilya,</i> Evening overtook me as I was putting up the electric lights. <form>hapunhápun</form> <number>1</number> every afternoon. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>GINAMUSGINÁMUS</sc></xr>, <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>GAMUS</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b5]</itype> do s.t. every afternoon. <i>Mahuman nà dáyun ug hapunhapúnun (hapunhapúnan) ku nag trabáhu,</i> It will soon be finished if I work on it every afternoon. <form>hiN-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <number>1</number> do in the afternoon. <i>Naghinghapung kalígù,</i> Swimming in the afternoon. <number>2</number> for afternoon to approach<corr>.</corr> <form>pa-(&rarr;), paka-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> stay s.w. until afternoon. <i>Magpahapun ta dinhi, kay ínit pa kaáyug udtu,</i> Let&apos;s wait here until afternoon, because it would be terribly hot at noon. <form>panghi-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> be around afternoon. <i>Muanhi siya, manghiudtu, manghihápun ba,</i> He&apos;ll come here around noon or around afternoon. <form>pani-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> <tr>eat supper</tr>. <i>Manihápun na ta kay alas utsu na,</i> Let&apos;s eat supper now because it is already eight o&apos;clock. <pos>n</pos> <tr>supper</tr>. <form>-ánun, ka-ánun</form> late in the afternoon. <i>Hapunánun (kahapunánun) nahuman ang iliksiyun,</i> The election was over late in the afternoon. <form>ka-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> afternoon as a phase of time of day. <i>Ang kaínit sa kahapúnun dumudulut kaáyu,</i> The heat in the afternoon is very penetrating. <number>2</number> the late years of one&apos;s life. <form>tig-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the eve of an important occasion. <number>2</number> banquet held on the eve of an occasion. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> hold a banquet on the eve of an occasion. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> attend the banquet held on the eve. <i>Manighapun ta sa íla,</i> Let&apos;s attend the banquet held on the eve at their house. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2N]</itype> go s.w. on the day before an event. <i>Manighapun ku sa barku, kay sayung mularga,</i> I&apos;ll go to the boat in the afternoon because it will leave early. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> done in the afternoon. <number>2</number> palm toddy gathered in the afternoon.

<p id=6120><form>hapus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>strike</tr>, usually with s.t. flexible with a long downward stroke. <i>Gihapsan níya sa sundang ang ságing,</i> He struck the banana tree with his machete. <i>Ihapus ku ning bakus nímu,</i> I will strike you with this belt. <number>2</number> spin a top. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> action of whipping at. <number>2</number> <tr>whip</tr>. <number>3</number> string of a top.

<p id=6121><form>hapuy, hápuy</form> <xr>= <sc>HAPLUY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6122><form>hapuyhápuy</form> <xr>= <sc>HAPÚHAP</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6123><form>hapyud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> massage gently moving hands in one direction. <i>Mitindug siya ug mihapyud sa íyang sinínà,</i> She stood up and smoothed out her dress. <i>Hapyúra ning ákung tiil kay gikalambri,</i> Massage my legs because I&apos;ve got cramps. <number>2</number> squeeze s.t. out of s.t. by massaging in one direction. <i>Hapyúra ang kulgit arun madagínut,</i> Flatten out the toothpaste to use up every bit of it.

<p id=6124><form>hára</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>queen</tr>. <i>Nahímu siyang hára sa pangílin sa ámung balángay,</i> She was made queen of the fiesta in our barrio. <form>&mdash; sa panimalay</form> wife as the head of the house. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; a2]</itype> become a queen.

<p id=6125><form>hárab</form> <xr>= <sc>ÁRAB<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=6126><form>harabharab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>rush</tr>, <tr>hurry</tr> in doing s.t. <i>Nagharabharab siyag súgù,</i> She rushed about giving orders. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> for monkeys to chatter wildly. <number>3</number> be <tr>aflutter</tr> with expectation. <i>Nagharabharab ákung ginháwa sa pagpakigkítà kaníya,</i> I&apos;m all excited at the thought of seeing her again.

<p id=6127><form>harábi</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. patent medicine used as cough syrup. <form>&mdash; ditúlu</form> <xr>= <sc>HARÁBI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6128><form>harag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> for s.t. tall to be leaning to one side. <i>Nagharag ang pusti. Tarúnga,</i> The post is leaning. Straighten it out. <i>Naharag ang mga balay human hangína,</i> The houses are leaning to one side after the windstorm. <number>2</number> lean back to rest on s.t. <i>Dì ku makaharag ánang siyáha kay gubà ug sandigánan,</i> I cannot recline on that chair because it has a broken backrest. <pos>a</pos> <tr>leaning</tr>.

<p id=6129><form>harána</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>serenade</tr>, music made beneath a girl&apos;s window by way of courting. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> serenade, go serenading. <i>Dalága ka na. Giharanáhan (giharanáan) na ka,</i> You are a young lady now. They&apos;re already serenading you. <number>2</number> sing under a person&apos;s window. <i>Haranáan nátù siya ugmà sa kaadláwun kay adlaw níya,</i> Let&apos;s serenade him tomorrow early in the morning because it&apos;s his birthday. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>serenading</tr>.

<p id=6130><form>hárang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> offering of food, smokes, drinks, etc. to supernatural beings during the planting and harvest seasons, or to the departed souls during All Souls Day. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> make <pb n=308>an offering of the <ix>hárang.</ix>

<p id=6131><form>hárang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> block s.o.&apos;s way with hostile purpose. <i>Usa ka bitin ang mihárang sa ámung agiánan,</i> A snake barred our way. <i>Ang patrulya gihárang (giharángan) sa mga kaáway,</i> The patrol was ambushed by the enemies. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2C; a1]</itype> confront s.t. unpleasant or hostile. <i>Dílì ku makahárang sa mapait nga kamatuúran,</i> I cannot face the hard truth. <i>Nagkahárang ang duha sa usa ka mainítung lantugiay,</i> The two met in hot debate.

<p id=6132><form>háras</form> <pos>a</pos> biting taste which characterizes citrus fruit. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; b6]</itype> feel a biting sensation after eating citrus fruit, having such a taste. <i>Nagháras na ning tutunlan íning buúngun nga háras,</i> My throat stings from this sharp pomelo.

<p id=6133><form>harasharas</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>done carelessly</tr> such that if there is a finished product, it is rough, not well-prepared. <i>Harasharas nga pagkalútù, way lamì,</i> It is carelessly cooked, tasteless. <i>Harasharas siyang mudrayib. Mu rag pituy kinabúhì,</i> He drives carelessly as if he had seven lives. <number>2</number> coarse in behavior. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. without much care. <i>Giharasharas niya pagbúhat ang lamísa,</i> He did a sloppy job in making the table. <number>2</number> fail to behave carefully, without proper circumspection. <i>Nagharasharas siya sa taliwálà sa sulimning sirimunyas,</i> He was misbehaving in the midst of the solemn ceremonies. <i>Unsáun nátù pagtígum ug magharasharas ka paggastu?</i> How can we save if you spend money without giving it any thought?

<p id=6134><form>hárat</form> <xr>= <sc>KÁRAS<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=6135><form>haraw</form> <number>1</number> exclamation expressing an earnest wish for s.t. to happen, either good or bad. <i>Haraw malúnud ang íyang gisakyan,</i> May the boat he takes sink. <i>Haraw makadaug ku sa rípa,</i> May I win the raffle. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; ka-</formx>[root] (confined to verbs of B conjugation) expression of exasperation and fear for the worst consequences of a rash action. <i>Giingnang dì padraybun. Haraw kabanggà,</i> I told him not to drive. Watch, he&apos;s going to crash. <i>Mitabuk giyud sa bahà. Haraw kadá sa súg,</i> He crossed when the river was in flood. Watch him get carried away with the current.

<p id=6136><form>harayháray</form> <xr>= <sc>HALAYHÁLAY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6137><form>harbas</form> <xr>= <sc>HALÁBAS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6138><form>hardin</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>flower garden</tr>. <number>2</number> place of beautiful emotions (literary). <i>Sa ákung hardin sa gugma ikay rúsas,</i> You are the rose in my garden of love. <number>3</number> way of playing billiards with numbered pieces set along the sides and in the center of the table, in which the piece hit represents a score and the players are obliged to make a certain score as indicated by a throw of dice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> have a flower garden. <form>-íru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gardener</tr>.

<p id=6139><form>hardul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> hurdle in races. <number>2</number> track event using hurdles.

<p id=6140><form>hardwir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hardware store</tr>.

<p id=6141><form>hari</form> give me. <i>Hari (ihari) ra nà,</i> Let me have that. <form>i-</form> <xr>= <sc>HARI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6142><form>hári, hárì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> do s.t. continuously. <i>Wà siyay ági naghári lag katúlug,</i> He didn&apos;t accomplish anything. All he did was sleep.

<p id=6143><form>hárì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>king</tr>. <i>Ang hárì sa Ispanya,</i> The king of Spain. <number>2</number> the king in cards, chess. <number>3</number> <tr>master</tr>, one who has power over. <i>Hárì sa panimalay,</i> The master of the household. <number>4</number> head of a coin. <number>4a</number> jocular expression uttered upon hearing s.t. fall. <i>Dihang nahúlug ang básu dihay niingung &lsquo;Hárì!&rsquo;</i> When the glass fell s.o. yelled &lsquo;Dropped s.t.! (lit. Heads!)&rsquo; <number>5</number> one who excels others in s.t. which requires skill or knowledge. <i>Ang ákung apuhan hárì sa iskiríma sa íyang panahun,</i> During his time, my grandfather was a master of fencing. <form>&mdash; nga gángis</form> big boss, <tr>kingpin</tr>, usually of a political party. <i>Nagkinahanglan nig bindisiyun sa háring gángis,</i> It needs the approval of the boss. <form>&mdash; nga lungsud</form> the sovereign people. <i>Ang kandidátu nangamúyù sa háring lungsud,</i> The political candidate pleaded with the electorate. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B16; b(1)]</itype> be a monarch. <i>Usa ka babáyi ang naghárì karun sa Inglatíra,</i> A woman is the sovereign in England. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; b(1)]</itype> assume leadership or command in a bossy manner. <i>Dì ku gustung harían sa ákung kaugalíngun,</i> I don&apos;t like to be lorded over in my own house. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12; b6]</itype> get heads in tossing coins. <i>Nakahárì (giharían) siyag kalima,</i> He got heads five times. <number>4</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> turn out to be heads. <i>Mahárì (muhárì) lang ning pagkaantúga,</i> If this toss turns out to be heads. <number>5</number> <itype>[A3; b(1)]</itype> for a condition or emotions to prevail. <i>Mihárì sa íyang dughan ang kakuyaw,</i> Fear prevailed in his heart. <i>Naghárì ang kahílum,</i> Silence reigned. <form>harìhárì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> treat in a bossy way. <form>harìhariun, maharìhariun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bossy</tr>, <tr>domineering</tr>. <form>-ánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>royal</tr>, <tr>regal</tr>. <i>Hariánun nga balay,</i> A palatial mansion. <i>Hariánung dugù,</i> Royal blood. <form>gin-an, ging-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>kingdom</tr>.

<p id=6144><form>hárì<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> fall with the rump or back hitting the ground first. <i>Nahárì ku sa d&amacracu;n nga danglug,</i> I fell on my back on the slippery road.

<p id=6145><form>hárim</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>harem</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> have, maintain a harem.

<p id=6146><form>harína</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>flour</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa mais</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>corn starch</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> make flour. <number>2</number> <itype>[B256; b6]</itype> form into <pb n=309>flour. <number>3</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> put flour into.

<p id=6147><form>haríning</form> <pos>n</pos> a princess that is a child.

<p id=6148><form>harsi</form> <xr>= <sc>HALSI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6149><form>harsiya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> guy rope or cable tied to s.t. vertical to maintain stability. <i>Harsiya sa pálu,</i> Guy ropes holding the mast. <number>2</number> cable or a strong rope holding the anchor or the hawser used in tying the boat to the dock. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> attach, make into a hawser or guy.

<p id=6150><form>harug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> supports for growing plants or s.t. for them to climb on. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> support climbing plants. <i>Giharug (giharugan) na ang agbáti ug mga lipak,</i> They used bamboo sticks for the <ix>agbáti</ix> vine to climb on.

<p id=6151><form>haruhas</form> <xr>= <sc>HARASHARAS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6152><form>harúhay</form> <pos>a</pos> in a comfortable financial situation. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B23(1); b6]</itype> for a way of life to become financially comfortable. <i>Kanang swildúha makaharúhay na giyud ning átung pagpuyù,</i> With that salary we can live a life of ease and comfort.

<p id=6153><form>harun</form> <xr>= <sc>ARUN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6154><form>hárung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; abc1]</itype> come face to face with. <i>Dílì siya makighárung sa mga bisíta,</i> She refuses to greet the visitors. <i>Ang sad-an dílì makahárung kanákug tan-aw,</i> He&apos;s guilty and cannot look at me straight in the eye. <i>Harúngan ku siya bísag ása ug bísan anus-a,</i> I&apos;ll take him on, any time, any place. <i>Wà kuy nawung ihárung níya kay sad-an ku,</i> I can&apos;t bring myself to face him because I&apos;m guilty. <i>Piligru ikahárung ang hárì sa dágat,</i> It is dangerous to come face to face with the king of the sea. <pos>n</pos> action of facing s.o. <i>Nadaug ku sa hárung, wà ku makapaháyag,</i> I was overcome by shyness when I tried to face her. I couldn&apos;t state my purpose.

<p id=6155><form>harus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> strip leaves off the stem or stalk. <i>Nagharus kug kamunggay nga iságul sa útan,</i> I&apos;m stripping off <ix>kamunggay</ix> leaves to use as vegetables. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> for a mechanism that engages to get stripped, get so it fails to engage. <i>Naharus ang kambiyu maung dì na mukagat,</i> The gears got stripped so that they won&apos;t engage. <number>3</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> involve all in doing s.t. <i>Iharus (harusa) ug lábay sa bintánà ang mga butang,</i> Throw everything out of the window. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A; a3]</itype> destroy, afflict all practically without exception. <i>Ang lúnup nga miharus sa tanang kabalayan,</i> The flood that destroyed all the houses. <i>Naharus ming tanan ug kasakit ug plú,</i> We were all sick with flu. <number>4</number> <itype>[A2N; a12]</itype> make a sweeping victory, reap all the victories in competitive activities. <i>Ang ámung iskuylahan mauy miharus (nangharus) sa atlítik mit,</i> Our school won a sweeping victory in the athletic meet. <i>Giharus kami ni Tínung sa blakdyak,</i> We all lost to Tinong in blackjack. <pos>a</pos> for a mechanism to be stripped. <i>Harus ug gusánu ang ruska,</i> The screw has stripped threads.

<p id=6156><form>haruyháruy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6(1)]</itype> go about in a relaxed way for pleasure. <i>Nagharuyháruy ka na man dihà. Tápus ka na ba sa búhat mu?</i> You are strolling about now. Are you through with your chores?

<p id=6157><form>hás</form> <xr>= <sc>HÁLAS<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=6158><form>hasag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> thrust a mass forcibly against s.t. else. <i>Akuy muhasag nímu sa bubung ug ímu kung bakakan,</i> I&apos;ll knock your head against the wall if you lie to me.

<p id=6159><form>hásag</form> <pos>n</pos> pressurized kerosene lamp (from the brand name &lsquo;<ix>Hasag</ix>&rsquo;). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> use a pressurized kerosene lamp.

<p id=6160><form>hasàhásà</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to small <ix>andúhaw.</ix>

<p id=6161><form>hásan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. land crab a bit smaller than the <ix>kágang,</ix> generally not eaten.

<p id=6162><form>hasang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> vent one&apos;s anger on s.o. <i>Bísag kinsang mahiduul ang íyang hasngan sa kasukù,</i> He vents his anger on anyone who goes near him.

<p id=6163><form>hásang</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gills</tr>. <form>hasanghásang</form> <pos>n</pos> an outlet on the side of a ship&apos;s hull to let the bilge water out. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> having gills.

<p id=6164><form>hashas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5c]</itype> pound rice a second time to husk the grains that had been missed the first time around. <i>Hashási ang bugas arun hamluyng kan-un,</i> Pound the rice a second time so it will be smooth to eat. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b5]</itype> go over s.t. written and polish it. <i>Naghashas ku niíning sinulat páras pagpamantálà,</i> I am revising the article for publication. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> piece that has been well-revised and polished. <i>Pakigpúlung nga hinashásan, Highly polished speech.</i> <number>2</number> specially chosen. <i>Hinashásan nga trabahanti,</i> Specially chosen workers.

<p id=6165><form>hásì</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>frighten</tr> s.o. with threats. <i>Ayaw kug hasía kay dì ku mahadluk,</i> Do not threaten me because I can not be frightened. <i>Ang lungsud gihásì sa dakung gútum,</i> The city was threatened with a severe famine. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> trouble, <tr>vex</tr>. <i>Kinsa na man puy naghásì sa bátà nga naghilak na man pud ri?</i> Who bothered the child that he is crying again? <i>Gihásì ang mga tanum sa úlud,</i> The worms are a pestilence for the plants. <number>3</number> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> for s.t. to be <tr>rampant</tr>, be on<corr>,</corr> in <tr>full swing</tr>. <i>Naghásì ang krímin sa piyir,</i> Crime is rampant on the waterfront. <i>Maghásì lámang ang pinugsanay sa humay,</i> Rice planting is proceeding in full swing.

<p id=6166><form>hasindíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>ASINDÍRU</sc>.</xr> <xr>see <sc>ASINDA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6167><form>haskan</form> <number>1</number> <formx>&mdash; nga <r>[adjective]</r>-a, ka-<r>[adjective], [verb]</r></formx> how very much! <i>Haskang kuyáwa <pb n=310>nákù uy!</i> My, how scared I was! <i>Haskang pangúrug naku!</i> My, how I trembled! <i>Haskang nakakáun níya!</i> God! How that child eats. <number>2</number> expression of helpless frustration at s.t. monotonous or boring. <i>Isdà sa Lúnis, isdà gahápun, isdà sa paniudtu, ug karun haskan mau gihápun,</i> Fish last Monday, fish yesterday, fish for lunch, and now, God! The same damn thing.

<p id=6168><form>haslag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> look bright and pleasant with neatness and cleanliness. <i>Mihaslag (nahaslag) ang panagway sa táwung bulingut nga nakaligù,</i> The dirty man looked neat and pleasant-looking after he washed himself. <i>Naghaslag nag iskrin human banwási,</i> The screen looks clean and bright now that you rinsed it. <pos>a</pos> look bright and clean.

<p id=6169><form>haslir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> one who makes his living by petty thievery, swindling, and the like. <number>2</number> gold digger. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> be, become a hustler.

<p id=6170><form>haslù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> loose in a place inserted. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; a]</itype> for s.t. to slip out of a place into which it was inserted. <i>Mihaslù (nahaslù) lang ang singsing sa ákung tudlù,</i> The ring just came off my finger. <i>Haslúa ang sundang sa sakub,</i> Pull the machete out of the sheath. <form>haslùhaslù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b6]</itype> keep slipping out of, coming loose. <i>Naghaslùhaslù ang ákung tiil sa luag nga sapátus,</i> My shoes keep coming off my feet.

<p id=6171><form>haslù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> stupidly <tr>inept</tr>, tending to do things wrong. <i>Haslù ka kay naglúgaw kag pinatisan,</i> You sure don&apos;t know what you&apos;re doing, putting soy sauce in the porridge. <i>Haslù nga pagkatupi. Daghang kabang,</i> What an inept haircut. It was very unevenly done. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456; b6]</itype> be, become stupidly inept.

<p id=6172><form>haslù<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> taking too much pride in one&apos;s <corr sic=possesions>possessions</corr>. <i>À kahaslù! Namungíngi man ang tudlù sa aláhas,</i> My! She wants to show off so she puts on every ring she has! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be too proud of possessions. <i>Nahaslù siya sukad nadiswildu,</i> She has started to become stuck up and to show off since she got a job. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> excessive pride in possessions. <i>Bisag wà nay ihungit nanginstulmin pa giyud ug pridyidir tungud sa ílang kahaslù,</i> Even though they have nothing to eat, they have to buy a refrigerator on installment, just to show off.

<p id=6173><form>hasmag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> rush, lunge into an obstacle or opposition. <i><corr sic=Ag>Ang</corr> irù mihasmag kaníya,</i> The dog rushed at him. <i>Kausa ra hasmági ang bakilid sa buldúsir, natumpag dáyun,</i> The bulldozer smashed into the hillside once and the whole thing came crumbling down. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23; b(1)]</itype> for emotions to appear in overwhelming suddenness. <i>Gihasmágan aku sa kamíngaw,</i> I am overwhelmed with loneliness. <pos>n</pos> action of lunging into.

<p id=6174><form>haspi</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. paper used as backing put around the bound edge in book binding. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> use this k.o. paper.

<p id=6175><form>hasta</form> <ix>followed by a subject:</ix> even [the subject] has done it or had it happen to him! <i>Hasta ikaw gitugkag katáhap nákù!</i> Have you, too, lost faith in me! <i>Hasta mga bátà gipatay,</i> Even the children were put to death. <i>Hasta pa gánì ang mga <corr sic="báta">bátà</corr> maantígu nang mangílad,</i> Even the little children know how to cheat. <form>&mdash; labista</form> <corr sic=good-bye>goodbye</corr>, till we meet again.

<p id=6176><form>hastilan</form> <xr>= <sc>PASTILAN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6177><form>hasù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> pump, cock the loading and ejecting mechanism of a rifle. <i>Hasuun nímu ang iskupíta úsà ka makatíru,</i> You must pump the shotgun before you can fire.

<p id=6178><form>hasù<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>HASLÙ<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=6179><form>hasug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> push s.t. into a container and tamp it down to fill it tight. <i>Hasuga (ihasug) ang kupras sa sáku,</i> Shove the copra tight into the sack.

<p id=6180><form>hasuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a hole to sow seeds in. <i>Ang bakilid hasukan kay dílì man madáru,</i> They will make holes for the seeds in the hillside because you cannot plow it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> insert s.t. into a hole or sheath. <i>Muhasuk ka gánì sa sundang mu sa sakuban ayawg itipas,</i> Be careful when you sheathe your bolo. <i>Anhà ihasuk ang halígi sa ímung gilúngag,</i> Plant the post in the hole which you dug. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> drive the stakes or pegs. <i>Hasuki ang mga tanum arun dì matumba,</i> Place stakes near the plants so they will not fall over. <pos>n</pos> <number>1a</number> <tr>dibble stick</tr>. <number>1b</number> hole dibbled in the ground to sow seeds in. <number>1c</number> action of making a hole. <number>2</number> <tr>peg</tr>, <tr>stake</tr>.

<p id=6181><form>hasuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> pack inside tight by compacting or tamping it down. <i>Ug inyung hasukun (ihasuk) ang kupras maígù ang tanan sa usa ka sáku,</i> If you pack the copra down, it will get into one sack. <pos>a</pos> compressed and well-packed inside a container.

<p id=6182><form>hásul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>bother</tr>, <tr>give trouble</tr>, <tr>inconvenience</tr>. <i>Muhásul ku nímug kadiyut ha?</i> May I bother you for a moment? <i>Gihásul ku pag-áyu niíning sip-un,</i> I am very much bothered by my cold. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; a2]</itype> bother to do, take the trouble of doing s.t. <i>Naghásul ka pa mag dala ug ságing níay daghan,</i> You have taken the trouble of bringing bananas when we have so many! <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for a child to be fussy. <i>Naghásul ang bátà kay gibutdag tiyan,</i> The child is fussy because he has an upset stomach. <pos>a</pos> entailing a lot of annoyance, bother. <i>Hásul kaáyung adtúun, <pb n=311>daghang sakaysákay,</i> It&apos;s a lot of trouble to go there because there&apos;s no direct transportation. <pos>a</pos> being a lot of trouble, causing inconvenience. <pos>n</pos> <form>&mdash; sa katursi</form> <number>1</number> World War I. <number>2</number> causing very much trouble and bother. <i>Hásul sa katursi ning batáa,</i> This child is a terrible nuisance. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>trouble</tr>, <tr>annoyance</tr>. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> causing lots of trouble and inconvenience. <i>Mahasúlung mga hangyù,</i> Requests that entail a lot of trouble.

<p id=6183><form>haswà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2PB12; c1]</itype> remove s.t. that sticks, get removed. <i>Maáyu kaáyung muhaswà (mupahaswà) sa buling ang Tayid,</i> Tide removes dirt well. <i>Tungud sa kalatà nahaswà ang pánit,</i> After the meat got done, the skin came off. <i>Haswáa (ihaswà) ning lápuk nga nitaput sa ákung sapátus,</i> Remove the mud that stuck to my shoes.

<p id=6184><form>hasyinda</form> <xr>= <sc>ASYINDA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6185><form>hát</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> music with a hot beat. <number>2</number> dance done to hot music. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; c1]</itype> dance to hot music. <i>Kasagáran sa mga batan-un maáyu muhát,</i> Most young people know how to dance to hot music.

<p id=6186><form>hatà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>feint</tr>, make a move to strike, kick, give, or the like, without actually intending to do so. <i>Hataa (hatai) ug karmilítus ang bátà,</i> Act like you&apos;re going to give the child some candy. <i>Hataan sa wala, butangan sa tuu,</i> Make a feint with the left and hit him with the right. <i>Ihatà ug syát ang búla,</i> Feint a shot with the ball. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> feinting action. <number>2</number> bluffing statement or threat.

<p id=6187><form>hátag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>give</tr>. <i>Lílas nga muhátag maáyung pagtulun-an,</i> A film which teaches a good lesson. <i>Ang adlaw naghátag kanátug kaháyag,</i> The sun gives us light. <i>Wà ku makahatag (makahátag) sa abangan,</i> I haven&apos;t paid the rent. <i>Tagáan (hatágan) ta kag singku,</i> I&apos;ll give you a nickel. <i>Humwurk nga gihátag sa maistra,</i> The homework the teacher gave. <i>Kinabúhì nga gihátag álang sa yútang natawhan,</i> A life given for one&apos;s country. <number>2</number> let s.o. have s.t. for a price. <i>Gihátag lang nig singku,</i> He let me have it for five pesos. <number>3</number> give a speech, reply; issue order. <i>Mihátag ang prisidinti ug pakigpúlung,</i> The President gave a speech. <i>Naghátag ang iksaminir ug mga instruksiyun,</i> The examiner is giving instructions. <number>4</number> <formx>&mdash; ug katahúran</formx> greet upon meeting, pay one&apos;s respects. <i>Wà gánì maghátag katahúran,</i> He didn&apos;t even greet me. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. given one. <i>Kining mga rilip hátag ni sa Amirika,</i> This relief clothing is a gift from the U.S.A. <number>2</number> selling price. <i>Pilay ímung hátag?</i> How much will you let me have it for? <number>3</number> turn to give. <i>Ákù rung hátag,</i> Now it&apos;s my turn to give. <form>hingatag</form> <pos>a</pos> generous, fond of giving. <form>-l-an(&rarr;), -anan(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. one is obliged to give. <i>Singkwinta písus ang ákung binulan nga halatagan,</i> I am obliged to give fifty pesos a month. <number>2</number> person to whom s.t. is to be given. <form>ig-r-/l-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> thing to be given. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. which has been given. <i>Dì ni hinátag. Pinalit ni,</i> I didn&apos;t get this as a gift. I bought it. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> one to whom given. <form>mag-l-, maN-l-, mag-r-, maN-r-</form> one who gives s.t. out. <form>manggi-un, ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> generous. <form>um-l-, um-l-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> one who gives (Biblical). <form>-l-un(&rarr;), -unun(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>-L-AN(&rarr;)</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p id=6188><form>hátak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23B126; c1]</itype> for s.t. to fall down from a place it was held or attached, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Muhátak (nanghátak) ug lubi si Idung,</i> Edong is knocking those coconuts down. <i>Nahátak sa ubus ang kapáyas nga hinug na kaáyu,</i> The overripe papaya fell to the ground.

<p id=6189><form>hátaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> appear for a moment on a surface. <i>Ígù lang mihátaw ang íhu sa dágat,</i> The shark just appeared for a second on the surface. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> appear on a surface. <i>Mihátaw ang mga gamut,</i> The roots appeared on the surface. <form>hatawhataw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> for one thing or a small number to be moving in a solitary way over an open area. <i>Aku ra giyuy naghatawhataw sa awdituryum,</i> I was the only one moving about in the auditorium. <i>Usa ka sakayan nga naghatawhataw sa kadagátan,</i> A small boat sailing alone in the sea.

<p id=6190><form>hatay</form> expression preceding a phrase warning s.o. against doing s.t. foolish: watch out. <i>Hatay ug makit-an kang Tátay nga nagkáp sa íyang gamitun,</i> Watch out! Father is going to see you touching his tools. <i>Hatay giyud ug mabughat ka ánang ímung pagsuruysúruy,</i> Watch out! You&apos;re going to have a relapse going about like that.

<p id=6191><form>hátay</form> <pos>a</pos> having a long, lean body. <i>Hátay ang láwas sa datsun,</i> The dachshund has a long body. <pos>n</pos> length of the body. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> develop a long body. <i>Kadakù na ba nímu karun! Mihátay (nahátay) ka mag maáyu,</i> How big you are now. You have grown tall! <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; sa banig</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> be confined to bed for a long time due to a sickness. <i>Mihátay sa banig ang masakitun,</i> The sick man stayed in his sickbed for a long time. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> stretch out to one&apos;s full length. <i>Ipahátay nang láwas mu. Tan-áwun nátug unsay ímung gitas-un,</i> Stand up straight and tall. Let&apos;s see how tall you are.

<p id=6192><form>hatdug</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hot dog</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> fix hot dogs, have hot dogs as food.

<p id=6193><form>hátì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> hunt with a dog. <i>Maáyu muhátì nang irúa ug usa,</i> That dog is good for hunting deer.

<pb n=312>

<p id=6194><form>hat kík</form> <xr>= <sc>HAGKIK</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6195><form>hatsa<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> vain and affected in behavior. <i>Hatsa bayà níyang maglakaw, mu rag mudílu,</i> How affectedly she walks! As if she were a model.

<p id=6196><form>hatsa<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>ATSA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6197><form>hatsit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sumptuous meal</tr> (colloquial). <i>Birtdi níya run. Sigúru may hatsit,</i> It&apos;s his birthday today. There is sure to be a good dinner. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b1]</itype> hold a sumptuous meal. <i>Unsay inyung gihatsítan?</i> What did you have your party for? or What did you have for your feast? <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> attend s.t. where a sumptuous meal is served, feast on. <i>Hatsítun na nátù ning litsun,</i> Let&apos;s eat the roast pig now.

<p id=6198><form>hatsuy</form> (from <ix>mutsatsu,</ix> the one who is punished in games) <pos>n</pos> in a game of <ix>takyan,</ix> one who serves the <ix>takyan.</ix> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> be, become the server in a game of <ix>takyan.</ix>

<p id=6199><form>hátub</form> <xr>= <sc>HAGTUB</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6200><form>hatud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> take s.t. s.w. <i>Hatdan ta kag pagkáun,</i> I will bring you some food. <i>Ihatud ang bisíta sa íla,</i> See the visitors home. <form>&mdash; sa panan-aw</form> watch s.o. while he goes s.w. <i>Ihatud siya sa ímung panan-aw hangtud musulud,</i> Watch him until he gets inside. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; c6]</itype> make s.t. reach a certain distance in time or space. <i>Anus-a kahà ihatud nganhi sa gubyirnu ang karsáda?</i> When will the government ever bring the road here? <i>Gihatud sa kamatáyun ang íyang kauyámut,</i> He never extracted himself from poverty until his death. <number>2a</number> lead to some bad results. <i>Kanang ímung pagkagastadúra makapahatud (makahatud) nátù sa kawad-un,</i> Your extravagance can end us up in the poorhouse. <number>2b</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> bring an offer down to a certain level, offer odds as great as a certain amount in betting. <i>Ihatud ang ímung paghangyù sa kinaubsang prisyu,</i> Bargain it down to the lowest price. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> action of delivering. <number>2</number> s.t. delivered. <i>Gamay ra ang ákung hatud,</i> I have a small supply (to deliver). <form>&mdash; sa</form> bargain as low as. <form>&mdash; balay</form> windfall. <form>&mdash; káwat</form> telegram. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> send a telegram. <form>ig-r-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. to be delivered. <form>&mdash; sa mintiryu</form> skin and bones (ready to be brought to the grave).

<p id=6201><form>hatùhatù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> eat greedily or ravenously. <i>Pwirti giyud tingáli nímung gutúma kay naghatùhatù ka man giyug káun,</i> How famished you must be judging from the way you are eating so ravenously. <number>2</number> take more of s.t. than one can use. <i>Ayawg hatùhatuag dala nang mga libru, kay dì man nímu mabása nang tanan,</i> Don&apos;t take all those books because you can&apos;t read all of them.

<p id=6202><form>hátul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1c]</itype> tease unmarried people by pairing them off as if for marriage. <i>Átung hatúlun sila si Pidrug Maríya,</i> Let&apos;s match up Maria and Pedro. <i>Ayaw kug ihátul ánang byúdu,</i> Don&apos;t tease me by pairing that widower off with me!

<p id=6203><form>hátum</form> <xr>= <sc>SÁTUM</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6204><form>haud</form> <pos>n</pos> leader, a short length of material used to attach a lure or hook to the end of a fishline. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a]</itype> attach, make into a leader.

<p id=6205><form>haum</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> fitting well. <i>Haum kaáyu ang ímung sinínà sa ímung láwas,</i> Your dress fits you well. <number>2</number> fitting, in accordance. <i>Tulumanung haum sa Indipindins Dí,</i> Programs appropriate for Independence Day. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB3; c]</itype> fit into or around s.t., cause s.t. to do so. <i>Ang makahaum niíning sapátus mauy katagáan,</i> Whoever this pair of shoes fits can have them. <i>Ihaum ang ímung pakigpúlung sa pangidarun sa manimátì,</i> Tailor your talk to the age-level of your audience.&dagger;

<p id=6206><form>háun</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> take things off the stove, fire. <i>Igkabúkal giyud haúna dáyun,</i> When the water boils take it off the fire immediately. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> bail one out of difficulties. <i>Ang ímung pagtábang mau ray makaháun (makapaháun) kanákù sa kalisud ku karun,</i> The only thing that can get me out of my difficulties is your help. <pos>n</pos> action of taking things off the fire. <i>Kada háun mulútù mig usa ka dusínang pán,</i> We bake a dozen loaves at one time. <form>bag-ung &mdash;</form> <number>1</number> just recently produced. <i>Way ikspiriyinsiya ang bag-ung háun,</i> The new graduates have no experience. <i>Bag-ung háung sista,</i> A guitar just from the factory. <number>2</number> new model. <i>Bag-ung háung kutsi,</i> The newest model car. <i>Bag-ung háung hirdu,</i> The latest style of hairdo.

<p id=6207><form>hawà</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> devoid of, lacking s.t. completely. <i>Hawà ang kwartu human panguhái sa mwiblis,</i> The room was bare after the furniture was removed. <i>Hawà siya sa kinaadman,</i> He is completely devoid of culture. <i>Hawà ang ákung tiyan,</i> My stomach is empty. <number>1a</number> having an empty feeling in the pit of one&apos;s stomach from looking down from heights or falling. <i>Hawà ang tiyan basta mukalit ug dulhug ang ilibítur,</i> You get an empty pang in the stomach when the elevator goes down suddenly. <number>2</number> <tr>separated</tr>, isolated out. <i>Hawà na sila sa ílang ginikánan,</i> They live apart from their parents. <number>3</number> <tr>different</tr>. <i>Hawà ra kaáyu íyang sinultihan sa ubang babáyi,</i> Her way of talking is very different from other girls. <number>3a</number> feel uneasy or uncomfortable about s.t. that one is not accustomed to. <i>Hawà kaáyu ning muhigdag way dúlug,</i> It is very strange to sleep without s.o. else in bed with me. <number>4</number> <formx>&mdash; sa</formx> aside from, in addition to. <i>Hawà <pb n=313>sa íyang swildu dúna pay pinsiyun,</i> Apart from his salary he has a pension. <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> separate, isolate from others. <i>Ílang ihawà (hawaun) ang dagkù sa gagmay,</i> They will separate the large ones from the small ones. <number>1b</number> <itype>[AC2]</itype> live separately. <number>1c</number> <itype>[AC2]</itype> do s.t. separately. <i>Naghawà mig higdà,</i> We sleep in separate places. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2; c1]</itype> be different, differentiate. <i>Nagkahawà ang hitsúra sa kalúha nga nagdakù,</i> As the twins grew bigger their features became more and more different. <i>Hawaun (ihawà) untà nímu ang táwung masayunsáyun lang sa dílì,</i> You should distinguish the people you can take for granted from those you can&apos;t. <number>2a</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> get an uneasy feeling at s.t. one is not accustomed to. <number>3</number> <itype>[B12; a4b4]</itype> get an empty pang in the pit of one&apos;s stomach when one looks down from a height or falls a distance. <i>Muhawà ang ákung tiyan ug mudúngaw ku sa ayruplánu,</i> My stomach gets a queasy, empty feeling when I look down from an airplane. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23P; b(1)P]</itype> leave, move away from a place. <i>Muháwà (mupaháwà) ku íning baláya kay buysit,</i> I&apos;ll leave this house because it brings us bad luck. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12P]</itype> remove, cause to leave. <i>Giháwà (gipaháwà, gipapaháwà) ang mga iskwátir,</i> The squatters were evicted. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> <xr>= <sc>HÁWÀ</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[AP; aP]</itype> <xr>= <sc>HÁWÀ</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr>

<p id=6208><form>háwak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>waist</tr>. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> get backaches. <i>Hawakun ka kun magpúnay kag tikubù,</i> You will be afflicted with backaches if you are always bent over. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> purlins, the beams in a roof running parallel to the ridgepole which support the common rafters (<ix>katsaw</ix>)<corr>.</corr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> attach, make into, use as purlins. <form>panig-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> stand with the arms on the waist as a sign of anger or superiority. <i>Nanighawak siyang nangasábà,</i> She stood with her hands on her waist as she scolded us. <i>Ayaw kug panighawaki dihà,</i> Don&apos;t you talk to me with your hands on your waist! <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> fat around the waist. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>waistline</tr>. <form>taga-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> waist-deep. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to suffer from backaches.

<p id=6209><form>háwak<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> having influence, pull in a place (slang). <i>Háwak siya dihà kay siyay intsards sa pirsunil,</i> He has influence in that place because he is head of the personnel section.

<p id=6210><form>háwan</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> clear an area. <i>Hawáni ang nataran sa mga sagbut,</i> Clean the weeds out of the yard. <i>Hawáni ang lamísa,</i> Clear the table. <i>Hawáni ang kawáyan sa mga tunuk,</i> Clear the thorns off the bamboo. <i>Gihawánan ang plása sa mga táwu,</i> The people were driven out of the plaza. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> for an area to become clear. <i>Miháwan dáyun ang sinihan dihang may misinggit kaláyu,</i> The moviehouse emptied instantly when s.o. yelled &lsquo;fire&rsquo;. <pos>a</pos> for a place to be emptied or cleared. <i>Háwan ang asíras basta gabíi,</i> The sidewalks are empty in the evening. <i>Adtu sila magbaskit sa háwan,</i> They play basketball in the empty area. <i>Háwan ang mga búkid dinhi,</i> The mountains here have been deforested. <pos>n</pos> <tr>area</tr> of ground that has been cleared. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <number>1</number> <tr>living</tr> room. <number>2</number> <tr>floorspace</tr> or anything enclosed.

<p id=6211><form>haw-ang</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>empty</tr>. <i>Haw-ang ang balay nga way mwiblis<corr sic=.>,</corr></i> A house was empty because it had no furniture. <i>Haw-ang ang tiyan ug pán ray ipamáhaw,</i> The stomach feels empty if you only have bread for breakfast. <number>2</number> for a life to be empty. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> for a place to become empty. <number>2</number> have a feeling of <tr>emptiness</tr> in one&apos;s life. <i>Naghaw-ang ang ákung kinabúhì sukad ka mawálà,</i> My life has been empty since you left. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> emptiness.

<p id=6212><form>háwas</form> <pos>n</pos> congressman. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6]</itype> be, become a congressman.

<p id=6213><form>haw-as</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>remove</tr> things from a confined space without moving the container. <i>Haw-ásun ba ang sinínà gíkan sa mundu?</i> Shall I take the clothes out of the steamer trunk? <i>Haw-ási ug tulu ka baril nga túbig ang tangki,</i> Remove three barrelfuls of water from the tank. <number>2</number> <itype>[B6; b6]</itype> for all of s.t. to go out of a place. <i>Mihaw-as ang ákung kináun pagsúka nákù,</i> My stomach was emptied when I vomitted. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> for emotions to <tr>come out</tr>. <i>Gihaw-ásan ku sa mga kaguul,</i> I was relieved of my worries. <number>2b</number> <itype>[AP; c]</itype> remove s.o. from a difficult life (literary). <i>Siyay mihaw-as (mipahaw-as) námù sa kalisud,</i> He lifted us out of our difficult life. <number>2c</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> go out of the water. <i>Mihaw-as mi sa dágat,</i> We got out of the water. <number>3</number> <itype>[B5]</itype> for a landmark to disappear as one moves away from it. <i>Mahaw-as na ang Sikihur ug hápit na ta maabut sa syudad,</i> Siquijor disappears over the horizon as we get close to the city. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>emptied</tr> of contents. <i>Haw-as na ang tanang karga sa barku,</i> All the goods have been taken off of the boat. <number>2</number> freed from emotions. <number>3</number> gone out of the water. <number>4</number> out of sight.

<p id=6214><form>haway</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>Hawaii</tr>. <number>2</number> k.o. sweet large-sized <tr>pineapple</tr>. <number>3</number> <formx>gábi sa &mdash;</formx> <xr>= <sc>BISUL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6215><form>hawáyà</form> <xr>= <sc>HULÁYÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6216><form>hawáyan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>Hawaiian</tr> dress having colorful designs. <number>2</number> Hawaiian music or dance. <number>3</number> Hawaiian pineapple. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> wear Hawaiian cloth. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> dance Hawaiian dance.

<p id=6217><form>hawhaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for the stomach to be <tr>empty</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <pb n=314><itype>[B6; b4]</itype> for the stomach to feel empty. <i>Naghawhaw ákung tiyan kay wà ku mamáhaw,</i> My stomach feels empty because I didn&apos;t have breakfast. <i>Gihawháwan ku sa ákung tíyan,</i> My stomach feels empty.

<p id=6218><form>hawhaw<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>HAGAWHAW</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6219><form>hawid, háwid<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>similar</tr>, <tr>resembling</tr>. <i>Mas hawid sa amahan ang kamagulángan,</i> The eldest is most similar in appearance to his father. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; a]</itype> resemble, be similar. <i>Muhawid ang gisabak sa panamkúnan,</i> The baby in the womb will take after what the mother has developed a craving or liking for. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>imitate</tr>, do as others do. <i>Ngánung muháwid ka man níya pagpúnay ug súruy nga minyù na man ka ug siya dílì?</i> Why do you roam around as he does when you&apos;re married and he isn&apos;t? <i>Hawíra ang íyang linalahan sa kálù,</i> Copy the way he weaves hats.

<p id=6220><form>háwid<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b]</itype> hold s.t. to prevent forward motion. <i>Hawíri ang irù arun dì makabuhì,</i> Hold the dog so it can&apos;t escape. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> hold rigidly in place, hold on to s.t. <i>Dílì mahuswà ang túbu kay gihawíran sa ruska,</i> You can&apos;t pull the pipe out because it is being held in place by a screw. <number>3</number> <itype>[AN2; b(1)]</itype> urge s.o. who is visiting to stay for dinner, spend the night. <i>Dì ta muadtug udtu kay hawíran giyud ta,</i> We won&apos;t go at noon because they will surely make us stay for dinner. <number>4</number> <itype>[B12N]</itype> for a blade to snag. <i>Maáyung pagkatikbas. Walà mangháwid,</i> It was neatly cut down. The blade didn&apos;t snag. <form>&mdash; sa dunggan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S]</itype> for grades to be just enough to allow one to pass. <i>Makaháwid lang sa dunggan, hustu na,</i> If my grade is enough to allow to pass, I&apos;ll be happy. <form>&mdash; sa pulsu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> eat just enough food to check one&apos;s hunger. <i>Timù ug ígung iháwid sa pulsu,</i> Take a bite of s.t. to check your hunger. <pos>n</pos> s.t. that checks hunger. <i>Hápit na tingpaniudtu. Miúkit na lang kug mani pára háwid sa pulsu,</i> It&apos;s almost lunchtime. I&apos;ll munch just enough peanuts to check my hunger. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> hold on to s.t. to avoid falling, keep from being separated. <i>Misulay siya pagtindug samtang nangháwid sa ákung buktun,</i> He tried to get up while he held on to my arm. <i>Ang nagkalumus nga táwu nagpanghawid sa bátang,</i> The drowning man was desperately trying to hold on to the log. <form>hawiránan</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. to hold on to maintain balance.

<p id=6221><form>hawin, háwin</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> hang s.t. up to dry. <i>Giháwin níya ang íyang sinínà,</i> She hung her clothes up to dry. <i>Kusáhus nga iháwin (hawínun),</i> Sliced meat hung up to dry. <form>pa-(&larr;), pama-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fishing in the deep sea with a hook and line. <form>pa-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> go line fishing in deep waters.

<p id=6222><form>hawla</form> <xr>= <sc>HALWA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6223><form>hawlut</form> <xr>= <sc>HALWUT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6224><form>hawsir</form> <pos>n</pos> the host at a house where a mahjong session is being held. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; c1]</itype> be a mahjong host.

<p id=6225><form>hawu-</form> <xr><ix>see also</ix> <sc>HALU-</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6226><form>hawud</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>best</tr>, <tr>tops</tr> in a certain field. <i>Hawud siya sa klási,</i> She is the best in her class. <i>Ang mga radiyung ginamà sa Hapun mauy hawud karun,</i> The best radios are the ones made in Japan. <i>Kanang bugúya mauy hawud niíning distritúha,</i> That toughie is the toughest of them all in this area. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2N; b4]</itype> be, get to be tops. <i>Nanghawud siya sa kanta,</i> He is the best singer. <i>Ang átung pruduktu gihawran na sa mga pruduktu sa Hapun,</i> Our products<corr> top the products of Japan</corr>. <form>hawudháwud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1P]</itype> act as if one were superior.

<p id=6227><form>hawughug</form> <xr>= <sc>HALUGHUG<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=6228><form>hawulháwul</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. sardine, of particularly tasty flesh with a multitude of bones going in four directions. Blue on top and silver on bottom, growing to 8&Prime;.

<p id=6229><form>hawus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1246; b4]</itype> for the body to be extremely tired, exhausted. <i>Gihawsan kug kinarga ug balas,</i> I am dead tired loading sand.

<p id=6230><form>háwut</form> <xr>= <sc>HALWUT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6231><form>hawuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN; a4]</itype> for a portion of the body to tire from doing s.t. for too long a time. <i>Mihawuy (nanghawuy, gihawuy) ákung líug ug hinangad,</i> My neck has gotten stiff from looking up all the time. <i>Gihawuy ákung kamut pagsinulat,</i> My hand is stiff from writing too much.

<p id=6232><form>háy<sub>1</sub></form> hi, an exclamation of greeting.

<p id=6233><form>háy<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> set s.t. aside for a special purpose. <i>Magháy tag salapì álang sa átung kasal,</i> Let&apos;s set aside money for our wedding. <i>Iháy ta ning prut sálad sa mga bisíta,</i> We will set this fruit salad aside for the visitors.

<p id=6234><form>háy<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>HALAY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6235><form>hayà</form> <xr>= <sc>WALÀ</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p id=6236><form>háyà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> lie in state. <i>Ang patay giháyà sa punirarya,</i> The body is lying in state at the funeral parlor. <pos>n</pos> body lying in state. <i>Prusisyun sa háyà sa átung Ginúu,</i> Procession of the dead body of Christ. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> in a supine state. <form>&mdash; ang búlan</form> for the crescent moon to be parallel to the earth&apos;s surface, considered a dangerous time for childbirth. <form>tig-(&rarr;), ting-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> swim on one&apos;s back. <i>Tighayaun (tighayaan) ku nang distansiyáha,</i> I will swim that distance on my back. <pos>n</pos> backstroke in swimming.

<p id=6237><form>hayabhayab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> for s.t. one wears that <pb n=315>is loose to be flapping. <i>Naghayabhayab ang báta sa kaluag,</i> The nightgown flaps because it is loose.

<p id=6238><form>hay-ad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)6; c1]</itype> lie flat on one&apos;s back with the arms outstretched. <i>Ang hubug naghay-ad sa karsáda,</i> The drunk was sprawled out on his back in the street.

<p id=6239><form>háyag</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> be <tr>light</tr>, <tr>bright</tr>, <tr>well-illuminated</tr>. <i>Háyag na paggíkan níla,</i> It was light by the time they left. <i>Háyag kaáyu ang baylihan,</i> The dance floor is well-illuminated. <number>2</number> for the sky to be clear. <i>Háyag na, wà nay dag-um,</i> It&apos;s clear now. There are no more clouds. <number>3</number> for the face to be bright and happy. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1PB2; a]</itype> illuminate, become bright. <i>Miháyag ang kwartu human sug-i,</i> The room became bright after the lamp was put in it. <i>Mugíkan ta sa dílì pa maháyag,</i> We will depart before it is light. <i>Hayági siya kay náay gibúlung,</i> Give her some light because she is looking for s.t. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> for the sky to clear. <number>3</number> <itype>[B256]</itype> for a countenance to brighten. <i>Miháyag (naháyag) ang íyang panagway,</i> Her face lit up. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> enlighten s.o. with knowledge. <i>Hayági mi sa ímung diyusnung gahum,</i> Enlighten us through your divine power. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>KA-</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> explain why. <i>Mipaháyag siya ngánung ingun tu adtu,</i> She explained why it had to be that way. <number>2</number> disclose one&apos;s purpose. <i>Wà siya makapaháyag sa íyang túyù,</i> He never got around to expressing what he wanted. <i>Unsáun pagsugut níya ug dì nímu pahayágan,</i> How can she accept you if you don&apos;t propose. <number>3</number> give one&apos;s opinion. <i>Mipaháyag siya nga dílì háyan ang gíra,</i> He expressed his opinion that war was not likely. <number>4</number> publish, relate in a newspaper. <i>Ang piryudikuy mipaháyag sa nahitabù,</i> The newspaper published what happened. <form>pa-</form> <number>1</number> explanation why. <number>2</number> disclosure of a purpose. <number>3</number> opinion. <form>pa-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> newspaper, news magazine. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> light. <i>Kaháyag sa lamparilya,</i> Light of the lamp. <number>1a</number> <formx>namat-an ug &mdash;</formx> place one was born (lit. place one first saw light). <number>2</number> brightness. <number>3</number> brightness of the face. <form>ma-</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> very bright. <number>2</number> [word referring to time] <form>sa &mdash;</form> for an infant to be [so-and-so] many days, weeks, etc. old. <i>Mag-útas lag kat&umacracu;g ang bátang pila pa ka simána sa maháyag,</i> An infant only a few weeks old does nothing but sleep.

<p id=6240><form>hayaghag</form> <xr>= <sc>HALAGHAG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6241><form>hayáhay</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1a</number> <tr>airy</tr>, comfortable and refreshing to the skin. <i>King kwartúha hayáhay kay atbang sa hángin,</i> This room is airy, cool, and fresh because it gets the full wind. <number>1b</number> a refreshed feeling. <i>Hayáhay na ang ákung gibátì human makakaligù,</i> I feel very much refreshed after my bath. <number>2</number> for one&apos;s financial situation to be comfortable. <i>Hayáhay na siya karun kay dakù siyag swildu,</i> He is in comfortable circumstances now because he has a good salary. <number>3</number> feel relieved of a burden or sickness. <i>Hayáhay na ang íyang pamínaw human katambáli,</i> She felt better after she took her medicine. <i>Hayáhay nang pamínaw ku kay nabayran na ang ákung útang,</i> I feel relieved now. I&apos;ve paid off my debts. <number>4</number> easy, requiring little effort. <i>Hayáhay ra tung iksamína,</i> That examination was easy. <number>5</number> for material to do easily for a certain number. <i>Hayáhay rang duha ka púlu íning panaptúna,</i> This cloth would easily make two shirts. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> be, become airy, refreshed, relieved. <number>2</number> for one&apos;s financial situation to become comfortable, ease up. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> get fresh air. <i>Magpahayáhay ta sa baybáyun,</i> Let&apos;s get some fresh air at the beach. <number>2</number> go s.w. to amuse oneself, take one&apos;s mind off troubles. <i>Magpahayáhay ta sa karnabal,</i> Let&apos;s go to the carnival to take our minds off our troubles. <number>3</number> <formx>pa- sa bágà</formx> go out to amuse oneself. <i>Magpahayáhay ta sa bágà kay láay kaáyu dinhi,</i> Let&apos;s go out to have some diversion because it&apos;s boring as heck here. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> comfort and ease; freedom from cares, sickness, etc. <form>pa-an</form> <pos>n</pos> place to go for relaxation.

<p id=6242><form>hay-alay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>jai-alai</tr>. <number>2</number> an extra bet in mahjong aside from the ordinary bet in which the player who gets mahjong for the fifth time gets the extra pot. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b5]</itype> win the jai-alai bet in mahjong. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> go to a jai-alai game to bet. <i>Manghay-alay ku rung gabíi,</i> I&apos;ll go and bet on the jai-alai tonight.

<p id=6243><form>háyan</form> there&apos;s a possibility that.... <i>Háyan kahutdan kag gasulína,</i> You might run out of gasoline. <i>Háyan maduktur tà ku run ug musígi pa tà kug iskuyla,</i> I might have become a doctor by now if I had continued going to school. <i>Háyan namálik na tu run,</i> Perhaps they have already returned.

<p id=6244><form>hayang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1P]</itype> put s.t. convex down with the convex side down. <i>Makahayang ka ba áring pawíkan?</i> Could you manage to flip the sea turtle on its back? <i>Haynga (ihayang, ipahayang) ning mga hapag sa lantay,</i> Put these shallow baskets on the bamboo shelf right side up. <number>2</number> lie on one&apos;s back, face up. <i>Muhayang lang siya sa bangkù ug matúlug,</i> He will just lie down on the bench and go to sleep. <number>3</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> fall and land on one&apos;s back. <i>Nahayang ku sa lápuk,</i> I fell down on my back in the mud. <form>&mdash; ang kúlun</form> <pb n=316>sure to win (lit. the pot is right side up [on the fire]). <i>Mupusta kug dakù kay áning taría hayang giyung kúlun,</i> I will place a big bet on this round because it is a sure win. <form>&mdash; ang payà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a3]</itype> for s.o. who is usually morose to become unusually gay (lit. for a half a coconut shell&mdash;smooth and neat on the inside and coarse and scraggly on the outside, to be lying with the inside up). <i>Unsa mang hangína ang nihurus nga nahayang man ang payà?</i> What wind is blowing that you are suddenly so bright and gay? <form>&mdash; ang plátu</form> for one&apos;s future to be assured. <i>Hayang ang plátu sa íyang anak kay nakaasawa siyag milyunarya,</i> The future of his children is assured because he married a millionaire. <form>kulub hayang</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>KULUB</sc>.</xr> <form>pa-/hipa-/hapa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> cause to fall down on one&apos;s back. <i>Nadalin-as ku ug napahayang kus lápuk,</i> I slipped and fell on my back into the mud. <form>tig-(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>TIGHAYÀ</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>HÁYÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6245><form>háyaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB26; c]</itype> raise, rise into the air. <i>Aku giyuy miháyaw sa imáhin arun makítà sa tanan,</i> I was the one who raised the image high for all to see. <i>Miháyaw ang túnu nímu sa kúrus,</i> Your pitch rose on the refrain. <i>Giháyaw na nákù ang kamut kay sagpáun ku untà siya,</i> I had already lifted my hands to slap her.

<p id=6246><form>hayblad</form> <pos>n</pos> high blood pressure. <pos>a</pos> very angry. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B146; a4]</itype> suffer from high blood pressure. <i>Kanúnay man ku nímung palagútun, mahayblad (hayblarun) man lang ta,</i> You always provoke me. You&apos;re going to give me high blood pressure yet. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; a4S]</itype> get angry. <i>Nahayblad ku sa íyang tinubagan,</i> The way she answered made me furious. <form>hayblarun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having high blood pressure. <number>2</number> easily angered.

<p id=6247><form>haybul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <number>1</number> go out to have a good time. <i>Basta tingswildu, muhaybul dáyun nà sila,</i> As soon as they get paid, they go out to have a good time. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; c]</itype> for a vehicle to go fast. <i>Hadluk kug muhaybul (mahaybul) ang trák,</i> I get scared when the bus goes fast. <number>2a</number> command given by conductor as a signal to the driver to get moving. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> go straight without paying attention to anyone along the way. <i>Muhaybul ka man lang. Dì ka makigsulti nákù?</i> Why do you go straight by me without greeting me? <form>haybulhaybul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> gallivant around, go around from place to place to have fun.

<p id=6248><form>haybuy</form> <pos>n</pos> a style of men&apos;s sport shirt, close-fitting and with tapering slits on both sides, similar to <ix>ambuys,</ix> but not so long at the rear. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> wear a <ix>haybuy</ix>-style sport shirt. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> tailor this sort of shirt.

<p id=6249><form>haydyam, haydyamp</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>high jump</tr> in an athletic contest. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b]</itype> perform the high jump.

<p id=6250><form>hayhat</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>haughty</tr> and <tr>snobbish</tr>. <i>Hayhat kaáyung babayhána kay dílì makighuyhúy sa mga pubri,</i> She&apos;s very snobbish because she doesn&apos;t mix with the poor. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> act, become snobbish.

<p id=6251><form>hayhay<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>HALAY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6252><form>*hayhay<sub>2</sub></form> <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> sigh in weariness, sorrow, pain, or the like. <i>Nanghayhay siya sa kakápuy,</i> She sighed with weariness.

<p id=6253><form>hayhil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>high heels</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> wear high heels. <i>Maghayhil ka ba sa piknik?</i> Will you wear high heels to the picnic?

<p id=6254><form>háyis</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> be the best in a class. <i>Háyis siya sa Aldyibra,</i> He is the best in Algebra. <number>2</number> be well-versed, most capable in s.t. <i>Kun báhin sa panganak si Lúling muy háyis,</i> When it comes to childbirth, Loling is the expert. <i>Háyis siya sa ínum,</i> He is an expert in drinking. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> get to be the best, an expert.

<p id=6255><form>hayiskul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>high school</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b6]</itype> be in high school.

<p id=6256><form>háyit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>height</tr>. <form>may &mdash;</form> tall and attractive. <i>Gwápu ug may háyit pa giyud,</i> Handsome and tall as well. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> have a height of. <i>Kun magháyit ka lang mínus sa singku pís, dì ka madáwat sa níbi,</i> If you stand less than five feet, the navy will not take you.

<p id=6257><form>haylu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a1]</itype> induce s.o. to do s.t. by offering him s.t. <i>Haylúa ang bátag dulsi sa pagkatúlug,</i> Entice the child with candy to make him go to bed. <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>enticements</tr>. <i>Ang ímung mga pahaylu dílì makatarug sa ákung pagdumílì,</i> All your enticements cannot make me change my mind. <form>mahaylúhun, mahaylúun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>enticing</tr>. <i>Mahaylúung tanyag,</i> A tempting offer.

<p id=6258><form>haypay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> hi-fi set. <pos>a</pos> for a voice to be screeching, piercing, and unpleasant.

<p id=6259><form>haypay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> make a person reveal s.t. by squirting carbonated beverages into his nostrils (slang). <i>Haypáyun (haypáyan) níla ang táwu arun mutug-an,</i> They will subject the man to the 7-Up treatment to make him sing. <pos>n</pos> action of using this method.

<p id=6260><form>hayun, háyun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> swing the arms in walking. <i>Iháyun nang ímung kamut ug maglakaw ka,</i> Swing your arms when you walk. <number>2</number> not carry s.t. <i>Ngánung naghayun ka nga nagkapulíkì si Máma mu?</i> Why are you empty-handed (lit. swinging your arms) when your mother is carrying more than she can manage? <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> walk, taking it easy, not exerting effort. <i>Muagwanta siya sa lákaw kay hayunan ra ang bayinti kilumitrus,</i> A twenty-kilometer walk won&apos;t bother <pb n=317>him because he will take it easy. <pos>n</pos> the swinging or swaying of one&apos;s arms. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> raise the arm in preparation to strike or throw s.t. <i>Ihayun pag-áyu ang búla úsà ilábay,</i> Raise the ball back before you throw it.

<p id=6261><form>hayung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4]</itype> for the sun&apos;s heat to be not at its greatest degree of intensity. <i>Muhayung ang kaínit sa adlaw ug maalas tris,</i> The sun&apos;s heat lessens at around three in the afternoon.

<p id=6262><form>háyup</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> domestic animal. <number>2</number> a person with base instincts and desires. <i>Buy-i ku háyup,</i> Let me go, you beast! <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> domestic animals.

<p id=6263><form>haywi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>highway</tr>. <i>Sa haywi muági ang mga dyipni pára Kunsulasiyun,</i> The jeepneys for Consolacion go by way of the highway. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a]</itype> make into a highway.

<p id=6264><form>haywis</form> <pos>n</pos> style of trousers with a wide waistline, coming to a point in the rear.

<p id=6265><form>hi<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> letter G.

<p id=6266><form>hi<sub>2</sub>, hì</form> <pos>n</pos> word to command a draft animal to move forward.

<p id=6267><form>hi-</form> in many forms beginning with <ix>hi-,</ix> there is a prefix <ix>hi-</ix> or <ix>hiN-.</ix> Look also under the form with <ix>hi-</ix> or <ix>hiN-</ix> subtracted.

<p id=6268><form>hi-(&rarr;)</form> derivative affix forming verbs which occur with the prefixes <ix>ma-<sub>1</sub></ix> (<ix>na-</ix>) and <ix>ma-an</ix> (<ix>na-an, ma-i</ix>). All verbs with these affixes may also occur with <ix>hi-(&rarr;)</ix> inserted after the prefixes. <number>1</number> referring to an action which happened to take place or which s.o. did involuntarily. <i>Nahibungat ku ang dílì ángayng isulti,</i> Words I should not have said slipped out of my mouth. <i>Kalit ka man lag tunghà dihà. Nahikurug man lang tag dì tyimpu,</i> My! You gave me a scare appearing like that. I couldn&apos;t help trembling, though there was no occasion to. <i>Nahidam-agan siyag irù ug nahipalingkud sa lápuk,</i> A dog jumped on her and she was knocked down into the mud. <number>1a</number> having happened, not necessarily accidentally, but not anyone&apos;s volition. <i>Nahilunà ang balay daplin sa dálan,</i> The house is located next to the road. <number>2</number> added after the abstract prefix (<i>pag-</i>) before verbs referring to motion with no meaning other than to elevate the style. <i>Paghiabut níya,</i> When he arrived. <i>Paghibalik níya,</i> When he returned.

<p id=6269><form>hi-an(&rarr;)</form> inflectional affix, future and past. (subjunctive <ix>hi-i</ix>) <number>1</number> added to the same bases as the ones to which local passive affixes are added (<ix>see -an<sub>1</sub></ix>) with the same meaning except that the action is accidental. <i>Hilingkuran ku ang íyang kálù,</i> I accidentally sat on his hat. <i>Hitagaan kag gása,</i> You might be given a present. <i>Kay unaunahun ka, hihagkan ka lagi,</i> You were so forward, so you got yourself kissed. <i>Higabhian siya,</i> He was overtaken by night. <number>2</number> added to bases to refer to the direct recipient of the action accidentally done (when the local passive, <form>-an<sub>1</sub></form> does not refer to the recipient of the action). <i>Itágù nang suláta básig hibasahan unyà ni Tátay,</i> Hide that letter because Dad might read it. <i>Dágan. Hidakpan unyà ka,</i> Run or you will get caught.

<p id=6270><form>hiay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> for a part of the body or dress to droop to one side. <i>Mihiay ang úlu sa nagdukà,</i> The drowsy man&apos;s head tilted to the side. <i>Naghiay ang ngábil sa paralitiku,</i> The paralytic&apos;s lips droop at one corner. <i>Ayaw hiaya (ihiay) ang abága sa ímung bláwus,</i> Don&apos;t let your blouse slip over your shoulder.

<p id=6271><form>hibabuyna</form> <xr>= <sc>HIRBUBUYNA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6272><form>híbag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4; b4]</itype> for the stomach to be upset. <i>Muhíbag ang tiyan basta dílì kahilísan,</i> The stomach becomes upset if you have indigestion. <pos>a</pos> for the stomach to be upset.

<p id=6273><form>hibág</form> <xr>= <sc>HIBÁLAG</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>*BÁLAG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6274><form>híbal</form> <xr>= <sc>HÍBAG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6275><form>hibálag</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>*BÁLAG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6276><form>hibalu</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>BALU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6277><form>hibangkaágan</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>*BANGKÁAG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6278><form>híbat</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>unsymmetrical</tr>, crookedly done. <i>Híbat kaáyu nga pagkalála ning baskíta,</i> This basket is crookedly woven. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be, become <tr>unsymmetrical</tr>. <i>Nahíbat ang dayandáyan,</i> The decorations were all askew. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> screw up the face. <i>Nahíbat ang íyang nawung paghílak níya,</i> His face screwed up when he cried. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>HÍBAT</sc>, <i>a</i>.</xr>

<p id=6279><form>hibawu</form> <xr>= <sc>HIBALU</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>BALU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6280><form>híbi<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> small dried shrimps with the shells removed.

<p id=6281><form>híbi<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> large deciduous tree bearing sweet amber-colored fruits similar to <ix>siriguylas:</ix> <bio>Spondias cytherea</bio>.

<p id=6282><form>hibì, híbì</form> <xr>= <sc>TÍBÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6283><form>hibi dyúti</form> <pos>a</pos> made for <tr>heavy duty</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be, become capable of handling heavy duty.

<p id=6284><form>hibìhibì</form> <xr>= <sc>KIPÌKIPÌ</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>KIPÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6285><form>hibilya</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>buckle</tr> for a belt or shoes. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> put a buckle on s.t. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make into a buckle.

<p id=6286><form>hibiwit</form> <pos>a</pos> heavyweight in boxing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> become a <tr>heavyweight boxer</tr>.

<p id=6287><form>hibubuyna</form> <xr>= <sc>HIRBUBUYNA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6288><form>híbuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2N]</itype> <number>1</number> for a multitude of s.t. to move in a wriggling fashion, or for s.t. to have a multitude of things wriggle over it. <i>Nanghíbuk (mihíbuk) ang úlud ibabaw sa <pb n=318>patayng irù</i> or <i>Ang patayng irù nanghíbuk sa mga úlud,</i> Worms are squirming over the dog&apos;s carcass. <i>Hastang nakahíbuk sa mga táwung mitábù sa Pápa,</i> My, how the crowd swarmed to meet the Pope. <number>2</number> for the children in a family to be numerous. <i>Pagkuntrul mu kay nanghíbuk lang nang inyung mga anak,</i> Practice birth control because you have so many children.

<p id=6289><form>híbul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S]</itype> have wet mucous in the nose. <i>Naghibul ang sip-un,</i> His nose is dripping. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> sniff mucous up into the nose. <form>hibulhíbul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for the mucous to come in and out of the nostrils.

<p id=6290><form>hibúlung</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>*BÚLUNG<sub>3</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=6291><form>hibulus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>diarrhea</tr>. <form>súka &mdash;</form> vomiting and diarrhea. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B14; a4b6]</itype> have diarrhea. <i>Naghibulus (gihibulus) siya sa hilabihang káun,</i> She had diarrhea from eating too much.

<p id=6292><form>híbun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S; a1]</itype> for a depression to get filled up or covered. <i>Muhíbun ang balikhaw ug manambuk,</i> The collarbone becomes covered with flesh when one gets stout. <i>Mahíbun ang hubag basta maghungut pa,</i> Boils become plump and full while they are still in the swelling stage. <i>Nagkahibun ang lungag nga butangánan ug basúra,</i> The garbage pit is gradually getting full. <i>Gihíbun níla ang atábay,</i> They covered the well over.

<p id=6293><form>hibung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> apply ointment to relieve swelling. <i>Hibungun (hibungan) nákug ityul ang hubag,</i> I&apos;m going to apply ichthyol ointment on the boil. <pos>n</pos> <tr>ointment</tr> put on swellings.

<p id=6294><form>*hibunghibung</form> <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>thickets</tr>.

<p id=6295><form>híbus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1B12]</itype> for a sack or flexible container to puncture, break so that it loses its contents; cause it to do so. <i>Nahíbus ang bulsíta ug naúsik ang sulud,</i> The bag burst and the contents spilled out.

<p id=6296><form>hibuylas</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>*BUYLAS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6297><form>híd</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chief</tr>, <tr>boss</tr>. <i>Nananghid si Pípi sa íyang híd,</i> Pepe asked permission to go out from his boss. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; c6]</itype> be, become the head of s.t. <form>&mdash; titsir</form> <pos>n</pos> principal of a school with only three or four grades.

<p id=6298><form>hidban</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>headband</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> wear a headband. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make into a headband.

<p id=6299><form>hidhid<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> smear viscous material onto s.t. <i>Hidhírig grása ang íhi,</i> Smear grease onto the axle. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC2; b]</itype> have sexual intercourse (humorous). <i>Nakit-ang nakighidhid didtus hutil,</i> Was seen having sexual relations in a hotel.

<p id=6300><form>hidhid<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>LIDGID</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6301><form>hidkwartir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>headquarters</tr>. <number>2</number> center of operations. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c6]</itype> have one&apos;s headquarters, make into headquarters.

<p id=6302><form>hidlaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a3b3(1)]</itype> <tr>long for</tr>, feel a strong <tr>yearning for</tr>. <i>Gihidlaw akug manuk,</i> I long for chicken meat. <i>Unsay ímung gikahidlawan?</i> What are you longing for? <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>yearning</tr>, <tr>longing</tr>. <i>Kining ákung kahidlaw nímu,</i> My longing for you.

<p id=6303><form>hidlayit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>headlights</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put headlights onto s.t.

<p id=6304><form>hígà</form> <xr>= <sc>HIGKÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6305><form>higad</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>steep slope</tr>, place sloping sharply. <i>Higad kaáyu ang hagdan,</i> The stairs are very steep. <number>2</number> shallow part of the sea near the seashore or shoreline. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> get to be steep, make s.t. steep. <i>Mu rag nagkahigad ang bungtud sa nadúgay nákung túngas,</i> After I had been climbing for some time, the slope seemed to be getting steeper and steeper. <number>2</number> <itype>[AP3; cP]</itype> go to the shallows. <i>Muhigad (mupahigad) mi sa hápun,</i> We go to the shallows in the afternoon.

<p id=6306><form>higal, hígal</form> <pos>a</pos> having strong sexual desire. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become highly desirous for sex. <i>Mahígal kag mutumar ka áning tambála,</i> You&apos;re going to get sexed up if you take this medicine. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> sexual lust.

<p id=6307><form>higála</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>good friend</tr>. <i>Higála kaáyu mi si Maríya,</i> Mary and I are very good friends. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23SC; ac3]</itype> befriend, be, become friends. <i>Nakahigala kug Amirkána,</i> I made friends with an American girl. <i>Mahímu bang maghigála ta?</i> May we be friends? <i>Higaláa ang ímung mga silíngan,</i> Make friends with your neighbors. <i>Gikahigála ku siya sa Mindanaw,</i> I became friends with him in Mindanao. <form>kahigaláan</form> <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s group of friends. <form>manag-</form> <pos>n</pos> people who are friends. <i>Ang duha ka managhigála nagkabildúhay,</i> The two friends were conversing. <form>mahigaláun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>friendly</tr>. <form>panag-, panaghigalaay</form> <pos>n</pos> friendship.

<p id=6308><form>higálam, higám</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>*GÁLAM</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6309><form>higanti</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>giant</tr>. <number>2</number> of giant size. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become a giant, <tr>gigantic</tr>. <form>higantihiganti</form> <pos>n</pos> figure of a giant for parades and processions. <form>higantihun</form> <pos>a</pos> gigantic.

<p id=6310><form>higasbut</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <formx>gasbut</formx>. exclamation of disapproval or displeasure at s.t. <i>Gasbut ba sab nang tawhána uy, ingun muuban, unyà dì diay tu,</i> Darn that man. He says he will go and at the last moment he says he won&apos;t. <i>Gasbut sad ning sipíra uy! Dì man masira,</i> Confound this zipper! It won&apos;t close. <i>Higasbut bayang bayhána! Dì pabayli mu rag gwápa,</i> To hell with that woman! She refuses to dance. You&apos;d think she was beautiful or s.t.

<p id=6311><form>hígaw</form> <xr>= <sc>HÍGAL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6312><form>higayun</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>GAYUN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6313><form>higdà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>lie down</tr>. <i>Kanang katri <pb n=319>mauy higdái,</i> Lie down on that bed. <number>2</number> spend the night. <i>Adtu ku muhigdà sa hutil,</i> I&apos;ll stay in the hotel. <number>2a</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> stay s.w. to comply with a social obligation. <i>Higdáan ku sad sila arun way máhay,</i> I&apos;ll also stay a night at their house, so there will be no recriminations. <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> put s.t. down in a lying position. <i>Átung higdáun (pahigdáun) ang pusti kay átung sipilyáhan,</i> We&apos;ll lay the post down because we have to plane it. <number>4</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> <form>&mdash; sa banig</form> be <tr>bedridden</tr>. <i>Usa na ka búlan karun nga naghigdà siya sa banig,</i> She has been bedridden for one month. <number>5</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> <form>&mdash; sa bahandì</form> live on a luxurious, wealthy scale. <number>6</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> <form>&mdash; lang ug magdaut</form> work so hard that one barely rests (lit. lie down only when sick). <i>Muhigdà lang ug magdaut nang tawhána tungud sa kakusug sa íyang nigusyu,</i> That man&apos;s business is so good that he barely has time to rest. <number>7</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> <form>&mdash; nga magkaun (nagkaun)</form> have sexual intercourse (humorous). <i>Basta maghigdà gánì nga magkaun, mumabdus giyud,</i> If you make love, of course you&apos;ll get pregnant. <form>-ánan</form> <pos>n</pos> bed, bedroom.

<p id=6314><form>higkù</form> <pos>a</pos> dirty and wet. <i>Ang tugkaran higkù kaáyu sa tingúlan,</i> The yard is dirty and wet during the rainy season. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become dirty and wet. <i>Baldiyúhi ang salug kay naghigkù ang húgaw ug túbig,</i> Rinse off the floor because the dirt and water are making a mess.

<p id=6315><form>higmuyù</form> <xr>= <sc>HISAGMUYÙ</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>SAGMUYÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6316><form>higpit</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>narrow</tr>, for s.t. to be small such that it restricts motion, causes difficulty. <i>Higpit nga dálan,</i> Narrow street. <i>Higpit ang panaptun pára himúung bistída,</i> The cloth is too narrow to make into a dress. <i>Higpit ang ámung balay pára námung tanan,</i> Our house is too small for all of us. <number>2</number> <tr>strict</tr>, holding a tight rein on s.t. <i>Higpit siya sa mga impliyádu,</i> He is very strict with the employees. <i>Higpit kaáyu mupaguwang kwarta,</i> He keeps tight control over his money. <number>3</number> be in tight financial circumstances. <i>Higpit ang ílang panimuyù,</i> They live in very tight circumstances. <i>Higpit ang kwarta run. Lisud tang makalún,</i> Money is very tight now. We will have difficulty getting a loan. <number>4</number> have a <tr>sharp rivalry</tr>. <i>Higpit ang indigay sa duha,</i> The two were in sharp competition. <i>Ang higpit kung kaáway sa pulitika,</i> My keen political rival. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> be <tr>strict</tr> with s.o. <i>Higpíti ang ímung anak kay dalága ra ba,</i> Be strict with your daughter. She is full grown now. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2; b4]</itype> be in a tight financial situation. <i>Kanang wà usbáwig swildu higpítan run sa panimuyù,</i> Whoever didn&apos;t get a raise is going to find life difficult now.

<p id=6317><form>hígup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>sip</tr>, take in liquid by sucking it up with air, take in air in the same manner. <i>Higúpi ug diyútay kay miáwas ang bír sa básu,</i> Sip off a little beer because it is running over. <form>-an, <corr>-</corr>ánan</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. from which one sips a liquid.

<p id=6318><form>higus, hígus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S]</itype> for a body to <tr>waste away</tr>, become thin rapidly. <i>Mihígus ang láwas sa masakitun,</i> The sick person&apos;s body wasted away. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4]</itype> thin out in quantity, output. <i>Mihigus na ang íyang mga súkì,</i> His customers have dropped in number. <i>Nagkahigus na ang búnga sa lubi,</i> The coconut trees are yielding less and less.

<p id=6319><form>higut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> tie s.t. up. <i>Higti ang irù arun dì kapaak,</i> Tie the dog up so it can&apos;t bite. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> tie s.t. to s.t. <i>Ihigut ang manuk sa kural,</i> Tie the chicken to the fence. <i>Ihigut ang dúyan sa káhuy,</i> Tie the hammock to the tree. <number>1c</number> <formx>&mdash; sa pilitína</formx> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> for a man to be married (lit. tied to the apron strings) (humorous). <i>Gihigtan na nà sa pilitína,</i> He&apos;s already hitched. <number>1d</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> <form>&mdash; sa trabáhu</form> be tied to one&apos;s work. <i>Wà ku kaduaw nímu kay nahigut ku sa trabáhu,</i> I was not able to visit you because I was completely tied up. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> be coiled around s.t. <i>Sawa nga naghigut sa sanga,</i> A snake that was coiled around the branch. <number>3</number> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> raise a gamecock. <i>Manghigut kug mga igtalarì,</i> I&apos;ll raise gamecocks. <number>4</number> tie up money. <number>4a</number> <itype>[B1256; b8]</itype> for an amount of money to be tied up in s.t. <i>Nahigut ákung puhúnan sa nigusyu,</i> My capital is tied up in the business. <i>Nahigtan níyag tris ang ákung diyis,</i> Three pesos of the ten I won belong to him. (Lit. Three pesos of his are tied up to my ten.) <number>4b</number> <itype>[AC; b6]</itype> have money tied in a common amount to dispense with making change (as for example, in gambling where money keeps changing hands). <i>Nagkahígut mi áring diyis,</i> Our money is all included in that ten peso bill. <number>4c</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> give an advance partial payment of the bride price (refundable if the marriage fails to go through). <i>Mangulitáwu ka ánang bayhána nga gihigtan na?</i> Are you going to court that woman, when a partial payment of the bride price has already been given? <number>5</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>hang oneself</tr>. <i>Maghigut nà siya ug dì nímu sugtun,</i> He&apos;ll hang himself if you don&apos;t accept him. <number>6</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a fishing net. <i>Ang púkut nga íyang gihigut,</i> The net he wove. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. used to tie up. <number>2</number> amount tied up in s.t.: in business, in a common, fund, in a bride price. <number>3</number> <tr>noose</tr> in hanging. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <number>1</number> <formx>&mdash; sa asáwa</formx> be <tr>henpecked</tr> (lit. allow one&apos;s <pb n=320>wife to tie him up). <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; sa pilitína</formx> for a man to get married (allow himself to get tied to an apron string). <i>Dì ku magpahigut sa pilitína,</i> I won&apos;t get hitched. <form>higtanan</form> <pos>n</pos> place s.t. is tied. <form>tigúlang sa higtanan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> get to be a spinster. <i>Maáyu pang matigúwang sa higtanan kay sa maminyù nímu,</i> I&apos;d rather be an old maid than marry you. <form>ig-l-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to tie s.t. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. tied to s.t. <form>hinigtan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>gamecock</tr>. <number>2</number> s.t. tied up. <form>hinigtag lánut</form> money which is not readily dispensed (lit. tied with abaca fibers). <i>Ang kwarta ni Lúlu hinigtag lánut. Ug muhátag, usa ra giyud ka dakù,</i> Grandfather squeezes his <corr sic=nickles>nickels</corr>. If he gives anything at all, it&apos;s no more than a penny. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> occupation of raising gamecocks.

<p id=6320><form>higwaus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B16]</itype> be <tr>uneasy</tr>, <tr>anxious</tr>. <i>Naghigwaus siya kay dúgayng naulì ang íyang anak,</i> She felt uneasy because her daughter came home late. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> be uneasy because of a desire to do s.t. <i>Naghigwaus siya ug adtu sa bayli,</i> He is anxious to get to the dance. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>uneasiness</tr>, <tr>anxiety</tr>.

<p id=6321><form>hi hi</form> word used in writing to represent the sound of laughter.

<p id=6322><form>hihin</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; a12]</itype> flock, move in groups. <i>Mihihin pagpanulud ang mga táwu sa simbahan sa kalit nga pag-ulan,</i> The people flocked into the church when it suddenly rained. <i>Áway ang nakapahihin sa mga táwu pagpanágan,</i> The fight made the people run away en masse. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> move in great numbers s.w.

<p id=6323><form>Hihúba</form> <xr>= <sc>HIYÚBA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6324><form>hik</form> <pos>n</pos> form used in writing to represent hiccoughs or the sound emitted by a drunk.

<p id=6325><form>hikabhikab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> for the heart to beat fast in excitement at the thought of achieving a great desire. <i>Naghikabhikab kug pakigkítà sa ákung trátu,</i> I&apos;m all excited about meeting my girl friend.

<p id=6326><form>híkad</form> <xr>= <sc>HIKLAD</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6327><form>hikadhikad</form> <xr>= <sc>HIKABHIKAB</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6328><form>híkap</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>touch</tr>, feel s.t. with the hand or fingers. <i>Muhíkap si Máma sa agtang sa gihilantan,</i> Mother would feel the forehead of the feverish child. <i>Kinsay naghíkap áring bungbung nga bag-ung pinintálan?</i> Who touched this freshly painted wall? <i>Átù kunung hikápun ug hinug na ba ning kaymítu,</i> Let me touch this star apple to see if it is ripe yet. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3S; a3]</itype> use s.t. which requires manual dexterity. <i>Ambut ug antígu pa ba ku kay dúgayng wà ku makahíkap (makahikap) ug sista,</i> I wonder if I still can do it. I haven&apos;t touched the guitar in a long time. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> touch, use s.o. else&apos;s things without permission. <i>Ayawg hikápa nang mga butang dílì ímu,</i> Don&apos;t touch other people&apos;s things. <number>4</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> come to own s.t. <i>Wà pa giyud ku makahikap ug singkwinta písus tibuuk,</i> I have never gotten my hands on a fifty-peso bill. <number>5</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> get hold of s.t. to use it. <i>Wà tay mahíkap nga magastu sa uspital,</i> We don&apos;t have access to any funds to pay for her hospitalization. <number>6</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> <form>&mdash; sa dílì hilikápun</form> scratch a part of the body that doesn&apos;t itch out of frustration or in not knowing what to do. <i>Bídang apikíha nákù sa kwarta. Makahíkap ta sa dílì hilikápun,</i> My! I&apos;m so short of money! I&apos;m scratching my head, even though it doesn&apos;t itch. <number>7</number> <itype>[A123S]</itype> <form>&mdash; sa lubut</form> for s.t. good to happen to s.o. to make him do s.t. unwonted and particularly nice. <i>Mibangkag paniudtu. Nakahikap dagway sa lubut,</i> He treated us to lunch. S.t. good must have happened to him. <number>8</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <form>&mdash; ug túbig</form> get oneself wet. <i>Dì siya muhíkap ug túbig ug náa níya,</i> She doesn&apos;t bathe when she menstruates. <form>hikaphíkap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> twiddle or toy with s.t. <i>Naghikaphíkap si Dinsiyu sa íyang búngut,</i> Dencio twiddled with his beard.

<p id=6329><form>hikat</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for the eye to look distorted due to a scar on the eyelid. <number>2</number> be crooked from being buttoned wrong or sewn so that the edges don&apos;t match up. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> get to look crooked or distorted. <i>Nahikat ang íyang mata dihang miuwat ang mibutu níyang buwinggit,</i> His eyes got a distorted appearance when the stye formed a scar. <i>Nahíkat ang íyang sinínà kay wà magtúngud ang pagkabutúnis,</i> Her dress is buttoned wrong and is all crooked.

<p id=6330><form>híkaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> deny, deprive one of s.t. which he should have. <i>Dílì ku ikaw hikáwan sa ímung pangayúun,</i> I won&apos;t deny you your request. <i>Ginúu, ayaw intáwun ihíkaw kanákù ang langitnung kalípay,</i> God, please don&apos;t deny me heavenly bliss. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>a</pos> devoid or deprived of s.t., esp. of very important necessities. <i>Bátang hinikáwan sa inahánung gugma,</i> A child deprived of a mother&apos;s love. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> depriving others, <tr>selfish</tr>. <form>ka-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>selfishness</tr>.

<p id=6331><form>híkaw<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>HÍGAL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6332><form>híkay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>prepare food</tr>. <i>Kinsay muhíkay sa átung pagkáun?</i> Who will prepare our food? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> hold a <tr>banquet</tr>, eating party. <i>Maghíkay mi rung Pasku,</i> We shall have a banquet this Christmas. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> process or arrange in preparation of s.t. <i>Mugíkan mi ug mahíkay na ang ámung pasapurti,</i> We&apos;ll leave when our passports are processed. <i>Ang tahù gihíkay ni H. M. Kantágu,</i> <pb n=321>The report was prepared by H. M. Cantago. <pos>n</pos> <tr>feast</tr>, <tr>banquet</tr>. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>prepared</tr>. <form>-l-un</form> <pos>n</pos> things used for preparation. <form>tig-, tag-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>cook</tr>. <number>2</number> person in charge of preparing s.t.

<p id=6333><form>hikdat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> for eyebrows to arch. <i>Muhikdat ang kílay níya basta masukù siya,</i> Her eyebrows become arched when she is angry. <pos>a</pos> eyebrows that are arched.

<p id=6334><form>hikìhíkì</form> <xr>= <sc>HUKÙHÚKÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6335><form>hiklad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> lay, spread out, usually for display. <i>Ayaw ihiklad ang inyung baligyà sa asíras,</i> Don&apos;t spread your wares on the sidewalk. <number>2</number> unfold, make known s.o.&apos;s secrets. <i>Gihiklad sa huwis ang íyang mga tinagúan,</i> The judge laid open all his secrets.

<p id=6336><form>hiklin, hikling</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB26; c]</itype> put s.t. aside and out of the way, <tr>step aside</tr>. <i>Ang mga napárut mihikling lang sa daplin,</i> The losers stepped aside. <i>Ihiklin ang síya sa iskína,</i> Put this chair away in the corner. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>take refuge</tr>, <tr>hide</tr>. <i>Swirting nakahiklin siya luyu sa káhuy,</i> Luckily he was able to hide behind the tree. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>save</tr>, <tr>set aside</tr>. <i>Maghiklin tag kwarta pára sa átung katigulangun,</i> We should set aside some amount for our old <corr sic="áge">age</corr>. <i>Dúna siyay gihikling nga pagkáun pára nímu,</i> She has put some food aside for you. <number>4</number> transfer one&apos;s residence to escape s.t. <i>Mihiklin mi pagkasúnug sa ámung balay,</i> We moved away when our house burnt down.

<p id=6337><form>hiklùhiklù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; c1P]</itype> shake the head from side to side in embarrassment upon asking s.o. for s.t. or when praised. <i>Nagpahiklùhiklù (naghiklùhiklù) kay naíkug,</i> She was shaking her head out of embarrassment.

<p id=6338><form>hiknat, hiknit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> pull slightly with the fingers as if stretching s.t. <i>Walà kung kabantay nga kadtung táwung naghiknat sa ákung dunggan mauy nagkáwat sa aríyus,</i> I did not notice that the man who was pulling my ears was stealing my earrings.

<p id=6339><form>hiktarya</form> <xr>= <sc>IKTARYA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6340><form>hiktin</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> narrower than normal. <i>Hiktin kaáyung dalána. Dì kaagiag trák,</i> This street is too narrow for a truck to pass through. <i>Hiktin ra ning panaptúna pára bistidúhun,</i> This piece of cloth is too narrow for a dress. <i>Labihan kahiktin sa íyang sinínà,</i> Her dress was way too small. <number>2</number> <tr>narrow-minded</tr>. <i>Hiktin kaáyu siyag mga panghunàhúnà sa pulitika,</i> He is very narrow-minded about politics. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become <tr>too narrow</tr>, <tr>small</tr>.

<p id=6341><form>híkug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> <tr>strangle</tr>, <tr>hang oneself</tr>. <i>Diriyut ku mahíkug kay gibira ang ákung kurbáta,</i> I almost choked to death because s.o. pulled my necktie. <i>Maghíkug na lang ku kay gibulagan ku,</i> I&apos;ll hang myself because we broke up. <number>2</number> <itype>[B146; b6]</itype> commit suicide by any means. <i>Pangpang nga íyang gihikúgan,</i> The cliff where he committed suicide. &dagger;

<p id=6342><form>hikùhíkù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; c1P]</itype> <number>1</number> rock, shake with laughter, dancing. <i>Naghikùhíkù siya pagkinatáwa,</i> She rocked back and forth with laughter. <i>Maáyu kaáyu siyang muhikùhíkù sa láwas samtang nagsáyaw,</i> She swayed her body beautifully as she danced. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>HIKLÙHIKLÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6343><form>híkum</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c2]</itype> do s.t. stealthily to avoid being noticed. <i>Mihíkum siyag súd sa kwartu sa babáyi,</i> He went inside the room of the girl stealthily. <i>Hikúmi (ihíkum) ug hátag ang kwarta,</i> Give him the money secretly. <pos>a</pos> done in a stealthy, furtive manner.

<p id=6344><form>hikut<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>HIGUT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6345><form>hikut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>slant-eyed</tr>. <i>Hikut ug mga mata ang kasagáran sa mga Hapun,</i> Japanese are usually slant-eyed. <number>2</number> <tr>Japanese</tr>. <i>Ang mga ayruplánung hikut,</i> Japanese airplanes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become slant-eyed.

<p id=6346><form>hikutar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>attend to</tr> s.t. and get it done. <i>Si Pápa ang muhikutar (maghikutar) pagpangítag balay nga átung kabalhínan,</i> Father will take care of looking for a house for us to move to. <form>hikutádu</form> <pos>a</pos> taking great care, being very concerned. <i>Ang purman hikutádu nga mahuman dáyun ang trabáhu,</i> The foreman sees to it that the work gets done right away. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be <tr>attentive</tr> to s.t.

<p id=6347><form>hikuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do s.t. stealthily to avoid being noticed. <i>Muhíkuy siyag biyà sa báy magabíi,</i> He sneaks out of the house at night.

<p id=6348><form>hikyad</form> <xr>= <sc>HIKLAD</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6349><form>hílà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> move, do s.t. slowly while at the same time wiggling the body. <i>Naghílà siya sa dálan,</i> She wiggled as she walked down the street. <i>Ayaw hiláa (ihílà) ang ímung linihukan kay mu ra kag báyut,</i> Don&apos;t wiggle while you walk or you will look like a fairy. <number>2</number> wriggle staying in place or wriggle out of s.t. <i>Nagawas ang bátà sa banig kay mihílà man,</i> The baby wriggled off the edge of the mat. <i>Gihílà na lang sa ginápus ang íyang láwas arun muiskápu,</i> The man that was tied wriggled around in order to escape. <number>3</number> cheat, swindle s.t. out of s.o. (slang). <i>Gihílà níla ang katigayúnan sa tigúlang,</i> They swindled the property out of the old man. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> an edible marine slug, usually found clinging to stones. <form>hilàhilà</form> <pos>n</pos> general name for <tr>slugs</tr> and <tr>snails</tr>, land and marine. <form>hilahílà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> wriggle around. <number>2</number> remain seated, instead of working. <i>Makahilàhílà ka kay daghan kag masúgù,</i> You can afford to sit on your behind because you have lots of servants.

<pb n=322>

<p id=6350><form>hílà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a1]</itype> make a slash in flesh with s.t. sharp. <i>Hiláa ang pinaakan sa bitin ug padug-a,</i> Slit the snakebite and let it bleed.

<p id=6351><form>hilab, hílab<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> slice off a thin flat piece. <i>Akuy muhilab sa isdà nga ipaun,</i> I&apos;ll slice off some of the flesh from the fish to use as bait. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> the sharp edge of a blade.

<p id=6352><form>hílab<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> empty or smarting sensation in the stomach caused by hunger, fear, or acidity. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; a4b4]</itype> feel a sharp revolting sensation on the pit of the stomach due to hunger, fear, etc. <i>Naghílab ang ákung tiyan sa kagútum,</i> My stomach hurts due to hunger<corr sic=",">.</corr> <i>Mu rag hilábun ang ákung atay sa kakuyaw,</i> I seem to feel a sharp pang in the pit of my stomach because of my fear. <i>Muinum kug litsi basta hilában ku sa tiyan,</i> I drink milk when my stomach hurts.

<p id=6353><form>hilabut</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>LÁBUT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6354><form>hiláda</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> food put on ice to keep from spoiling. <number>2</number> drink made with scraped ice, sugar, water, and flavoring. <number>2a</number> <xr>= <sc>KAHILÁDA</sc></xr>, <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>KAHIL<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> put food on ice to keep it from spoiling. <i>Hiladáhun ang mga isdà arun dì madubuk,</i> The fish will be put on ice so they will not spoil. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> prepare iced drinks. <form>hiladur</form> <pos>n</pos> one who puts food on ice.

<p id=6355><form>hílak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b3c]</itype> <tr>cry</tr>. <i>Naghilak si Pitra kay gibyáan sa trátu,</i> Petra wept because her boy friend left her. <i>Dì nà ángayng hilákan,</i> That&apos;s not worth crying about. <i>Wà na kuy lúhà nga ihílak,</i> I have no more tears to cry. <form>mag- ang panahun ug dílì</form> <itype>[A13]</itype> [so-and-so] is sure to happen. <i>Maghilak ang adlaw ug dílì siya mahubug,</i> That&apos;ll be the day when he doesn&apos;t get drunk. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> action of crying. <number>2</number> turn to cry. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>MA-(&rarr;)</sc>.</xr> <form>hilakhílak, hinilakay</form> <pos>a</pos> tear jerker. <i>Ságad sa mga salídang Tagálug mga hilakhílak,</i> Most Tagalog pictures are tear jerkers. <form>-in-, pag-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> action of continuous crying. <form>ka-un(&rarr;)</form> feel like crying. <form>ma-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> given to crying easily. <i>Mahilak kaáyu ning batáa,</i> It doesn&apos;t take much to make this child cry. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> be in constant tears. <i>Ang nagmahilak kung kasingkásing,</i> My heart which is constantly crying. <form>pala-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> crybaby.

<p id=6356><form>hílam</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> search for s.t. by feeling about with the hands. <i>Gihílam níya ang íyang pusil sa uluhan,</i> He felt about for his gun on the headboard. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> feel a surface in detail with the fingertips. <i>Hiláma ákung úlu dì ba náay búkul,</i> Feel my head and you will find a bump. <number>3</number> <itype>[c3]</itype> be at one&apos;s disposal, available for an emergency. <i>Wà giyud tay mahílam nga bugas,</i> We can&apos;t get our hands on any rice. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> feel one&apos;s way around in the dark. <i>Misulud siya sa kwartu nagpanghilam sa ngitngit,</i> He went into the room groping around in the dark.

<p id=6357><form>hilamun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>weeds</tr> growing in a cultivated field. <i>Ang mga hilamun makasáwut sa humay,</i> Weeds stunt the growth of the rice.

<p id=6358><form>hilam-us</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> wash s.o.&apos;s face. <i>Akuy muhilam-us sa bátà,</i> I will wash the child&apos;s face. <number>2</number> <itype>[c]</itype> take insults, shame with equanimity without being unduly perturbed. <i>Ihilam-us ku na lang ang ílang mga pangyúbit,</i> I won&apos;t pay any attention to their hoots of derision. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> wash one&apos;s face. <i>Manghilam-us siya únà matúlug,</i> She washes her face before going to bed. <form>-ánan, paN-an</form> <pos>n</pos> vessel for washing the face.

<p id=6359><form>hílan</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for an uncultivated, unpopulated area to be disease-infested or infested with supernatural beings. <i>Hílan nga dapit ang gihátag sa gubyirnu,</i> The land that the government gave was disease-infested forest land. <i>Misum-uk sila sa hilan nga lasang,</i> They came into a lonely and frightening forest. <number>2</number> place that is dangerous because of the type of people that live there. <i>Hílan kaáyu ang Tundung puy-an. Daghang naglukluk nga kriminal,</i> Tondo is a dangerous place to live. There are so many criminals around. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> for a forest or thicket to become disease-infested. <number>2</number> for a place to become dangerous because of the bad types that infest it.

<p id=6360><form>hilánat</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fever</tr>. <i>Taas kaáyu ang íyang hilánat,</i> His fever is very high. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; b4]</itype> have a fever. <i>Gihilantan (mihilánat) ang bátà ganína sa buntag,</i> The child had a fever (developed a fever) this morning. <form>hilantan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> have a fever. <i>Naghilantan ang bátà,</i> The child has a fever. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>feverish</tr>, about to have a fever.

<p id=6361><form>hilang</form> <pos>a</pos> for things in a row or woven to be further apart than they should be. <i>Hilang ug ngípun,</i> Having teeth far apart. <i>Hilang pagkalála,</i> Woven too loosely. <i>Hilang pagkatanum ang mais,</i> The corn was planted too far apart. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6c1]</itype> be too far apart. <i>Muhilang ang mga lugas sa mais ug way abúnu,</i> The corn will bear ears lacking in kernels if it isn&apos;t fertilized.

<p id=6362><form>hilangyud</form> <xr>= <sc>HULANGYUD</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6363><form>hílap</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cut a wide slice off s.t. <i>Akuy muhílap sa karni nga kusahúsun,</i> I&apos;ll slice the meat to make it into jerked meat. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; a12]</itype> affect one&apos;s feelings deeply. <i>Daw hilápun ang ákung kasingkásing nga magsud-ung sa mga binyáan,</i> I was touched to the depths of my heart looking at the abandoned <pb n=323>children. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> touching deeply.

<p id=6364><form>hilas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> give s.o. a small share of s.t. one has obtained. <i>Gihilasan mig tagsa ka sipì sa íyang ságing,</i> He gave us each a hand of bananas.

<p id=6365><form>hílas</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>obscene</tr>, <tr>lewd</tr>. <i>Hílas nga sini,</i> Obscene movies. <i>Hílas kaáyu kang manulti,</i> You talk terribly lewdly. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; b4]</itype> be, become lewd, find s.t. so. <i>Gihilásan kung nagtan-aw ánang law-ay nga salída,</i> I was revolted looking at that dirty movie. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b4]</itype> make oneself revolting, ridiculous by doing s.t. improper. <i>Naghílas kag kanta mu rag dílì yabag,</i> You are making yourself ridiculous singing off key like that. <i>Gihilásan ku sa íyang hambug,</i> I find it revolting the way he brags.

<p id=6366><form>hilaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>uncooked</tr>, <tr>raw</tr>. <i>Hilaw pa nang kan-un,</i> The rice is still uncooked. <number>2</number> <tr>unripe</tr>, green. <i>Aslum ang manggang hilaw,</i> Green mangoes taste sour. <number>3</number> <tr>pale</tr>, light in color. <i>Hilaw nga pagkapula ang pintal sa ílang balay,</i> Their house is painted a pale red. <number>4</number> for one&apos;s facial expression to be artificial and unnatural. <i>Hilaw ang íyang pahiyum kay sad-an nákù siya,</i> She gave me a forced smile because she had a guilty conscience for what she did to me. <number>4a</number> having an embarrassed expression on the face. <i>Hilaw ang ílang dagway sa nasakpan sila,</i> They had an embarrassed expression on their faces when they were caught. <number>5</number> <ix>in phrases:</ix> <formx>bibingka nga &mdash;</formx> <pos>n</pos> woman&apos;s genitalia. <formx>budbud nga &mdash;</formx> <pos>n</pos> <tr>penis</tr>. <formx>&mdash; nga ayis</formx> ice that hasn&apos;t frozen well, having a white soft part in the middle. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13B16; a12]</itype> be halfway cooked, cook s.t. halfway. <i>Kinsay naghilaw sa paglútù sa kan-un?</i> Who cooked the rice that is half done? <number>2</number> <itype>[B6; a12]</itype> get an artificial, forced expression on the face. <number>3</number> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> get an embarrassed expression on the face. <number>4</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be unripe, green. <i>Ug mahilaw ang mangga ayawg ipakáun sa bátà,</i> If the mango is green, don&apos;t give it to the child to eat. <form>tagilhaw</form> <pos>a</pos> not yet fully ripe.

<p id=6367><form>*hílay</form> <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>carnal vices</tr>. <form>balay sa ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> house of prostitution.

<p id=6368><form>hilbas</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. herb, cultivated for medicinal uses: <bio>Artemisia vulgaris</bio>.

<p id=6369><form>hilhig</form> <pos>a</pos> for s.t. woven to have threads displaced. <i>Hilhig nga pagkalála ang banig,</i> A poorly woven mat, such that some threads are out of place. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> for the threads in a piece of cloth to get pushed far apart. <i>Dalì rang mahilhig ning muskitíru,</i> The threads of the mosquito net easily get loose.

<p id=6370><form>hilhil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> slice a piece off of s.t. which has bulk. <i>Hilhíla ang kunggu sa ímung suwang,</i> Cut the wart off your chin.

<p id=6371><form>hilíbis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab]</itype> saw or cut thin pieces off the edge of s.t. flat. <i>Naghilíbis kug lubi pára usap-usápun,</i> I sliced off the edge of the coconut meat to munch. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> thin strips sliced off the edges.

<p id=6372><form>hílig</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; a]</itype> be <tr>leaning</tr>, <tr>tilted</tr> to one side. <i>Mihílig ang sakayan nga gihapak sa balud,</i> The boat leaned to one side as it was battered by the waves. <number>2</number> develop a <tr>tendency</tr>, <tr>inclination</tr>. <i>Nahílig siya sa panúgal kay nakadaug man siyag kausa,</i> He developed an inclination for gambling because he won once. <pos>n</pos> <tr>inclination</tr>, <tr>liking</tr>. <i>Wà kuy hílig sa pangwarta,</i> I have no interest in making money. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>tilted</tr>. <pos>n</pos> counterbalance in kites attached to the wing to make the wing tilt upwards and stabilize the flight. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a]</itype> put such a counterbalance on a kite. <form>ma-, ma-un</form> <tr>fond of</tr>.

<p id=6373><form>hilihud</form> <xr>= <sc>HULIHUD</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6374><form>hilikuptir</form> <pos>n</pos> helicopter. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> ride on a helicopter.

<p id=6375><form>hilimásaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> rinse the body off. <i>Hilimasáwi si Dyunyur sa sabun,</i> Rinse the soap off of Junior. <form>paN-</form> rinse oneself off. <i>Nanghilimásaw ku gíkan sa pagkalígù sa dágat,</i> After I went swimming in the ocean I rinsed myself off.

<p id=6376><form>hiling</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> examine s.t. carefully, touching it to see what is there. <i>Gihiling níya ang irù ug may libun ba,</i> He examined the dog to see if there were any ticks. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> examine one&apos;s health. <i>Ayawg píyung ug hilngun ang ímung mata sa duktur,</i> Don&apos;t close your eyes when the doctor examines them.

<p id=6377><form>hilíra</form> <pos>n</pos> line of objects. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put, be in a line or row. <i>Naghilíra sa kadaghan ang íyang sapátus,</i> She has rows upon rows of shoes.

<p id=6378><form>hílis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2; aP]</itype> <number>1</number> for s.t. to lose part of its bulk by melting, friction, dissolution; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Ang batuung karsáda muhílis ug gúma,</i> A rough road wears tires down. <i>Muhílis ang yílu ug hiinitan,</i> Ice melts if you leave it in the sun. <i>Ang ihirsisyu makapahílis (makahílis) sa tambuk,</i> Exercise gets rid of fat. <i>Hilísa (pahilísa) ang tablíta sa túbig,</i> Let the tablet dissolve in the water. <number>2</number> <tr>digest</tr>. <i>Wà ku kahilísi sa ákung gikaun,</i> I didn&apos;t digest my dinner. <number>3</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> feel small. <i>Nahílis ku sa kaúlaw,</i> I felt small on account of my shame. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <number>1</number> worn down, having part melted away. <i>Hilis ug tikud ang sapátus,</i> The shoes are worn down at the heels. <number>2</number> backing down in a fight. <i>Hilis ming tanan ánang bagísa,</i> We&apos;re all scared of that toughie. <number>3</number> expression promising harm to s.o. <i>Hilis giyud <pb n=324>mu nákù ug inyu kung sulayan,</i> You&apos;ll see what I&apos;m like (lit. you&apos;ll be worn down) if you test me. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; a12]</itype> back down in a fight, cause s.o. to do so. <form>-in-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> fatty flesh cooked until the fat melts and only a hard crust remains.

<p id=6379><form>hilit</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>secluded</tr>, <tr>isolated</tr> in location. <i>Hilit ning lugára kay layug silíngan,</i> This place is secluded because there are no near neighbors. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be a secluded place. <i>Ug mahilit ang lugar, háyan alabtan,</i> If the place is secluded, there are likely to be ghosts. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> go to a secluded place. <i>Nagpahilit sila arun makalugar,</i> They went to a secluded place to do it. <form>ka-an, kahilithilitan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>isolated</tr>, <tr>secluded</tr> places. <form>kina-an</form> <pos>n</pos> most isolated, secluded place.

<p id=6380><form>hilmit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>helmet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> wear a helmet. <form>hilmithilmit</form> <pos>n</pos> glans penis (humorous).

<p id=6381><form>hilt sintir</form> <pos>n</pos> public <tr>health clinic</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a health clinic.

<p id=6382><form>hilu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>poison</tr> ingested. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> poison s.t. or s.o. <i>Kinsay naghilu sa irù?</i> Who poisoned the dog? <number>1a</number> poison s.o. by magical means. <i>Manghilu sila pinaági sa tayhup,</i> They poison people by blowing on them. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> give s.o. bad or wrong ideas about s.t. <i>Kinsay mihilu nímu bátuk nákù?</i> Who poisoned your mind against me? <i>Gihiluan níya ákung hunàhúnà báhin sa pagpalit ug awtu,</i> He gave me the bad idea of buying a car. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> commit suicide by taking poison. <i>Naghilu siya kay gibulagan sa trátu,</i> He poisoned himself because he was jilted. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> kill with poison. <i>Ang tubli makahílu sa isdà,</i> The derris plant kills fish by poisoning them. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be physically affected by a stench. <i>Báhung makahílu,</i> A stench that knocks you over. <form>hilúan</form> <pos>n</pos> one who practices magical poisoning. One becomes a <ix>hilúan</ix> only by killing a member of his own family and must continue killing at a specified rate to stay alive and healthy.

<p id=6383><form>hílu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>thread</tr>. <form>&mdash; dikaríta</form> <pos>n</pos> spool of thread. <form>&mdash; nga pinalus</form> <pos>n</pos> skein thread.

<p id=6384><form>hilú</form> <pos>n</pos> <ix>expression used upon answering the phone:</ix> hello. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> say hello on the phone.

<p id=6385><form>hílug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> rub oil on the skin. <i>Hilúgi ug linimintu ang pamául,</i> Rub liniment on the sore muscles. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> give the extreme unction. <i>Gihílug (gihilúgan) siya sa párì,</i> He was given the extreme unction by the priest. <form>&mdash; sa himalatyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>extreme unction</tr>.

<p id=6386><form>hílum</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>silent</tr>, <tr>quiet</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>secret</tr>, not overt. <i>Hílum nga gugma,</i> Secret love. <i>Naghilak siya sa hílum,</i> He cried in secret. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; aP]</itype> be silent, quiet. <i>Kun dílì mu muhílum sa klási,</i> If you do not keep quiet in class. <i>Nahílum ang mga trabahadur pag-abut sa purman,</i> The workers stopped talking when the foreman arrived. <number>2</number> <itype>[ac]</itype> keep s.t. secret, hush s.t. up. <i>Hilúma lang ang nahitabù,</i> Hush up the incident. <i>Ihílum ning ákung isulti nímu, ha,</i> Keep what I&apos;m going to tell you for yourself. <i>Hustu na ning dus syintus ihílum sa pulis,</i> Two hundred pesos is enough to shut the cop up. <number>3</number> <itype>[aP]</itype> for a court case to peter out. <i>Ambut ngánu, apan nahílum man lang tung ílang kásu,</i> I don&apos;t know why, but their case was just sort of fizzled out. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do s.t. secretly or in silence. <i>Mihílum siya paggawas sa kwartu,</i> He sneaked out of the room. <i>Hilúma pagkúhà ang yáwi ni Máma,</i> Get the key from Mother on the sly. <form>(&rarr;)</form> Shut up! <i>Hilum dihà!</i> Shut up! <form>paka-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> keep quiet, remain silent. <i>Nagpakahilum na lámang si Míla sa usa ka suuk,</i> Mila just remained silent in a corner. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> silence. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>peaceful</tr> and <tr>quiet</tr>. <form>-un(&rarr;), ma-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> not given to talking.

<p id=6387><form>hilus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26; c1]</itype> for s.t. tied securely in place to slip off, move out of place by sliding. <i>Nakabuhì ang kanding kay mihilus ang sinumpayan sa písì,</i> The goat escaped because the knot which tied the two pieces of rope slipped off. <i>Nahilus ang ákung pagkuput sa sanga,</i> I lost my hold on the branch. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1B12; b]</itype> for the skin to get burnt by heat or chafing action. <i>Nahilusan (nahilus) ákung buktun sa túbig ínit,</i> My arm got burnt with the hot water. <i>Nagkahilus ákung pálad pagpinugung sa pasul,</i> My palm is getting chafed from trying to hold the fishing line. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> peel off s.t. hard after loosening it by dipping it in boiling water. <i>Dì pa makahilus nang tubíga sa kuku sa bábuy kay dì pa búkal,</i> That water can&apos;t get the pig&apos;s hooves loose because it is not boiling. <number>3a</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> for one&apos;s whole being be scorched (literary). <i>Midukù si Magda kay daw nahilus siya sa tinan-awan ni Migil,</i> Magda seemed to melt under Miguel&apos;s fiery gaze. <pos>n</pos> inflammation of the skin caused by burning or chafing. <i>Hilus gumíkan sa hapin,</i> Diaper rash. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for the skin to peel as the result of burning or chafing. <form>-in-</form> water taken off of boiled rice before it is fully cooked.

<p id=6388><form>hílut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>massage</tr>, pull the bones for medicinal purposes. A wide variety of symptoms are treated by <ix>hílut</ix> ranging from swellings and fractures to fevers and pains. <i>Maáyu siyang muhílut ug piang,</i> He is good in setting dislocated joints. <i>Kamau siyang muhílut ug bátang suhì,</i> He knows how to massage a baby that is upside down in the <pb n=325>womb. <i>Hilúta ang tampihak,</i> Massage the temples. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> repair personal relations. <i>Kadalì rang mahílut ang gikabangían sa duruha,</i> It will be easy to settle their differences. <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> repair a defect with makeshift methods. <i>Dílì mahílut ning dipiktúha kinahanglan ilísan ang písa,</i> There is no way to take care of this defect without replacing the part. <number>4</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> stretch a failing grade near the borderline to allow the student to pass. <pos>n</pos> action of massaging. <i>Dílì madá sa hílut,</i> Massage can&apos;t take care of it. <form>maN-r-, mag-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> folk doctor who treats by massaging.

<p id=6389><form>hiluy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c]</itype> for the eyes to droop. <i>Naghiluy na ang íyang mata sa kakatulgun,</i> Her eyes are drooping from drowsiness. <pos>a</pos> <tr>droopy-</tr>*eyed.

<p id=6390><form>hilwas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> shoemaker&apos;s instrument used to cut and shape material for soles or heels, or to smoothen rough edges in footwear. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> trim, cut with a <ix>hilwas</ix>.

<p id=6391><form>hilwas<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>HILUWAS</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>LUWAS<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=6392><form>himábaw</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>BABAW</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6393><form>hímag</form> <pos>n</pos> oil with magical healing properties obtained from a special k.o. leech. When it is applied to wounds it causes them to close up such that no trace remains.

<p id=6394><form>himalang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b4]</itype> inflict malicious or unnecessary damage on. <i>Giprísu na ang naghimáng sa dalága,</i> The man who raped the woman was put in prison. <i>Gihimángan sa kanding ang ákung mga masítas,</i> The goats destroyed my potted plants.

<p id=6395><form>himalingka</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b3(1)c5]</itype> be angered and surprised by s.t. that comes unexpectedly. <i>Nahimalingka ku pagkahibalu nákung gitikásan ku níya,</i> I was taken aback in anger when I knew that he cheated me. <i>Ayawg ikahimalingka ang ákung isulti nímu,</i> Don&apos;t react angrily to what I&apos;m going to tell you.

<p id=6396><form>himámat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> <number>1</number> for people to find out how they are related to each other. <i>Makighimámat aku nímug unsa kang pagkauyuána nákù,</i> I would like to find out by what relationship you are my uncle. <number>2</number> meet and get to know one another. <i>Himamáta ang Amirkána,</i> Meet the American lady and get to know her. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> meet s.o. who is arriving and pay him attention. <i>Himamáta ang bisíta,</i> Greet the visitor and entertain him. <i>Gihimámat siya sa masípang pakpak,</i> He was greeted with loud applause. <number>3a</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> meet one&apos;s sight. <i>Mauy nahimámat sa ákung pagtan-aw,</i> What greeted my eyes.

<p id=6397><form>híman<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tools</tr>, <tr>utensils</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> supply equipment. <i>Ang ákung bána mauy naghíman sa kusína,</i> My husband equipped the kitchen with utensils. <i>Himáni ang ímung anak nga nagtunghà,</i> Equip your child with what he needs to study. <number>2</number> process, make ready for a purpose. <i>Naghíman ku sa ákung mga dad-unun,</i> I&apos;m preparing the things I&apos;m taking with me. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>equipment</tr>, <tr>tools</tr>, for doing s.t.

<p id=6398><form>híman<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>masculine</tr>, <tr>he-man</tr>. <i>Híman kaáyu kanang barbiládu,</i> That muscle-man is a real he-man. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> become a he-man.

<p id=6399><form>him-an(&rarr;)</form> optional alternant of <ix>hing-an</ix> before bases beginning with <ix>b</ix> or <ix>p.</ix>

<p id=6400><form>himangnù</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>MANGNÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6401><form>himangud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; c5]</itype> feel <tr>slighted</tr>, <tr>hurt</tr> by s.o.&apos;s actions. <i>Nahimangud ku nímu kay nahibalu ka man diay sa tinúud apan wà giyud ku nímu sultíhi,</i> I feel hurt because you knew the truth, but you didn&apos;t let on to me. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> hurt feelings, resentment.

<p id=6402><form>himanhíman</form> as it turned out, [so-and-so] is not true despite allegations. <i>Miiskuyla kunu siya, apan himanhíman diay tu didtu sa sini,</i> She said she went to school, but the truth is that she went to the movie. <i>Ingun kang dì kamau, himanhíman bansay,</i> You said you didn&apos;t know, but it turned out you&apos;re real good.

<p id=6403><form>*himaráut</form> (from <ix>dáut</ix>) <form>pang-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac2]</itype> <tr>scorn</tr> s.t., say it is no good. <i>Ug magpasuburnu siya panghimaraútun siya,</i> If he lets himself be bribed, people will scorn him. <i>Gipanghimaráut ku ang ákung pálad,</i> I cursed my fate. <i>Dílì maáyung ipanghimaráut (panghimaraútan) ang pamisti sa usa ka táwu,</i> It isn&apos;t right to look down on a person for his clothes.

<p id=6404><form>himásaw</form> <xr>= <sc>HILIMÁSAW</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6405><form>himáyà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>spiritual joy</tr>, <tr>glory</tr>. <i>Tugub sa himáyà ang ílang kaminyúun,</i> Their marriage was full of bliss. <form>mistiryu sa &mdash;</form> the <tr>Glorious Mystery</tr>, one of the three Mysteries of the Holy Rosary. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> be <tr>glorified</tr>. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> be blessed. <i>Gipahimayáan ka sa Ginúu ug usa ka masulundun nga anak,</i> You are blessed by God with an obedient child. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>glory</tr>, <tr>joys</tr>. <i>Giánud aku sa díwà sa húni ngadtu sa kahimayáan,</i> I was drifted by the spirit of the melody to the heights of joy. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>glorious</tr>, <tr>joyful</tr>. <i>Mahimayáung tulimbang sa mga linggánay,</i> Joyful ringing of the bells. <i>Mahimayáung kamatáyun,</i> Glorious death.

<p id=6406><form>himbà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> <tr>decrease</tr> considerably in quantity or volume. <i>Ngánung nahimbà (mihimbà) ning bugas? Nakuháag dakù,</i> Why do we suddenly have so little rice left? S.o. took a lot away from it.

<p id=6407><form>himbangkaágan</form> <xr>= <sc>HIBANGKAÁGAN</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>*BANGKÁAG</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=326>

<p id=6408><form>himbay</form> <pos>a</pos> slow-moving, without energy in walking. <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>HIMBAYHIMBAY</sc>.</xr> <form>himbayhimbay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1P; c1]</itype> dilly-dally in walking. <i>Ngánung naghimbayhimbay (nagpahimbayhimbay) ka mang naglakaw nga gipadalì ka man?</i> Why are you dilly-dallying when I told you to hurry? <number>2</number> be wobbly. <i>Naghimbayhimbay ang ligid kay luag ug búha,</i> The wheel is wobbling because the sleeve bearing is loose.

<p id=6409><form>himbis</form> <xr>= <sc>HINGBIS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6410><form>himì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> cry-baby. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become a cry-baby. <form>himìhimì</form> <pos>n</pos> whimper. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> whimper, whine.

<p id=6411><form>hímì</form> <pos>n</pos> dirt. <pos>a</pos> dirty. <i>Hímì kaáyu kag trabáhu. Usba,</i> Your work is very dirty. Do it again. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12S; a]</itype> make s.t. dirty. <i>Maghímì ta basta magkaun tag ayisdrap,</i> You get dirty if you eat popsicles. <i>Gihimían kus íyang nilútù maung walà ku mukáun,</i> I felt that the food she cooked was dirty so I didn&apos;t eat. <form>(&rarr;)<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>HÍMÌ</sc>, <i>a</i>.</xr> <form>himìhimì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> make s.t. dirty. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of getting dirty.

<p id=6412><form>himidyà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b(1)]</itype> look down on. <i>Gihimidyáan siya nga mubù,</i> He was looked down on with derision for being short. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to despise others.

<p id=6413><form>hímil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> touch s.t. with the hands. <i>Masukù giyud siyag himílun ang íyang tinda,</i> She gets mad when s.o. touches her goods. <form>himilhímil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> take care of s.o. intimately as a nurse does.

<p id=6414><form>himílu</form> <pos>n</pos> cufflinks. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear cufflinks.

<p id=6415><form>himisik</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PISIK</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6416><form>himnu</form> <pos>n</pos> hymn.

<p id=6417><form>himpit</form> <xr>= <sc>HINGPIT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6418><form>himpus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <number>1</number> be of use, do for a purpose. <i>Dílì maghimpus nang haligía sa dakung balay,</i> That post won&apos;t do for a large house. <number>2</number> continue to be of service. <i>Dílì maghimpus ang tihíras ug punáyan mug luksuluksu,</i> The cot won&apos;t last if you keep jumping on it. <number>3</number> for s.t. to come of s.t. <i>Dílì maghimpus ang trabáhu ug byàbyáan,</i> Nothing will come of the work if you don&apos;t stick to it.

<p id=6419><form>himsug</form> <pos>a</pos> robust and full. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> become robust and full. <i>Muhimsug (mahimsug) ang mga tanum kun pirming abunúhan,</i> The plants will grow robustly if you always put fertilizer on them. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> robustness. <i>Ang bitamína makahátag ug kahimsug sa láwas,</i> Vitamins make the body robust.

<p id=6420><form>hímu, hímù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, construct. <i>Kamau kang muhímù ug talabánug?</i> Do you know how to make a kite? <i>Himúun kung palu ning kahúya,</i> I will make this piece of wood into a mast. <number>1a</number> make s.o. into s.t. <i>Himúun ta kang kapitan,</i> I&apos;ll make you a captain. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> do, perform. <i>Ayawg himúa tung ímung panghulgà,</i> Don&apos;t carry out your threats. <number>2a</number> conduct or hold an activity. <i>Adtu himúa ang míting sa iskuylahan,</i> The meeting will be held at the schoolhouse. <number>3</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> turn into, become. <i>Ang kawad-un mauy nakahímù (nakapahímù) níyang kawatan,</i> Poverty caused him to become a thief. <i>Nahímung batu ang gikuptan ni Mídas,</i> The thing which Midas touched turned into stone. <i>Nahímung sumsúman sa mga tabì,</i> It became the subject of conversation for the town gossips. <number>4</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> be capable of doing s.t. not usual, allow to do s.t. <i>Dì ku makahímù paghingílin níya,</i> I can&apos;t bring myself to evict him. <i>Mahímù ka nang mupaúlì,</i> You may go home now. <i>Walay mahímù,</i> Nothing can be done about it. <number>4a</number> <formx>&mdash; nga</formx> <itype>[a3]</itype> be possible. <i>Mahímù kaáyu nga bulagan ka,</i> You might just possibly be jilted. <number>4b</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> for a woman to be easily had. <i>Mahímù nang bayhána,</i> You can easily get a piece off that woman. <number>5</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> happen, occur. <i>Mau kadtuy kinadak-ang súnug nga nahímù sa syudad,</i> That was the biggest fire that happened in the city. <pos>n</pos> make. <i>Lig-un ni kay hímù man ni sa Amirika,</i> This is strong because it is of American make. <form>paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> turn oneself, s.t. into s.t. <i>Nagpakahímù siyang kataw-anan,</i> He made himself a laughing stock. <number>2</number> to be capable of doing s.t. <i>Unsáun nákù pagpakahímug pasulud nímu nga dílì ku háwak?</i> How could I give you a job when I have no power? <form>ma-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become (Biblical). <i>Ang tanan mamahímù nga yútà human mamatay,</i> All will be transformed into dust after death. <form>-in-</form> <number>1</number> s.t. made. <i>Ákù nang hinímù,</i> That was of my own make. <number>2</number> s.t. made of. <i>Balay nga hinímù sa batu,</i> House made of stone. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> accomplishments, results. <i>Gibatbat sa pamúnù ang mga kahimúan sa íyang administrasiyun,</i> The president enumerated the accomplishments of his administration. <number>2</number> possibility. <i>May kahimúan usab nga kitang mga táwu kalíwat gíkan sa láing planíta,</i> There is also a possibility that man is descended from beings from another planet. <number>3</number> activities in general. <i>Unsa may kahimúan sa inyung pista?</i> What are the activities in your fiesta? <form>mag-r-, mag-l-</form> <pos>n</pos> maker, producer, manufacturer, etc.

<p id=6421><form>himughat</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>BUGHAT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6422><form>himugsù</form> (from <ix>bugsù<sub>2</sub></ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> deliver, give birth to. <i>Nahimugsuan si Bíki ug usa ka bátang laláki,</i> A baby boy was born to Vicky. <i>Si Kristu gihimugsù sa usa ka pasungan,</i> Christ was born in a manger. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256; a]</itype> be brought into being (literary). <i>Ang bag-ung <pb n=327>nahimugsù nílang lungsud sa kalasangan,</i> The town they just created in the forest. <i>Ubra maistra nga nahimugsù sa íyang kakúgi,</i> The masterwork which his labors brought forth. <number>3</number> result from (literary). <i>Panimalus nga nahimugsù sa íyang pagdumut,</i> The revenge that his hatred gave rise to.

<p id=6423><form>himul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b]</itype> wipe the face around the mouth. <i>Himuli ang bátà kay nagkamumhu ang simud,</i> Wipe the child&apos;s face because he has crumbs all over him. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> wipe one&apos;s face.

<p id=6424><form>himulálung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a3b8]</itype> <number>1</number> have a clear picture of s.o.&apos;s appearance. <i>Nahimuladngan (nahimulálung) nákù ang íyang nawung dihang nahayagan siya,</i> I got a clear view of his face when the light fell on him. <number>2</number> remember a face vaguely but not be able to place it exactly. <i>Nakahimulálung tu ku nímu. A si Dyan diay ka,</i> I seem to remember you&mdash;Oh yes. You&apos;re John, aren&apos;t you? <number>3</number> be aware of s.t. <i>Nakahimulálung ku nga may táwu, piru hángin dagway tu,</i> There seemed to be s.o. there, but probably it was the wind. <i>Dílì nímu mahimuladngan ang pagtúbù sa ímung mga bátà,</i> Your children grow up on you without your noticing it.

<p id=6425><form>himuláut</form> (from <ix>dáut</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B145]</itype> be dying. <i>Gilawàlawaan na ang mata sa naghimuláut,</i> The dying man&apos;s eyes are blurred.

<p id=6426><form>himúlus</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PULUS<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=6427><form>himungà</form> (from <ix>búnga</ix>) <pos>n</pos> mother hen. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> raise a mother hen. <i>Nakahimungà na siyag wayit lighurn,</i> She has already raised white leghorn mother hens. <form>-an(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>HIMUNGÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6428><form>himungáwung</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>*MUNGÁLUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6429><form>himungáyà</form> <pos>n</pos> consciousness, awareness. <i>May himungáyà pa siya sa pagdala námù níya sa uspital,</i> He still was conscious when we brought him to the hospital. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> come to consciousness, bring back to consciousness. <i>Mihimungáyà ang bátà sa paghuman ug indiksiyun,</i> The child awakened after the injection. <i>Dakung butu ang naghimungáyà sa mga táwu sa kaadláwun,</i> A loud burst awakened the people at dawn. <number>2</number> <itype>[B123; b(1)]</itype> become awake to a fact. <i>Nakahihimungáyà sila nga dautan ang ílang gihímù,</i> They became aware that what they were doing was bad. <i>Nagkahimungayà ang katawhan ug hinayhínay sa mga nahitabù,</i> The people are gradually becoming awake to what is going on. <i>Nahimungayáan siya sa ákung pagpatin-aw,</i> He finally understood what it was all about after my explanation.

<p id=6430><form>himungsíyù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b3]</itype> be hurt by s.t. s.o. close did without nurturing resentment on that account. <i>Nahimungsíyù ku níya kay wà siya paútang,</i> He hurt me because he didn&apos;t lend me money.

<p id=6431><form>himurids</form> <pos>n</pos> hemorrhage. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a4]</itype> have a hemorrhage, cause hemorrhage. <i>Naghimurids ang íyang matris,</i> She had a hemorrhage in her uterus. <i>Gihimurids si Bíti,</i> Betty had a hemorrhage.

<p id=6432><form>himus</form> <pos>a</pos> cuddly and plump. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> for a child to be cuddly and plump. <i>Gihimusan ku nang batáa. Kaáyung paákun,</i> That baby is so cuddly. How I&apos;d love to bite it.

<p id=6433><form>himutákal</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>BUTAKAL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6434><form>himut-uk</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PUT-UK</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6435><form>himuylas</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>*BUYLAS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6436><form>Hin.</form> <pos>n</pos> abbreviation for <ix>hiniral,</ix> <ix>1a.</ix>

<p id=6437><form>hiN-<sub>1</sub></form> derivative affix forming verb bases. <number>1</number> to words which refer to a state or time of day to form verbs which mean &lsquo;be almost [such-and-such] a state, time of day&rsquo;. Verbs of this sort usually have a short penult and occur with <ix>mag-<sub>1</sub></ix> (<ix>nag-,</ix> etc.) and <ix>ma-<sub>1</sub></ix> (<ix>na-</ix>). <i>Sa naghinigulang na si Tátay,</i> As Dad was moving toward old age. <i>Sa naghinapus na ang pangadyì,</i> As the prayers were about to end. <number>2</number> forming verbs referring to an intense action. <i>Naghinud-ung sila ni Maríya hangtud siya midukù,</i> The people kept staring at Maria until she bowed her head. <number>3</number> added to nouns to form a verb meaning &lsquo;get the [noun] out&rsquo;. <i>Nanghingìkì siya humag káun ug karni,</i> He picked his teeth after he ate the meat. <i>Hingut-an ta ka,</i> I will pick your lice. <number>4</number> added to a few verb bases to form verbs referring to an accidental or involuntary action. <i>Ang balay túa mahimutang daplin sa dágat,</i> The house is situated next to the sea. <i>Paghigut arun dì ka mahimulag sa sakayan,</i> Tie yourself so you won&apos;t get separated from the boat.

<p id=6438><form>hiN-<sub>2</sub></form> affix added to verbs or nouns to form adjectives which mean &lsquo;fond of [noun], [doing verb]&rsquo;. <i>Hingáun ug lútù,</i> Fond of eating rice. <i>Hinábung,</i> Fond of cockfights.

<p id=6439><form>hinabdus, hinablus</form> <xr>= <sc>HUMABLUS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6440><form>hinabù</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>TÁBÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6441><form>hínag</form> <pos>a</pos> sparse, loosely woven. <i>Hínag pagkahablun,</i> Woven loosely. <i>Hínag ang buhuk,</i> Sparse hair. <i>Hínag ang mga táwu sa baylihan,</i> There were very few people on the dance floor. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become sparse. <i>Nagkahinag na ang dáhun sa tanum kay nagkamatay,</i> The leaves of the plant are getting sparse because it is slowly dying. <i>Muhínag ang kamaisan ug dì punáan,</i> The cornfield will lack plants if you do not reseed the <pb n=328>places that fail to sprout.

<p id=6442><form>hinagdung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small tree of thickets. A fluid which is blown out of the wood is used as a poultice for swellings. The leaves are mixed with water for bathing babies: <bio>Trema orientalis</bio>.

<p id=6443><form>hinagiban</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> weapon. <number>2</number> instrument used in bringing about a desired result. <i>Ang kuntrátu mauy ákung hinagiban sa burúka,</i> The contract is my best weapon in the case. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> use s.t. as a weapon. <i>Gihinagiban ni Matahari ang íyang kaanyag,</i> Mata Hari used her beauty as a weapon. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> have a weapon.

<p id=6444><form>*hináhin</form> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> <number>1</number> for s.o. over-eager to do s.t. to be restrained or dissuaded. <i>Dì na giyud siya magpahináhin sa pagpaúlì,</i> She can&apos;t be dissuaded from going home. <number>2</number> allow oneself to be left out of s.t., miss out on s.t. (usually in the negative). <i>Dì ku magpahináhin. Muuban giyud ku,</i> I won&apos;t let myself be left out. I&apos;ll go along. <number>3</number> allow s.o. to get an advantage. <i>Ása man ku magpahináhin. Unhan ku giyud siya,</i> I won&apos;t let him get an advantage. I&apos;ll beat him to it.

<p id=6445><form>hinalam, hinálam</form> <xr>= <sc>HIGÁLAM</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>*GÁLAM</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6446><form>hínam</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b3(1)]</itype> be eager, intensely desirous. <i>Ang lamíang pagkáun nakahínam (nakapahínam) kanákù,</i> The delicious food made me eager (to eat dinner). <form>kulbà &mdash;</form> <pos>a</pos> anticipated with eagerness and fright. <i>Kulbà hínam sila nga nagpaábut sa risulta,</i> They were in great suspense as they awaited the outcome. <form>hinamhinam</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146]</itype> be overcome by eagerness. <i>Naghinamhinam siya sa pag-abut ni Santa Klawus,</i> He is eagerly anticipating Santa&apos;s arrival. <form>ka-</form> eagerness to do s.t. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> full of eager anticipation.

<p id=6447><form>hin-an(&rarr;)</form> optional alternant of <ix>hing-an</ix> before bases beginning with <ix>d, e,</ix> and <ix>s.</ix>

<p id=6448><form>hinangiban</form> <xr>= <sc>HINAGIBAN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6449><form>hinangkan</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ANAK</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6450><form>hinánib</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>HÁNIB</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6451><form>hinánuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> <number>1</number> be sound asleep. <i>Nahinánuk na ang mga bátà. Makalugar na ta,</i> The children are sound asleep. We can do it now. <number>2</number> be dormant (literary). <i>Gipúkaw mu ang nahinánuk ku nga pagbátì,</i> You brought my dormant emotions to life.

<p id=6452><form>hínas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> clear an area by burning. <i>Muhínas (maghínas) ku sa baul ug muínit,</i> I&apos;ll burn the plants I cut down when it gets sunny. <i>Nahínas ang mga balay sa iskwátir,</i> The slum area was levelled by the fire.

<p id=6453><form>hinásà</form> <pos>a</pos> familiar, acquainted with s.o. or s.t. <i>Hinásà kaáyu nákù ning nawnga,</i> This face looks very familiar to me. <i>Hinásà ku kaáyu sa kinabúhing Manilan-un,</i> I&apos;m very familiar with what life in Manila is like. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126C13; b6c5]</itype> be, become familiar or acquainted with. <i>Nagkahinásà mi sa tantung agiági níya sa ámù,</i> We became acquainted because she constantly passed by our place. <i>Gihinasáan ku ánang tawhána,</i> That person looks familiar to me.

<p id=6454><form>*hináut</form> (from <ix>dáut</ix>) <form>&mdash; nga</form> I hope that.... <i>Hináut untang magmalampúsun ka,</i> I hope that you succeed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> hope for s.t. to happen. <i>Panghinaútan (ipanghináut) námù ang ímung kadaúgan,</i> We hope you will be victorious. <form>paN-</form> hopes for s.t. good to happen.

<p id=6455><form>hinaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> wash the hands. <i>Hinawi ang bátà,</i> Wash the child&apos;s hands. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> <number>1</number> wash one&apos;s hands. <i>Manghinaw ta,</i> Let&apos;s wash our hands. <number>2</number> <formx>paN- sa matag bagul</formx> find oneself without money (from the idea that if one washes with a half a coconut with the eyes punched out, there is hardly any water). <i>Manghinaw ka sa matag bagul ug dílì nímu ampíngan ang ímung kabílin,</i> You&apos;ll find yourself without money if you&apos;re not careful with your inheritance. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> disclaim responsibility. <i>Dì ka makapanghinaw sa ímung sáad,</i> You can&apos;t go back on your promise. <form>-an(&larr;), -l-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>washbasin</tr>. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> washed hands.

<p id=6456><form>hinawnaw</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>NAWNAW</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6457><form>hínay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>slow</tr>. <number>1a</number> lacking in speed. <i>Hínay kaáyu ang íyang mga lákang,</i> She walked slowly. <number>1b</number> taking long to happen. <i>Hínay ang umintu sa swildu sa maistra,</i> The teacher&apos;s raise in salary is slow in coming. <number>2</number> <tr>soft</tr>. <number>2a</number> low, not loud. <i>Hínayng tíngug,</i> Soft voice. <number>2b</number> light, not strong. <i>Hínay ra ang ákung sagpà níya,</i> I gave her a very light slap. <number>2c</number> <tr>gentle</tr>. <i>Nabátì ku ang hínay nga dápat sa íyang mga ngábil sa ákung áping,</i> I felt the gentle touch of his lips to my cheeks. <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[B; b5]</itype> do s.t. slowly, become slow. <i>Nahínay (mihínay) ang dinaganan sa bangkà kay daghag karga,</i> The boat has slowed down because of the heavy load. <i>Hináyi (hináya) pagpadágan ang kutsi,</i> Drive the car slowly. <number>1b</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> become soft, gentle; do s.t. quietly. <i>Nagkahinay ang radiyu kay nagkadiskarga na ang batiríya,</i> The radio is becoming weak because the batteries are running down. <i>Hináya (ihínay) pagbutang ang bátà,</i> Put the baby down gently. <form>hinayhínay</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> rather slow, soft. <number>2</number> bit by bit. <i>Ang usa ka lungnik sa hinayhínay nahurut giyud níya,</i> Bit by bit he finally finished a whole fifth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> do s.t. slowly, gradually. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> tending to <pb n=329>move slowly by nature. <i>Hinayan kanà. Dì mahímung padaliun,</i> He&apos;s a slow sort. You can&apos;t rush him. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>slowness</tr>, <tr>softness</tr>. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> slow in movement. <i>Hinayun siyang mulíhuk kay masakitun,</i> He moves slowly because he is sickly.

<p id=6458><form>hínay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13P; b]</itype> always do s.t. <i>Ngánung naghínay ka na lang núug katúlug dihà?</i> Why do you do nothing but sleep? <form>hinayhínay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> continue to do s.t. <i>Naghinayhínay lang mig káun samtang nagpaábut sila,</i> We continued eating while they waited. <number>2</number> leave, get going. <i>Maghinayhínay na lang ta kay hápun na man,</i> Let&apos;s get going because it&apos;s late.

<p id=6459><form>hinayak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1236C13; b]</itype> <number>1</number> get oneself so far committed that it would be awkward to back out. <i>Sígi na lang kay nakahinayak na kug káun bisag dì pa tingkaun,</i> Since I started, I might as well just eat properly even if it isn&apos;t time yet. <i>Kay nahinayak ka nag pakigtrátu níya, pangasaw-a na lang,</i> You&apos;ve gone so far as to get engaged, you might as well marry her. <i>Humana lang nà kay nahinaykan na nímug tábas,</i> Just finish it because you already started cutting it. <i>Nagkahináyak ang duha, búsa nag-ípun na lang,</i> The two have got too deeply involved with each other, so they just set up house together. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1236; b]</itype> do s.t. in excess or longer than necessary. <i>Bídang nakahinayak nímug asin sa sabaw,</i> You put too much salt in the soup. <i>Nahinaykan nákug duut, dì nabuak,</i> I pushed it too hard and it broke. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> do s.t. for nothing, in vain. <i>Nahinayak akug anhi,</i> I came here for nothing. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> cause s.o. to push through with s.t., do s.t. in excess for nothing. <number>2</number> do s.t. in excess purposely, allow oneself to get too deeply involved. <i>Ug magpahinayak kag inum,</i> If you drink excessively. <i>Nagpahinayak siya sa gugma,</i> She allowed herself to get too deeply involved in a love affair.

<p id=6460><form>hinayhay</form> <xr>= <sc>HANAYHAY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6461><form>hinayun</form> <number>1</number> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>DÁYUN</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>HÍNAY<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=6462><form>hindà</form> <number>1</number> baby talk for <ix>higdà</ix> &lsquo;go to sleep&rsquo;. <i>Hindà na ta dung. Túlug na,</i> Come on. Let&apos;s go sleepy-by, son. <number>2</number> word uttered upon reaching home base in hide-and-seek. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> go home free. <form>-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> place used as home base.

<p id=6463><form>hindang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small tree: <bio>Myrica javanica</bio>.

<p id=6464><form>hindian</form> <pos>a</pos> particular, choosy about food. <i>Níwang nang batáa kay hindian sa pagkáun,</i> That child is thin because he is very choosy about his food.

<p id=6465><form>hindik</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>neat</tr>, <tr>orderly</tr>, <tr>clean</tr>. <i>Hindik siyang mamistibisti,</i> She dresses neat and trim. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> make s.t. <tr>neat</tr> and trim. <i>Hindíka ang kwartu kay nagkalamúkat lang,</i> Straighten up the room because it&apos;s a mess. <form>pa-, paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> make oneself <tr>neat</tr>, <tr>clean</tr>. <i>Dugáya sad nímung manghindik (magpahindik) uy,</i> My! How long it takes you to get yourself ready! <number>2</number> primp oneself up. <pos>n</pos> cosmetics. -an a tending to keep oneself neat.

<p id=6466><form>híngag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> <tr>interested</tr>, <tr>enthusiastic</tr> over. <i>Híngag siya sa mga pahindik,</i> She&apos;s very interested in cosmetics.

<p id=6467><form>hingahinga</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P]</itype> <tr>pant</tr> rapidly from exertion, overeating. <i>Naghingahinga ang tambuk human patungása sa bungtud,</i> The fat man was panting rapidly after he was made to climb the hill.

<p id=6468><form>híngak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> <tr>breathe</tr> deeply and rapidly. <i>Gihingákan ku ug bugtaw nímu,</i> I ran out of breath running after you.

<p id=6469><form>hingalhingal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13P]</itype> <tr>pant</tr> with the mouth open and tongue hanging. <i>Naghingalhingal ang kábaw nga gidáru sa ínit,</i> The carabao is panting with its tongue hanging out because it plowed in the sun.

<p id=6470><form>híngan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B256]</itype> have <tr>enthusiasm</tr>, <tr>interest</tr> for s.t. <i>Dì kaáyu ku muhíngan (mahíngan) sa pagbása,</i> I don&apos;t have a great interest in reading. <form>dílì &mdash;</form> for s.t. undesirable not to be in a bad degree. <i>Bintáhang managána. Mapildi sa dílì híngan,</i> It&apos;s better to be prepared because if misfortune befalls you, it won&apos;t be so bad. <i>Maldítu siya, apan dílì híngan,</i> He&apos;s naughty, but not terribly much so.

<p id=6471><form>hing-an(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>HI-AN(&rarr;)</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6472><form>hingaphingap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13P; b3]</itype> be <tr>excited</tr>, <tr>restless</tr> in expectation. <i>Naghingaphingap giyud kung nagpaábut kanímu,</i> I am very excited in waiting for your arrival.

<p id=6473><form>hingári</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> <tr>always</tr> do s.t. <i>Ayaw hingaríhi (hingaríi) nag túyuk,</i> Stop that constant twirling.

<p id=6474><form>hingatag</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>HÁTAG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6475><form>hingáwa, hingáwà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b3(1)]</itype> feel highly <tr>worried</tr> about s.t. <i>Gikahingawáan ku ang dilikádu níyang kundisiyun,</i> I am worried about his delicate condition. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>worry</tr>, <tr>anxiety</tr>. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> full of <tr>worry</tr>.

<p id=6476><form>hingbangkaágan</form> <xr>= <sc>HIBANGKAÁGAN</sc></xr><corr>.</corr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>*BANGKÁAG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6477><form>hingbis</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>scale</tr> on fishes, reptiles, birds&apos; legs. <number>2</number> type of <tr>character</tr> (taken from the notion that the fighting cock is judged on the basis of the scales on his legs). <i>Unsa kahà ang hingbis sa íyang pagkababáyi?</i> What type of a woman is she? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> remove the scales. <i>Human na nákù hingbísi ang mga isdà,</i> I already removed the fish scales. <number>2a</number> <itype>[AN; b(1)]</itype> select a fighting cock <pb n=330>according to the scale formation on its legs. <i>Manghingbis kug manuk pára itárì,</i> I will select a cock for the cockfight. <number>2b</number> size up a person. <i>Gihingbísan kug maáyu sa ákung uganganun,</i> My future father-in-law sized me up very carefully. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> having scales.

<p id=6478><form>hingì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> ask for s.t. from s.o. (slang). <i>Muhingì pa kug takwal ni Irpat,</i> I&apos;ll have to ask Father for money. <pos>n</pos> action of asking. <form>hingìhingì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b3]</itype> whimper in asking for s.t. or attention. <form>hingìhíngì</form> <pos>n</pos> action of whimpering.

<p id=6479><form>hingílin</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> dismiss s.o. from his abode or job. <i>Gihinginlan siya sa íyang mga ginikánan,</i> His parents drove him out of the house. <number>2</number> drive away a feeling, atmosphere. <i>Ang huyúhuy dílì ígung makahingílin sa kaígang,</i> The breeze was insufficient to drive out the heat. <number>3</number> <itype>[A3P; b]</itype> drive away or expel evil spirits from a place or from a person&apos;s body. <i>Páring maghingílin sa mga ispiritu malignu,</i> A priest that will exorcise the evil spirits. <pos>n</pos> the ritual of freeing a person or place of evil spirits. <pos>n</pos> ceremony of <tr>exorcism</tr>.

<p id=6480><form>hingiting</form> <xr>= <sc>ALINGITING</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6481><form>hingkud</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1a</number> for a person to be <tr>full-grown</tr>, completely <tr>matured</tr>. <i>Hingkud nga dalága,</i> A fully grown young lady. <i>Sini álang sa mga hingkud,</i> A movie for adults. <number>1b</number> be exactly at a certain age, around the age of maturity. <number>1c</number> <formx>&mdash; ang salabútan</formx> have an adult&apos;s understanding. <number>2</number> for fruits borne by plants that bear fruit once and die to reach maturity. <i>Hingkud na ang púsù. Maáyu nang sanggíun,</i> The corn is full-grown now. We should harvest it. <number>3</number> for a stretch of time to be just long enough. <i>Hingkud na ang panahun sa panimalus,</i> The time is ripe for revenge. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> <number>1</number> get to be matured, a full [so-and-so] many years old. <i>Muhingkud kung bayinti anyus ugmà,</i> I will be exactly twenty years old tomorrow. <number>2</number> for time to get matured.

<p id=6482><form>hinglit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> stretch and press cloth or paper with the hands to smooth it out. <i>Gihinlit níya ang gum-us nga papil nga íyang sulatan,</i> He smoothed the crumpled piece of paper out with his hand because he was going to write on it. <i>Hinlíta ang ímung sayal kay way utaw,</i> Smooth over your skirt with your hands because it was not ironed.

<p id=6483><form>hinglù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; a]</itype> <tr>clear</tr> s.t., get cleared off. <i>Hinglúi ang lamísa,</i> Clear the table. <i>Nahinlù na ang masitasan sa sagbut,</i> The flower bed has been cleared of weeds. <i>Nagkahinlù ang plása sa hápit na ang tungang gabíi,</i> The plaza was getting cleared as midnight approached. <pos>a</pos> <tr>cleared</tr>.

<p id=6484><form>hingpit</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> complete, nothing lacking. <i>Hingpit ang kahimánan,</i> The equipment is complete. <i>Hingpit nga ulitáwu,</i> A young man, completely grown. <i>Himáyà nga hingpit gayud,</i> Complete and utter bliss. <i>Dì pa siya hingpit nga abugádu kay wà makabár,</i> He is not a full-fledged lawyer because he hasn&apos;t taken the bar exams. <i>Haúna kini sa hingpit nga alas dúsi,</i> Take this out no earlier than twelve o&apos;clock. <number>2</number> complete, without reservations. <i>Hingpit nga gugma,</i> Complete, whole-hearted love. <i>Hingpit ang ákung hukum,</i> My decision is final. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; nga babáyi</formx> woman complete with female virtues. <pos>n</pos> <tr>tools</tr>, <tr>utensils</tr>. <i>Hingpit sa panupi,</i> Equipment for cutting hair. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> get to be complete with nothing lacking or without reservations. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> tools, utensils. <i>Kahingpítan sa panimalay,</i> Furniture and utensils for the household. <form>ka-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> reaching completion. <i>Walay kahingpitun ang paghímug diksiyunariyu,</i> There never <corr sic=seem>seems</corr> to be any end to making a dictionary.

<p id=6485><form>híngù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a]</itype> <tr>pull a tooth</tr> or break off one of several projections which are like teeth in a row. <i>Kanang ímung sinudlayan makahíngù (makapahíngù) ug sudlay,</i> The comb is going to break the way you are using it. <i>Wà ka pa kahingúi?</i> Haven&apos;t you lost any teeth? <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> loose tooth. <i>Átung ibtun nang ímung hingù bi,</i> Let&apos;s pull out your loose tooth. <pos>a</pos> having been pulled out. <i>Hingù na ang íyang bag-ang,</i> He has lost a molar. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; b4]</itype> for the milk teeth to fall out. <i>Nanghíngù (gipanghingúan) na si Irna,</i> Erna is losing her baby teeth.

<p id=6486><form>hínguk</form> <xr>= <sc>HÍNUK<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=6487><form>híngus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>sniffle</tr>, draw the <corr sic=snout>snot</corr> up into the nose. <i>Mihíngus si Lulu nga namáhid sa íyang lúhà,</i> Lulu sniffled as she wiped her tears. <pos>n</pos> <tr>sniffle</tr>.

<p id=6488><form>hingushingus</form> <xr>= <sc>INGUS-INGUS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6489><form>hinguy</form> <xr>= <sc>HUNGUY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6490><form>hinhin<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>HILHIG</sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr>

<p id=6491><form>hinibra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gin</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> have, serve gin. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into gin.

<p id=6492><form>hiniral</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>general officer</tr>. <number>1a</number> title of address for a general. <number>2</number> <formx>kastígu &mdash;</formx> punishment given to both parties in a quarrel. <formx>intráda &mdash;</formx> general admission in a theater. <number>3</number> k.o. imported gamecock. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; c1]</itype> be, become general.

<p id=6493><form>hiniru</form> <pos>n</pos> types of course served. <i>Pila ka hinirung sud-an ang átung andámun?</i> How many kinds of dishes shall we prepare?

<p id=6494><form>hínis</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> remove dirt that clings to s.t., <tr>polish</tr> by scouring or chemical action. <i>Ímu bang gihinísan ang kubyirtus?</i> Have you polished the silverware? <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <form>&mdash; sa túbu</form> for males to <tr>masturbate</tr> (polish the <pb n=331>tube). <pos>n</pos> <form>(&rarr;)</form> <number>1</number> preparation used for scouring or polishing. <number>2</number> <formx>walay &mdash;</formx> <tr>unpolished</tr>.

<p id=6495><form>hiníti<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jockey</tr>, one who rides a horse in a race.

<p id=6496><form>hiníti<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>HANÍTI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6497><form>hinlas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> clean by bathing or with a washcloth. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>clean oneself</tr>.

<p id=6498><form>hinlawan</form> <pos>n</pos> coarsely ground corn grits which require remilling or are fed to animals. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> for corn grits to come out coarse.

<p id=6499><form>hinlit</form> <xr>= <sc>HINGLIT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6500><form>hinlù</form> <xr>= <sc>HINGLÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6501><form>hintil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Gentile</tr>, non-Jew.

<p id=6502><form>hintulhintul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> for a mixture to come out <tr>lumpy</tr>. <i>Naghintulhintul ang labadúra kay walà maáyu nga pagkamiskla,</i> The batter was lumpy because it was not well mixed.

<p id=6503><form>hinù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b3]</itype> develop a craze for doing s.t. after s.t. nice happened to one doing it once. <i>Makahinù (makapahinù) ang pagdúlà sa madyung,</i> Once you have tried playing mahjong, you can easily develop a craze for it. <i>Ang pagpangáwut ug bahanding lunubung mauy gihinúan (gikahinúan) sa mga táwu run,</i> Nowadays there is a craze to dig for buried treasure.

<p id=6504><form>hinug</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ripe</tr>. <i>Hinug na ang mga ságing,</i> The bananas are ripe. <number>2</number> for a cold to be at a late stage, when the mucous gets thick. <number>2a</number> for acne or small pimple to come to a head. <number>3</number> for a time to be just right for s.t., for plans to be developed to the point that only realization is lacking. <i>Hinug na ang mga plánu sa ákung panimalus,</i> The ground is fully prepared for my revenge. <pos>n</pos> any variety of banana eaten uncooked when ripe. <i>Palbangáan pa ang hinug nga ílang gipalit,</i> The bananas they bought are still a bit green. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> be, become ripe or for cold to mature. <number>1a</number> <formx>&mdash; ang úlu</formx> for the head to get bumped so much it is as if it had softened. <i>Nahinug na ning ákung úlu sa pagpinakungpákung,</i> My head has become soft because I&apos;ve bumped it so often. <number>2</number> <itype>[B25]</itype> for the time to become ripe, for the preparations for s.t. to reach a state of completion. <form>hinggan</form> <pos>n</pos> bunch of fruit, some of which are ripe. <i>Gúlang na ang ságing kay hinggan,</i> The bananas are mature because there are some ripe fruits in the bunch. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become mature with some ripe fruits in it.

<p id=6505><form>hinúgan</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>TÚLUG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6506><form>hinúgay</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>DÚGAY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6507><form>hinug-u</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>SUG-U</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6508><form>hinúgun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b5c5]</itype> feel that it is a great pity that s.t. is gone. <i>Nahinúgun kaáyu mi sa sayung kamatáyun ni Kinidi,</i> We felt it was a great loss that Kennedy died so young. <i>Gihinugnan nga mugastu ang tihik,</i> The miser considers every penny he spends a loss. <i>Dílì ángay ikahinúgun (kahinugnan, hinugnun) ang usa ka gamay nga butang,</i> A small thing is nothing for which one should feel regret. <form>-in-</form> <pos>a</pos> s.o. whose passing engenders a feeling of great loss. <i>Kadtung ámung igsúung namatay hininúgun kaáyu,</i> That dead brother of ours was very dear to us. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> sense of loss. <form>mahinugnánun</form> <pos>a</pos> feeling a great sense of loss. <i>Mitangdù siya sa paghátag sa ituy sa mahinugnánun nga tíngug,</i> He consented to give the puppy away with a sad voice.

<p id=6509><form>hínuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> do s.t. stealthily or without anyone&apos;s noticing it. <i>Mihínuk siya pagdúlug sa babáyi,</i> He stealthily lay down beside the woman. <i>Hinúka ug kúhà ang búla ug dì siya pahulam,</i> Get the ball away from him when he&apos;s not looking if he won&apos;t lend it. <i>Ihínuk nig gawas sa Kustum,</i> Spirit this away from the Customs area.

<p id=6510><form>hínuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish.

<p id=6511><form>hinuklug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b3(1)]</itype> be affected by a great emotion, esp. grief. <i>Nahinuklug ang mga táwu sa masulub-ung balità,</i> The people were stricken with grief at the sad news. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> causing great emotion. <number>2</number> full of grief. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> deep emotion, grief. <i>Sa túmang kahinuklug nanalinghug sila sa nasudnung áwit,</i> With deep emotion they listened to the national anthem.

<p id=6512><form>hinuktuk</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>TUKTUK<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=6513><form>hínul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> <number>1</number> feel s.t. with the tips of the fingers. <i>Hinúla ang lapalapa, dì ba náay bildu,</i> Feel your sole. There&apos;s a piece of glass in it, isn&apos;t there? <number>2</number> <tr>feel for</tr>, <tr>grope</tr> around for s.t. <i>Gihínul ni Kulas ang puspuru sa iláwum sa íyang unlan,</i> Colas fumbled for the matches under his pillow. <number>3</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> available to one. <i>Wà siyay nahut nga mahínul,</i> He did not have a cent to his name.

<p id=6514><form>hinulsul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b(1)]</itype> <tr>repent</tr> for sins. <i>Hinulsúli ang salà mung nabúhat,</i> Repent your sins. <form>paN-, pag-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>repentance</tr>.

<p id=6515><form>hinultul</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>TULTUL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6516><form>hinulung, hinúlung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B16; b3(1)]</itype> look at s.t. with fascination or with surprise. <i>Naghinulung kung nagtan-aw sa sirkadur,</i> I was fascinated watching the acrobat. <i>Nahinulung mi sa gipakítà níyang kausában,</i> We were amazed at how he had changed. <i>Dílì ikahinulung ang íyang líhuk sa nakaila na níya,</i> Her actions don&apos;t strike people who know her as surprising. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b(1)]</itype> notice <pb n=332>s.t. <i>Wà mahinulngi námù nga nanáug ang bátà,</i> We didn&apos;t notice that the child went downstairs.

<p id=6517><form>hinumdum</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>DUMDUM</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6518><form>hinungdan</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>TUNGUD</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6519><form>hinunúa</form> but, on the contrary<corr sic=.></corr> (literary). <i>Ayaw kami ug itugyan sa panulay hinunúa luwasa gíkan sa kadaútan,</i> Lead us not into temptation but deliver us from evil.

<p id=6520><form>hinúun</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <formx>núun</formx> <number>1</number> instead, however, rather. <i>Ug ímu siyang patrabahúun magdúlà núun,</i> If you put him to work, he just plays instead. <i>Hinúun, ug magtuun ka, makapasar pa ka,</i> However, if you study, you still can pass. <i>Dílì akuy nagkúhà. Ikaw núun,</i> I didn&apos;t take it. Rather it was you. <number>2</number> but [so-and-so] is good anyway. <i>Dì ni mau ang ímung giingun, bulubaratu núun ning klasíha adtung usa,</i> This isn&apos;t what you asked for, but it&apos;s a bit cheaper. <number>2a</number> [so-and-so] may or may not be right, good, etc., but this definitely is. <i>&lsquo;Wà tay láin gawas áring puwa.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Maáyu núun. Mas gwápu núun ni,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;We don&apos;t have any except this red one.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Oh, that&apos;s fine. That&apos;s even better (than what I had asked for).&rsquo; <i>Wà ku kaila níla. Prid núun,</i> I don&apos;t know them. But Fred, I do. <number>2b</number> to be sure [so-and-so] is the case, but.... <i>Hinúun, gwápu siya, apan way trabáhu,</i> To be sure, he&apos;s handsome, but he doesn&apos;t have a job. <form>gayud &mdash;</form> [so-and-so] is more than you allege or would think. <i>Unsay barátu? Mahal giyud núun,</i> What do you mean cheap? It is expensive, more than you would think. <i>Kabayad ka giyud núun pud,</i> You can very well afford it, anyway. <number>3</number> [so-and-so] is contrary to my desire. <i>Manday nagtirnu na ku, miulan na núun,</i> Just the one time I wear a suit, it starts to rain. <form>na &mdash;</form> it&apos;s too late, but it could have been done earlier. <i>Dinhi tà ka gahápun. Wà na núun,</i> You should have come yesterday. Now they&apos;re all sold out. <number>4</number> with imperatives: you might as well do it under the circumstances, since you&apos;ve got the chance. <i>Adtu man kahà ka sa lungsud. Dad-a núun ni,</i> You&apos;re going to town, anyway. You might as well bring it with you. <i>Upat man ta. Dúlà núun ta,</i> There&apos;s four of us. We might as well play. <number>5</number> <formx>ra &mdash;</formx> it is only [so-and-so], said sarcastically or jocularly when whatever it is, is actually a lot. <i>Singku písus ra núun ang kílu sa kamátis,</i> Tomatoes are &lsquo;only&rsquo; five pesos a kilogram. <i>Mil písus ra núun ang ákung daug,</i> I &lsquo;only&rsquo; won a thousand pesos. <number>6</number> <formx>mau ra pud &mdash;</formx> that&apos;s just the one thing that&apos;s wrong with it. <i>&lsquo;Nindut ning sinináa, galing luag nákug diyutay.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Mau ra pud núun.&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;This is a nice dress, but it&apos;s a little too big.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;That&apos;s just what&apos;s wrong with it.&rsquo;

<p id=6521><form>hinyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>genius</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> consider s.o. a genius.

<p id=6522><form>hip</form> <number>1</number> interjection of warning s.o. <number>a</number> that he&apos;s going to hit s.t. <i>Hip! Maigù nang bumbilya,</i> Watch it! You&apos;re going to hit the light bulb, <number>b</number> that he&apos;s doing s.t. wrong and he&apos;s being observed. <i>Hip, ayawg hilabti nà. Nagtan-aw bayà ku,</i> Watch it. Don&apos;t touch that. I&apos;m watching you. <number>2</number> interjection expressing the desire for s.t. to hit s.t. <i>Hip. Hip. A, nasulud giyud sa bangag!</i> Easy does it. Now it&apos;s in the hole.

<p id=6523><form>hipálag</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PALAG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6524><form>hipanhipan</form> (from <ix>ulahípan</ix>) <pos>n</pos> small red or brown worms resembling small centipedes, used as bait. They are of two kinds: <bx>&mdash; sa bás</bx> kind found in sand, <bx>&mdash; sa batu</bx> kind found inside stones or boulders.

<p id=6525><form>hiphip</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> insert in between s.t. or into a tight place or container. <i>Nakítà kung mihiphip siyag papil dibangku sa libru,</i> I saw her insert a bill in the book. <i>Naghiphip siyag pistúla sa íyang háwak,</i> He tucked a pistol into his waist. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>bribe</tr>. <i>Mihiphip (nanghiphip) siyag táwu nga mupalúsut sa íyang papílis</i>, He bribed a person who could work out on his papers. <i>Gihiphipan níya ang pulis arun dílì siya dakpun,</i> He bribed the policeman so he wouldn&apos;t be arrested. <pos>n</pos> bribe. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <number>a</number> fond of giving bribes.

<p id=6526><form>hípi<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>chief</tr>, person of highest authority. <i>Hípi sa kapulisan,</i> Chief of Police. <number>1a</number> title for a chief. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; dibyáhi</formx> <number>a</number> the ship&apos;s officer charged with the ship&apos;s trading and business transactions. <number>b</number> the head of a cargo truck sent to buy farm products wholesale. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> be, become a chief.

<p id=6527><form>hípi<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hippie</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> be, become a hippie.

<p id=6528><form>hipì</form> (from <ix>hiplì</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b6P]</itype> <number>1</number> move behind s.t. to hide. <i>Magpahipì (maghipì) ku sa sira,</i> I will hide behind the door. <number>2</number> for s.t. to lurk behind what appears. <i>Luyu sa íyang pahiyum nagpahipì ang kayugut,</i> Behind her smile lurks hatred.

<p id=6529><form>hipíhip</form> <xr>= <sc>HAPÍHIP</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6530><form>hiplì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ABP; c]</itype> <number>1</number> move out of the way, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Aku na lay muhiplì áning mga pintul,</i> I&apos;ll get these pieces of wood out of the way. <i>Nagpahiplì (naghiplì) lang sa suuk ang mga ibis,</i> The kids hid themselves in the corner. <i>Ihiplì úsà ang trabáhu kay mangáun ta,</i> Put your work aside for the moment because we&apos;re going to eat. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> dodge, duck out of the way. <i>Nakahiplì siya sa dihang giistrítan siya sa íyang kuntra,</i> He <pb n=333>ducked to the side when his opponent swung at him.

<p id=6531><form>hiplig</form> <xr>= <sc>HIPLÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6532><form>hiplus</form> <xr>= <sc>HAPLUS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6533><form>hiplut</form> <xr>= <sc>HAPLUS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6534><form>hipnù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> fill s.t. to the brim with a liquid. <i>Ayaw hipnúa ang baldi arun dì mukibà,</i> Don&apos;t fill the pail to the brim so it won&apos;t spill over.

<p id=6535><form>hipsut</form> <xr>= <sc>IPSUT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6536><form>hípun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> tiny shrimp. <number>2</number> <ix>tugnus</ix> fish preserved in salt.

<p id=6537><form>hípus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> gather s.t. up and put it away. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> put s.t. away so as not to lose it. <i>Nakahípus ka ug sulat didtus lamísa?</i> Did you put away a letter that was on the table? <number>1b</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> save money. <i>Maghípus tag diyutayng kwarta pára sa byáhi,</i> Let&apos;s save some money for the trip. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> make up beds. <i>Kamuy muhípus sa inyung katri, dílì aku,</i> You make your beds, not me. <number>3</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> put things away for the night. <i>Kinsa may muhípus sa mga kanding didtus lagúna?</i> Who will bring the goats in from the pasture? <i>Hipúsa ang gibulad nga mais,</i> Gather up the corn that was dried in the sun. <i>Sa nahípus na ang mga bátà,</i> When the children were put into bed. <number>4</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> fold up, draw in the limbs or their analogues on manufactured objects. <i>Mikáyaw ang ayruplánu nga walà mahípus ang ligid,</i> The airplane took off without retracting its wheels. <i>Hipúsa ang ímung tiil, ayawg ipasayà sa agiánan,</i> Draw in your feet. Don&apos;t let them spread out into the walkway. <number>5</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> collect, gather and form a composite whole. <i>Mau ni ang balità nga nahípus karung adláwa,</i> These are the news we gathered today. <number>6</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> kill, do away with. <i>Kay siya may nagbalità ngadtu sa pulis, gihípus siya sa mga ismaglir,</i> Because he sang to the police the smugglers did away with him. <number>7</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> take in a certain amount. <i>Sa pamaligyà muhípus mi ug dyis mil adlaw-adlaw,</i> We take in ten thousand in sales every day. <number>8</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become neat and orderly. <pos>a</pos> neat and orderly. <i>Hípus kaáyu ang kwartu,</i> The bedroom is tidy. <form>&mdash; ug nawung</form> <pos>a</pos> have a grave and composed expression. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2N]</itype> for the face to become composed. <i>Nagpanghipus (nagkahipus) na ang nawung sa himalatyun,</i> The dying man&apos;s face is gradually becoming composed. <form>paN-</form> <number>1</number> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> get ready for a trip. <i>Nanghípus ku pára sa byáhi ugmà,</i> I am preparing for the trip tomorrow. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12S3]</itype> for a womb to make preparations for childbirth with false pains and a small discharge of blood. <i>Manghiugmà pang ianak ning tiyána, Nagpanghipus pa lang ni,</i> This baby won&apos;t be born before some time tomorrow. It&apos;s only making preparations at this point. <form>hipushípus</form> of a sort that can be folded up and stored. <i>Síyang hipushípus,</i> Folding chairs. <form>-ánan</form> <pos>n</pos> place for storing things for the night or for a while. <form>-l-un(&rarr;), -un(&rarr;), -únun</form> <pos>n</pos> things to be kept, put out of the way, or gathered up for the night. <form>kahipsan, kahilipsan</form> <pos>n</pos> tools or instruments for a certain trade. <form>manggi-un</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to put things away where they are safe.

<p id=6538><form>hip-ut</form> <xr>= <sc>GIP-UT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6539><form>hiráda</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> <number>1</number> be <tr>unsuccessful</tr>, <tr>fail</tr>. <i>Nahiráda ang ákung nigusyu sa súnug,</i> My business failed because of the fire. <i>Nahiráda ku sa iksámin kay walà ku makatuun,</i> I failed in the test because I didn&apos;t study. <i>Nahiráda ku sa tárì gahápun,</i> I incurred a great loss in the cockfight yesterday. <number>2</number> fall a victim to sickness, tricks, bad luck, and the like. <i>Nahiráda ku sa trangkásu,</i> I came down with the flu. <i>Nahiráda ku sa mangingilad,</i> I was victimized by the swindler. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> in pool, shoot the cue ball to a place where it will prevent the opponent from getting a good aim at the target. <i>Ihiráda ku ang bulimánu arun dì níya masúd ang utsu,</i> I&apos;ll shoot the cue ball into a position where access to number eight is blocked. <number>4</number> <itype>[A2N; b]</itype> court a girl (colloquial). <i>Kun akuy muhiráda anang bayhána, sugut nà dáyun,</i> If I court that girl, it won&apos;t take her long to say &lsquo;yes&rsquo;. <pos>n</pos> hit a cue ball making a carom.

<p id=6540><form>hirag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> lean to one side. <i>Naghirag ang pusti,</i> The post is leaning to one side. <number>2</number> lean on. <i>Ayaw ug hiragi ang kural kay matumba,</i> Don&apos;t lean on the fence because it will give way.

<p id=6541><form>híral</form> <pos>a</pos> for males to be highly inclined to have coitus. <i>Híral kaáyu ning kabayúa kay muúlag dáyun sa bayi,</i> This horse is very highly sexed. It readily takes to the female. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become highly sexed. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> sexual appetite. <i>Bísag unsa nímu kahíral, pagkuntrul,</i> No matter how strongly you feel the urge to have sex, don&apos;t.

<p id=6542><form>híram</form> <xr>= <sc>HÍLAM</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6543><form>hiraminta, hiramintas, hiramyinta, hiramyintas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tools</tr> for engaging in some handicraft. <i>Hiraminta sa pamanday,</i> Carpenter&apos;s tools. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> have or obtain tools.

<p id=6544><form>hirbabuyna</form> <xr>= <sc>HIRBUBUYNA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6545><form>hirbubuyna</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. mint: <bio>Mentha arvensis</bio>.

<p id=6546><form>hirbularyu</form> <xr>= <sc>ARBULARYU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6547><form>hirdu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hair-do</tr>, <tr>coiffure</tr>. <i>Unsa may ngán ánang ímung hirdu?</i> What do you call your hair-do? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> do the hair. <i>Ang báyut <pb n=334>mauy mihirdu sa ákung buhuk,</i> The homosexual did my hair up. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; c6]</itype> wear a hair-do. <i>Maghirdu kug Prins twist sa bayli,</i> I&apos;ll wear a French twist hair-do to the dance.

<p id=6548><form>hirig</form> <pos>a</pos> in a leaning position. <i>Hirig ang ílang balay human sa bagyu,</i> Their house was tilted to one side after the typhoon. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> lean over to one side. <i>Muhirig ang búti ug usa ka kílid ray kargáhan,</i> The boat will list to one side if you load only one side. <form>hilirgan</form> <pos>a</pos> for kites to be unbalanced in flight. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125]</itype> be, become <tr>unbalanced</tr>.

<p id=6549><form>hiringga</form> <pos>n</pos> apparatus used to give an enema. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> give an <tr>enema</tr>.

<p id=6550><form>hiringgilya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hypodermic syringe</tr>.

<p id=6551><form>hiringgíru</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish.

<p id=6552><form>hiringhiring</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> for the stomach to be bursting with fullness. <i>Naghiringhiring ang ákung tiyan sa kabusug,</i> My abdomen is bursting with fullness.

<p id=6553><form>hírit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> aim blows at s.o. <i>Ug maghinambug ka dinhi, hihiritan ka giyud,</i> If you keep on with that big talk, you&apos;ll get a sound boxing. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> take an additional card in games where the player has an option of so doing. <i>Muhírit ku kay gamay ra ang ákung numiru,</i> Hit me. I still have a small total. <pos>n</pos> the act of asking or giving an extra card.

<p id=6554><form>hirniya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hernia</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> have a hernia.

<p id=6555><form>hirpin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hairpin</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> use a certain hairpin, pin the hair. <i>Dì ku muhirpin ánang tayaun,</i> I refuse to use those rusty hairpins. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> put hairpins in one&apos;s hair. <i>Dì na ku manghirpin kay mag-isprínit ku,</i> I won&apos;t use hairpins because I will use hairspray.

<p id=6556><form>hirsáyans</form> <pos>n</pos> beautician&apos;s course.

<p id=6557><form>híru</form> <pos>n</pos> postal or telegraphic <tr>money order</tr>. <form>&mdash; pust&acaron;l</form> postal money order. <form>&mdash; tiligrapiku</form> telegraphic transfer. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; c]</itype> send money through postal or telegraphic services. <i>Ipahíru (ihíru) dáyun ang báyad,</i> Send a money order for the payment at once.

<p id=6558><form>hirushirus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> suck in one&apos;s breath in pain or displeasure. <i>Naghirushirus (nangpanghirushirus) siya sa kasakit,</i> He sucks in his breath in pain.

<p id=6559><form>hisà</form> <xr>= <sc>ISÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6560><form>hísà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> for animals to mate. <i>Mumabdus na dì madúgay ang átung báka kay gihisáan na,</i> Our cow will soon become pregnant because she has been bred.

<p id=6561><form>hísang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; ab4]</itype> for skin diseases, inflammations to come out in profusion. <i>Hisángun giyud ang d&amacracu;p arun dílì makalunud,</i> Measles should be made to come out profusely in order to avoid complications. <pos>a</pos> skin ailment coming out thickly.

<p id=6562><form>hisgut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> mention, say s.t. in passing. <i>Walà siya muhisgut báhin sa sábut,</i> He didn&apos;t say anything about the agreement. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC; bc]</itype> talk about s.t. <i>Gipanaghisgútan níla ang nahitabù,</i> They talked about what had happened. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. said in passing. <i>Hisgut lang tu níya nákù,</i> He just said that to me in passing. <number>2</number> talk. <i>May hisgut nga mulansad si Imilda,</i> There&apos;s talk that Imelda is going to run for president. <form>-l-an, -ánan</form> <pos>n</pos> subject of conversation.

<p id=6563><form>hisi</form> <xr>= <sc>ÁSI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6564><form>*hislung</form> <form>wà, dì &mdash;</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; b(1)]</itype> not give up doing s.t. until one succeeds. <i>Dì ku muhislung sa ákung pagtuun hangtud maduktur,</i> I won&apos;t give up my studies until I become a doctor. <i>Wà nákù hislungi ang nakautang nákù,</i> I persisted in my efforts in collecting my debts.

<p id=6565><form>hislut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a12]</itype> <number>1a</number> for a string or incasing around s.t. to slip off, cause it to do so. <i>Nahislut ang sapátus pagdinágan,</i> His shoes came off as he was running. <i>Ayaw ug badbára ang lambu. Hisluta lang ang balù,</i> Don&apos;t undo the knot. Just slip off the loop. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> escape by slipping out of the tether. <i>Ang kanding nakahislut sa íyang hukut,</i> The goat has slipped out of its tether rope. <number>2</number> peel off. <i>Nahislut ang kúbal sa íyang pálad,</i> The callous on his hand came off.

<p id=6566><form>hísù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> apply an oily substance to the hair. <i>Dílì siya muhísù ug baratuhun,</i> He won&apos;t use cheap hair oil. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> preparation for the hair. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> apply oil to one&apos;s hair. <i>Dì ku manghísù kay dagul ku,</i> I won&apos;t use hair oil because my hair is short.

<p id=6567><form>Hisukristu</form> <pos>n</pos> Jesus Christ.

<p id=6568><form>hisúpu</form> <pos>n</pos> hyssop (Biblical).

<p id=6569><form>Hisus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> Jesus, name of Christ and a popular Christian name. <number>2</number> mild interjection: <number>a</number> uttered upon discovering that s.t. is to a greater extent than expected. <i>Hisus kamahal,</i> My! How expensive. <number>b</number> uttered when s.t. happens that can&apos;t be remedied. <i>Hisus! Nahúlug ang bátà,</i> Jesus! The baby fell. <number>c</number> making little of s.t.: oh, heck, that&apos;s nothing. <i>&lsquo;Mahal man ni&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Hisus, kabayad nà sila,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;This is expensive.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Oh hell, that&apos;s nothing. They can afford it.&rsquo; <number>d</number> indicating disbelief, feigned or otherwise (used by women and children). <i>Hisus! Túu ka gud. Hambug lang nà,</i> Hmm, you believe that? That&apos;s just big talk. <number>e</number> expressing distaste. <i>Hisus, kabáhù,</i> Jesus! What a smell! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> utter the prayers said for a dying man. <i>Hisusan siya sa dì pa <pb n=335>mamatay,</i> Say the prayers over him before he dies. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> exclaim <ix>Hisus!</ix> <i>Nakapanghisus ku pagkadungug ku sa nutisya,</i> I couldn&apos;t help exclaiming at hearing the news.

<p id=6570><form>Hisusmaryusip</form> (from <ix>Hisus, Maríya i Husip</ix>) <pos>n</pos> rather strong interjection expressing fright or discomfiture. <i>Hisusmaryusip! Nakuyawan ku nímu,</i> Jesus Christ! You scared me. <i>Hisusmaryusip! Makauúlaw,</i> Jesus Christ! How embarrassing!

<p id=6571><form>hiswíta, hiswítas</form> <pos>n</pos> Jesuit. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> be a Jesuit.

<p id=6572><form>hit</form> <pos>n</pos> hit, a popular or obvious success. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> be, become a hit. <i>Sigurádung muhit basta pilikulang law-ay,</i> It is sure to become a hit if it&apos;s a dirty picture. <form>sung-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> popular tune at a certain period. <i>Ang Munlayit Sirinid sunghit sa panahun sa gíra,</i> &lsquo;Moonlight Serenade<corr>&rsquo;</corr> was popular during the war. <number>2</number> pamphlet in which the hit tunes are printed. <i>Kuháa ang sunghit kay manganta ta,</i> Get the song book so we can sing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be, become a hit tune.

<p id=6573><form>hitabù</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>TÁBÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6574><form>hítad</form> <xr>= <sc>HUYÁTID</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6575><form>hítak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for s.t. to present in greater amounts than usual. <i>Naghítak ang kwarta sa súgal,</i> There&apos;s lots of money around at the gambling game. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> become a mire, for a place to turn to mud. <i>Muhítak (mahítak) ning dapíta ug dì bunbúnan ug balas,</i> This place will become a mire if you don&apos;t put sand over it. <pos>a</pos> be a mire. <i>Hítak kaáyu ning ubus sa panghugasan,</i> The ground beneath the sink is all mud.&dagger;

<p id=6576><form>hital</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> for a child to have constant indigestion. <i>Ang bátang taudtaud káun mahital,</i> A child that doesn&apos;t eat on a regular basis develops digestive disorders. <pos>a</pos> having constant diarrhea and a distended stomach.

<p id=6577><form>hit-anmis</form> <pos>a</pos> done in a hit and miss way.

<p id=6578><form>hit-anran</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> hit-and-run. <number>2</number> hit-and-run tactics in boxing.

<p id=6579><form>hiting</form> <pos>a</pos> full to the point that pressure is being exerted. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN]</itype> be, become swollen with fullness. <i>Nanghiting ang íyang tútuy kay mabdus,</i> Her breasts were full because she was pregnant. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> extremely full. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2N]</itype> become extremely full. <i>Naghíting ákung tiyan sa kabusug,</i> My stomach is filled to bursting. <form>hitinghiting</form> <xr>= <sc>HITING</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6580><form>hitsas</form> <xr>= <sc>HITSU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6581><form>hitsu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> complete, having all parts intact. <i>Dílì bitsu ning baráha,</i> This is not a complete deck of cards. <i>Hitsu nag ngípun ang bátà,</i> The baby has all its teeth now. <number>2</number> having been fully furnished. <i>Hitsu kaáyu ang ílang balay sa mga galamitun,</i> Their house is fully furnished with utensils. <i>Hitsu siya sa íyang libru,</i> He has been furnished with all his books. <form>&mdash; diritsu</form> <pos>a</pos> manner of ordering clothes from the tailor whereby the tailor supplies the cloth and the labor. <i>Ang lukat sa tirnu nuybinta písus hitsu diritsu,</i> The suit will cost ninety pesos, cloth included. <form>kuntra &mdash;</form> <pos>a</pos> for a body or structure to be ill-proportioned. <i>Kuntra hitsu siya kay tambuk unyà gamayg batíis,</i> She is ill-proportioned; she is fat but has thin legs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a]</itype> complete a set, furnish complete. <i>Kaanúgung giíhaw wà pa gánì mahitsu ang balhíbu,</i> What a pity to kill it before it even grows big enough to have all its feathers. <form>kahitsúhan, kahitsuan</form> <pos>n</pos> complete set of equipment for some occupation.&dagger;

<p id=6582><form>hitsúra</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> appearance of the face. <i>Paríha mu si Túnig hitsúra,</i> You and Tony have the same facial appearance. <i>Nagmug-ut íyang hitsúra kay walà siya kabahini,</i> He has a sulking expression because he hasn&apos;t gotten his share. <number>2</number> shape, form that presents itself to the eyes. <i>Ang ubud paríha ug hitsúra sa sawa,</i> The eel has the same shape as a snake. <number>2a</number> <formx>walay &mdash;</formx> having come out without any recognizable shape. <i>Way hitsúrang pagkatupíha,</i> Haircut without shape. <number>3</number> <formx>may, (walay) &mdash;</formx> good-looking (ugly). <number>4</number> the nerve! <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>tsura</bx>. <i>Ag hitsúra sa minì nga musulti nákù sa ingun!</i> The nerve of the fool to say that to me! <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> have the face of. <i>Ug aku pay nakahitsúra ánang ímung kagwápu,</i> If I had a handsome face like yours. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> take shape. <i>Nahitsúra na ang balay kay may atup ug bungbung na,</i> The house has taken shape because it has a roof and walls. <i>Hitsuráun nákù ang pul-an mu rag úlug sawa,</i> I will shape the handle into the form of a snake&apos;s head. <number>2a</number> <formx>dílì, walà ma-, mag-</formx> become irrecognizable. <i>Nabuthan siya sa dinamíta ug ang láwas walà mahitsúra,</i> The dynamite exploded on him, and the body became unrecognizable. <number>3</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> be realized as a result of effort. <i>Walay ági nga mahitsúra áning paagíha,</i> You&apos;re not going to realize any output in this way. <form>hitsuráan, hitsuráhan</form> <pos>a</pos> handsome, good-looking person. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become good-looking.

<p id=6583><form>hitudhítud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6N]</itype> be full and move because of fullness. <i>Nanghitudhítud ang úlud sa katambuk,</i> The worm is fat and wriggly with fullness.

<p id=6584><form>híwà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> cut s.t. into smaller pieces or slices. <i>Hiwáa ang karni sa gibag-un ingun ug tudlù,</i> Cut the meat up into slices as thick as a finger. <i>Hiwáa ang úbud ug gagmay,</i> Cut up the bamboo shoots in little <pb n=336>pieces. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> for the emotions to be <tr>deeply affected</tr>. <i>Gihíwà ákung kasingkásing nga nagtan-aw sa makililímus,</i> It moved my heart to look at the beggar. <pos>n</pos> <tr>slice</tr>, <tr>piece</tr> <tr>cut off</tr> of s.t. <form>-ánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cutting board</tr>. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cut up</tr>.

<p id=6585><form>híwal</form> <xr>= <sc>HIWALHÍWAL</sc>.</xr> <form>hiwalhíwal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>writhe</tr>, <tr>wriggle</tr>. <i>Naghiwalhíwal ang úlud,</i> The worm is wriggling.

<p id=6586><form>hiwasa, hiwasà</form> <xr>= <sc>ALIWÁSA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6587><form>hiwátid</form> <xr>= <sc>HUYÁTID</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6588><form>hiwaus</form> <xr>= <sc>HIGWAUS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6589><form>hiwì</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>crooked</tr>, <tr>winding</tr> or <tr>twisting</tr>, <tr>slanting</tr> to one side or <tr>askew</tr>. <i>Hiwing dálan,</i> Crooked road. <i>Hiwì pagkabutang ímung kálù,</i> Your hat is on crooked. <i>Hiwì kaáyu ang tinidur sa bisiklíta,</i> The bicycle fork is badly bent. <number>2</number> <tr>crooked</tr>, <tr>dishonest</tr>. <i>Ang paági sa pagsubasta hiwì kaáyu,</i> The procedure of the bidding was very irregular. <number>3</number> <tr>deformed</tr>. <i>Hiwì siyag nawung,</i> He has a deformed face. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> turn out crooked. <i>Ug mahiwì ang linya, ipausab,</i> If the line comes out crooked, redo it. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1B; a12]</itype> become <tr>crooked</tr>, make s.t. <tr>crooked</tr>. <i>Ayaw ug hiwía ang láray sa síya,</i> Don&apos;t put the chairs in a crooked row. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> make a face at s.o. <form>paN-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> make a face at s.o. <i>Nanghíwì siya nákù kay wà siya tagái nákù ug mansánas,</i> He made a face at me because I did not give him an apple. <form>ka-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>misdeed</tr>. <i>Ang kahiwían sa mga pulitiku,</i> The misdeeds of the politicians.

<p id=6590><form>híwid</form> <xr>= <sc>HUYÁTID</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6591><form>hiyá</form> <tr>getty-up</tr>, word used to prod a horse to start running or to run faster. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> do all at once, at the same time. <i>Naghíyag pamumba sa syudad ang mga bámir,</i> The bombers bombed the city all at the same time. <i>Gihiyáan kug bíyà sa ákung tanang binatunan,</i> All my servants quit at one time.&dagger;

<p id=6592><form>híyà</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>HIYÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6593><form>hiyak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B246]</itype> for a surface to get a <tr>chasm</tr> or trough formed in it. <i>Mihíyak ang yútà paglínug,</i> The earth opened up into a chasm in the earthquake. <i>Nabundak ang sakayan dihang mihíyak ang dágat paglabay sa dakung balud,</i> The boat lurched downwards in the wake of the huge wave. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> <tr>pull in</tr> the stomach. <i>Hiyáka (ihíyak) ang ímung tiyan arun masirhan ímung sípir,</i> Pull in your stomach so we can close the zipper. <number>3</number> <itype>[B246]</itype> feel a hollow sensation in the pit of the stomach. <i>Mihíyak ang tiyan ku pagdulhug sa ilibítur,</i> I got a hollow feeling in the pit of my stomach when the elevator went down.

<p id=6594><form>híyas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>good qualities</tr>, <tr>virtues</tr> not inherent in s.t. <i>Mga híyas nga pagabatunan sa usa ka pangúlu,</i> Qualities that a leader must possess. <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to make a woman beautiful. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> use jewelry or make-up. <i>Nagpahíyas siyag aríyus,</i> She wore earrings as jewelry. <i>Ipalit na lag bugas ang ímung ipahíyas,</i> Why don&apos;t you buy rice with what you spend on personal adornments?

<p id=6595><form>hiyawasa</form> <xr>= <sc>ALIWASA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6596><form>Hiyúba</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Jehovah</tr>. <form>Saksi ni &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> Jehovah&apos;s Witness.

<p id=6597><form>híyud<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> squeeze s.t. soft to make s.t. come out of it. <i>Hiyúra ug maáyu ang hubag arun muguwà ang tanang nánà,</i> Squeeze the boil so all the pus comes out. <i>Sudlig túbig ang tináig hiyúra,</i> Run water into the intestines and squeeze them (to clean them). <number>2</number> squeeze s.t. that is long with the fingers to straighten it out. <i>Hiyúrun ku ang alambri arun mutánus,</i> I will squeeze the wire with my fingers to straighten it out.

<p id=6598><form>híyud<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> get <tr>curled</tr> up from dampness, heat. <i>Nahíyud ang tabla nga nainitan,</i> The lumber curled because it was left in the sun. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>HIYUDHÍYUD</sc>.</xr> <form>hiyudhíyud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> <tr>undulate</tr>, wiggle about with an undulating motion. <i>Naghiyudhíyud ang kílid sa tulda nga gidasmagan sa huyúhuy,</i> The wall of the tarpaulin tent undulated as it was blown by the breeze. <pos>n</pos> <tr>undulation</tr>.

<p id=6599><form>híyum</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> press the lips tight. <i>Inay mutíngug mihíyum na hinúun sa bàbà,</i> Instead of talking she pressed her lips tight. <form>hiyumhiyum</form> <xr>= <sc>KIPÌKIPÌ</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>KÍPÌ</sc>.</xr> <form>pa-, pa-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> smile. <i>Mipahiyum kanímu ang kapaláran,</i> Lady Luck smiled on you. <i>Pahyúmi ang bátà,</i> Smile at the child. <pos>n</pos> <tr>smile</tr>. <form>mapa-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>smiling</tr>.

<p id=6600><form>híyung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6c1]</itype> for the eyes to <tr>squint</tr>, close, particularly to see s.t. better. <i>Mihíyung ang mata ni Imuy nga mitútuk kanákù,</i> Emoy squinted as he looked at me. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>slit-eyed</tr>, having a piece of epidermis over the eyes so that they look very narrow. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> somewhat <tr>squint-eyed</tr>. <form>hiyunghiyung, hiyunghíyung</form> <xr>= <sc>KIPÌKIPÌ</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>KÍPÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6601><form>híyus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b4]</itype> for air to leak out. <i>Dì makahíyus ang hángin kay maáyug balbula,</i> The air can&apos;t escape because it has a good valve. <i>Nahyúsan mi,</i> We had a flat tire. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; b7P]</itype> become <tr>deflated</tr>, decrease in size like s.t. deflated. <i>Nahiyus ang pabúrut,</i> The air came out of the balloon. <i>Nagkahiyus ang hubag,</i> The boil is subsiding. <i>Pahyúsi (hyúsi) nang háwak mu,</i> Take s.t. off your waist. <number>3</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> become decreased in amount. <i>Bag-u pa gánì kung nagpalit ug usa ka bákid bugas nahíyus lang dáyun,</i> I bought a cavan <pb n=337>of rice only recently and how quickly it was consumed. <i>Nagkahiyus na ang bahà,</i> The flood is going down now. <number>3a</number> <itype>[B2; b7]</itype> for the amount of food in the stomach to decrease through digestive action. <i>Wà pa gánì mahíyus ang paniudtu, paínit na pud,</i> Before we&apos;ve even digested our lunch, they serve tea. <pos>a</pos> broke, without money. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> leaky, letting air or gas out. <i>Hiyus ang búla,</i> Leaky ball. <number>2</number> s.t. from which some or all gas has come out. <i>Hiyus ang ligid,</i> One of your tires is soft.

<p id=6602><form>hiyut</form> <xr>= <sc>HÚSUD</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6603><form>hmm<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> onomatopoetic representation for humming.

<p id=6604><form>hmm<sub>2</sub>, hmp</form> expression of annoyance, anger, disregard. <i>Hmp, ábi níya mukupus ku,</i> Humph, he thought I would back down. <i>Hmp, tsúra níya,</i> Humph, the nerve of him.

<p id=6605><form>hú</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> whoa, a command for a horse to stop (pronounced with a long, low tone). <number>2</number> hey, a call to get attention from way in a distance (pronounced with a high pitch). <number>3</number> shout uttered when one is called to <corr sic=acknowledged>acknowledge</corr> that he has heard the call.

<p id=6606><form>húbad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>HULBAD</sc>.</xr> <number>1</number> a <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> break out of a hold in wrestling or judo. <i>Way makahúbad ning gwarníha,</i> No one can break out of this lock. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>translate</tr> into another language. <i>Ihúbad (hubárun) nátù sa Ininglis ang Binisayà,</i> Let&apos;s translate the Visayan into English. <form>&mdash; ug damgu</form> interpret dreams. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> solve a problem. <i>Lisud hubárun ning gumunhápa,</i> This is a difficult problem to solve. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> move to free oneself from a lock in wrestling. <number>2</number> <tr>translation</tr>. <form>hubadhúbad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a3]</itype> justify to oneself why things are as they are. <i>Naghubadhúbad siya sa íyang kaugalíngun nga hustu, bisag gipakasayup sa uban,</i> He justified to himself that it was proper, even if others misunderstood. <form>mag-r-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>translator</tr>, language <tr>interpreter</tr>. <form>tag-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> translator of some specific piece.

<p id=6607><form>hubag</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>boil</tr>. <i>Hápit na mubutu ang hubag,</i> The boil is about to come to a head. <number>2</number> any swelling, usually reddish, on and beneath the skin. <i>Daghag hubag ang náwung sa pinaakan,</i> He has swellings all over the face where he was bitten. <number>3</number> magical expression uttered repeatedly by an <ix>unglù</ix> that has gotten injured as he immerses himself in a river in order to get cured instantly. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> get a boil. <i>Gihubagan siya sa lubut,</i> He has a boil on his buttocks. <number>2</number> <itype>[B3(1)46]</itype> <tr>swell</tr>. <i>Mihubag ang ági sa íyang indyiksyun,</i> The region on his arm which was injected swelled. <i>Naghubag ang íyang mata sa paghinílak,</i> Her eyes are swollen from constant crying. <form>&mdash; sa bábuy</form> <xr>= <sc>DÁTI</sc>.</xr> <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> newly harvested grains which haven&apos;t been dried. <i>Dì magaling ang húbag nga mais kay mapusà lang,</i> Fresh corn kernels cannot be milled because they will just get squeezed. <xr><ix>see also</ix> <sc>KULUB</sc>.</xr> &dagger;

<p id=6608><form>húbak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>asthma</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; a4]</itype> have an asthma attack. <i>Muhúbak (hubákun) nà siya basta mahágù,</i> He has an asthma attack when he gets overworked. <i>Naghúbak nang batáa tibuuk gabíi,</i> That child had an asthma attack the whole night. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having asthma.

<p id=6609><form>hubas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B23(1); a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>dry up</tr> or <tr>drain</tr> liquids out. <i>Mihubas na ang linung-ag,</i> The rice water has evaporated. <i>Nahubas ang sapà,</i> The creek dried up. <i>Hubsun nímu ang ákung lúhà,</i> You&apos;ll make me cry till I run out of tears. <i>Nahubsan mi. Wà nay túbig ang tangki,</i> We ran out of water and the tank is empty. <number>1a</number> <formx>maka- ug danaw</formx> having big feet (lit. that can dry up a pond by stepping into it). <number>2</number> for patience, luck to run out. <i>Nagkahubas ang ákung paílub,</i> My patience is wearing thin. <i>Nahubsan ku sa pálad,</i> My luck ran out. <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> method of catching fish by setting a trap in a place where water runs out, either in a tidal pool or in a stream where the flow is diverted. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> catch fish by this method. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> take care of rice, corn grits until they get cooked dry. <i>Ikay pahubas sa linung-ag,</i> Take care of (lit. let dry) the rice I am cooking.

<p id=6610><form>hubaw</form> <xr>= <sc>HUBAWHUBAW</sc>.</xr> <form>hubawhubaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46N; b4]</itype> for a part of the body to <tr>swell</tr> so that the flesh is soft and pudgy. <i>Mihubawhubaw (gihubawhubawan) ang íyang mga mata ug hinílak,</i> Her eyes swelled from crying. <i>Naghubawhubaw ang íyang bitíis tungud sa biribíri,</i> Her legs got swollen due to beri-beri. <pos>a</pos> swollen, such that the flesh is soft.

<p id=6611><form>hubhub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> devour food greedily. <i>Gihubhub (gihubhuban) sa mga irù ang manuk,</i> The dogs tore and devoured the chicken.

<p id=6612><form>húbit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>describe</tr> in words. <i>Ákung hubítun ang nahitabù,</i> I&apos;ll describe what happened. <pos>n</pos> <tr>description</tr>.

<p id=6613><form>hubkas</form> <pos>n</pos> celebration offered by a family on the first anniversary of a relative&apos;s death. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> observe the first anniversary of s.o.&apos;s death. <i>Unyà ra ta magminyù ug kahubkásan ang ákung bána,</i> We&apos;ll wait to get married until my husband has been dead a year (has had the first death anniversary celebration). <number>2</number> come out of one year&apos;s mourning.

<p id=6614><form>hublag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> for a crowd to do one thing together with vigor. <i>Mihublag ug pangatáwa <pb n=338>ang mga tumatan-aw,</i> The onlookers all broke into laughter. <i>Gihublagan ug pangáun sa mga bátà ang kík,</i> The children swarmed over the cake. <number>2</number> for crowds to run in every direction. <i>Mihublag (nanghublag) ang mga táwu sa singgit nga &lsquo;kaláyu!&rsquo;,</i> The people ran in every direction at the shout of &lsquo;fire!&rsquo;.

<p id=6615><form>hublut</form> <xr>= <sc>HULBUT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6616><form>húbù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> take off s.t. one wears. <i>Hubúa ang ímung sapátus,</i> Take off your shoes. <i>Gihubúan níla ang bag-ung pyánu sa íyang tabun,</i> They took the cover off of the new piano. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b]</itype> <form>&mdash; sa katungdánan, sutána</form> resign from one&apos;s duties, be relieved of duties. <i>Maghúbù siya sa íyang sutána únà magminyù,</i> He will resign from his priestly duties before he marries. <i>Gihubúan siya sa íyang katungdánan,</i> He was relieved of his duties. <form>&mdash; sa Santu Ninyu</form> <pos>n</pos> the Friday following the feast of the Holy Child (held on a Sunday) during which the elaborate attire of the image is changed. <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> the dress that a bride wears after taking off her wedding dress. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bare</tr>, <tr>naked</tr>. <i>Hubung láwas,</i> A naked body. <number>2</number> devoid or wanting in. <i>Hubù sa mga mwiblis,</i> Bare of furniture. <i>Hubù sa pagláum,</i> Devoid of hope. <number>3</number> simple, plain. <i>Dì siya musúruy tungud sa hubù nga katarúngan nga wà siyay kwarta,</i> He won&apos;t go out for the simple reason that he has no money. <form>hubùhúbù</form> <pos>n</pos> showing off nakedness. <i>Salídang hubùhúbù,</i> Film full of nude scenes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; c1]</itype> show off nakedness. <form>-in-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> clothes that are too soiled to wear. <i>Ihayhay ang ímung mga hinubuan arun mamala ang singut,</i> Hang your soiled clothes up so that the perspiration will dry out. <form>ka-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> barrenness, being unadorned. <i>Ang kahubù sa kinaiyáhan,</i> Unadorned nature.

<p id=6617><form>hubug</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>drunk</tr>, <tr>intoxicated</tr>. <i>Hubug kaáyu ang táwu kay nagsusapinday na,</i> The man must be very drunk. He is staggering. <i>Hubug sa kalípay,</i> Intoxicated with happiness. <i>Hubug sa báhù,</i> Whoozy from the stench. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P; a]</itype> make drunk. <i>Hubgun ku si Pípi,</i> I&apos;ll get Pepe drunk. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> make oneself drunk. <i>Maghubug ku arun malímut,</i> I will get drunk in order to forget. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be <tr>groggy</tr> from some outside cause. <i>Nahubug ang buksidur sa nagpungasing kúmù sa kuntra,</i> The boxer became groggy from the blows his opponent rained on him. <i>Ang anghit nímu makahubug,</i> Your stench can make one pass out. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23PB126; a1]</itype> <tr>excite</tr> greatly, overcome with powerful emotion. <i>Nahubug siya sa gahum nga gisángun kaníya,</i> He was intoxicated by the power entrusted to him. <i>Hubgun ku ang babáyi sa mga pasálig,</i> I&apos;ll intoxicate the girl with promises. <form>(&larr;)</form> <itype>[C2]</itype> engage in drunken revelry. <i>Maghúbug sila kay nakadawat ug bakpi,</i> They will go on a spree because they received their back pay. <form>hubgánun</form> <pos>a</pos> easily getting intoxicated with liquor, smoke, nauseating odors. <i>Dílì ku makasustinir ug panabákù kay hubgánun kaáyu ku,</i> I can not stand smoking because I easily get intoxicated by the smoke. <form>hubughúbug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> get drunk habitually. <i>Dílì ka maghubughúbug samtang mag-iskuyla ka,</i> You should not drink while you are attending school. <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> act or do s.t. as a drunk would. <form>pala-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>drunkard</tr>.

<p id=6618><form>hubun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fontanel</tr>, the soft, boneless areas in the skull of a baby or young animal which are later closed by the formation of bone. <form>hubunhubun</form> <xr>= <sc>HUBUN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6619><form>hubung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>hide</tr>, keep out of sight. <i>Mihubung ang adlaw luyu sa búkid,</i> The sun hid behind the mountain. <i>Lasang nga ámung gihubngan,</i> The jungle we hid in. <number>1a</number> for s.t. different to lurk behind what appears. <i>Ang íyang pahiyum gihubngan sa pagdumut,</i> Hatred lurked behind his smile. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for the one who is &lsquo;it&rsquo; in hide-and-seek to cover his face. <i>Samtang maghubung ka, ayaw ug lìlì,</i> When you cover your face, don&apos;t peek. <pos>n</pos> turn to hide one&apos;s face in hide-and-seek. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put s.t. out of sight. <form>pina-</form> <pos>n</pos> weapon hidden for emergency purposes.

<p id=6620><form>húbung</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>full</tr> and <tr>plump</tr>. <i>Húbung ning mga síku,</i> These sapodillas are nice and plump. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> full and rounded. <i>Magkahúbung ang láwas sa babáying maghinága,</i> The body of a girl becomes full and rounded as she approaches adolescence.

<p id=6621><form>húbut</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>HULBUT</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>BULHUT</sc>, <i>1, 2, 3.</i></xr>

<p id=6622><form>húbuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>swell</tr> from a bruise. <i>Mihúbuy ang agtang níyang napangkà,</i> His forehead bumped against s.t. and swelled. <form>hubuyhubuy</form> <pos>a</pos> very plump and soft to the touch. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become soft to the touch. <i>Ug maghubuyhubuy na gánì ang hubag hápit na nà mubutu,</i> When a boil gets soft and tender, it is about to erupt. <i>Naghubuyhubuy na ang tsíkus sa kahinug,</i> The sapodillas are soft from ripeness.

<p id=6623><form>hubyà</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lazy</tr> (dialectal).

<p id=6624><form>hubyas</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. boat hollowed from a single log.

<p id=6625><form>húd</form> <xr>= <sc>HULUD</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6626><form>húdas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Judas</tr> Iscariot or St. Jude Thaddeus. a betrayer.

<p id=6627><form>hudhud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>scrape off</tr>, <tr>chip</tr>, <tr>uproot</tr> s.t. <pb n=339>shallow by pushing it with a knife or some instrument. <i>Naghudhud siya sa káhuy pára sungsung,</i> He&apos;s whittling a piece of wood with a chisel to make a stopper. <i>Hudhúra ang mga sagbut sa daplin sa dálan,</i> Scrape out the weeds growing at the edges of the road. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> bury in a shallow way. <i>Gihudhud lang ang gibunù,</i> They just put the murder victim in a shallow grave. <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> catch with a <ix>hudhud</ix> net. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> instrument for scraping, chipping. <number>2</number> k.o. dip net used in shallow waters for catching small fish and crustaceans. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> catch with a <ix>hudhud</ix> net. <pos>n</pos> fishing with a <ix>hudhud.</ix>

<p id=6628><form>hudir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> bother, disturb the peace. <i>Ang inyung áway nakahudir sa mga silíngan,</i> Your quarrel has disturbed the neighbors. <i>Gihudir ang mamumúnù sa íyang kunsyinsiya,</i> The murderer was bothered by his conscience. <number>2</number> make s.o. suffer discomfort or misery. <i>Ang ímung bisyu mauy maghudir nímu,</i> Your vices will make you miserable. <i>Gihurut níyag káun ang sud-an. Akuy nahudir ug sulag asin,</i> She ate all the food. All I had left to eat was rice and salt.

<p id=6629><form>Hudíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Judea</tr>.

<p id=6630><form>hudiyákà</form> <pos>n</pos> noisy <tr>merriment</tr>, a <tr>rejoicing</tr>. <i>Ang Pasku punù sa hudiyákà,</i> Christmas is full of noisy merriment. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12C2; c5]</itype> <tr>rejoice</tr>, make merry. <i>Gihudiyákà níla ang nahitabù,</i> They were noisily merry over what had happened. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> full of noise and merriment.

<p id=6631><form>hudíyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>Jew</tr>. <number>2</number> s.o. regarded as evil, cruel. <i>Hudíyu kaáyu nang tawhána. Wà giyuy kalúuy,</i> That man is a demon. He has no mercy. <i>Ikawng hudiyúa ka, ay na giyug bálik diri,</i> You s.o.b.! Don&apos;t you ever come back here!

<p id=6632><form>hudlat</form> <pos>n</pos> idle threat made to frighten s.o., but which one has no intention of carrying out. <i>Dì lang ni hudlat. Tinud-un giyud,</i> This is no mere threat. I mean to do it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a1]</itype> frighten with an idle threat. <i>Hudlátun níla ang isdà paingun sa báling,</i> They are frightening the fish into going to the net.

<p id=6633><form>hudnu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> put into the oven to cook. <i>Naghudnu siya sa kík,</i> She is baking the cake. <number>2</number> dry coconut meat in a wood-fired drier. <i>Hudnúhun (ihudnu) lang ang lubi ug tingúlan,</i> We simply dry coconut meat in the drier during the rainy season. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>oven</tr>. <number>2</number> coconut drier made of bamboo flooring under which there is a pit where fire is kept going. <form>hudnuhan</form> <xr>= <sc>HUDNU</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> baking.

<p id=6634><form>húg</form> <xr>= <sc>HULUG</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>HÚLUG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6635><form>h&umacracu;g</form> <xr>= <sc>HÚLUG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6636><form>húgà</form> <xr>= <sc>HULGÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6637><form>hugádu</form> <pos>a</pos> for machine and structure parts to fit too loosely. <i>Hungaw ang tangki kay ang balbula hugádu,</i> The tank is leaky because the valve is loose. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become <tr>loose</tr>.

<p id=6638><form>hugadur</form> <pos>a</pos> <pos>a</pos> <tr>habitual gambler</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become a <tr>gambler</tr>.

<p id=6639><form>hugalbù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> loud popping, plopping sound. <i>Ang hugalbù sa pag-ibut sa bakíta sa luthang,</i> The popping sound when you pull the plunger. <number>2</number> <tr>swampy</tr> place, <tr>mire</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a hollow, plopping sound. <i>Maghugalbù ang túbig nga mag-ambak,</i> Water dropping from a height produces a loud plopping sound. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> fall with a plop. <i>Naghugalbù ku sa bínug,</i> I fell into the mire.

<p id=6640><form>hugalbung</form> <pos>n</pos> heavy pounding or thumping sound. <i>Ang hugalbung sa bawud,</i> The pounding sound of the waves. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make a heavy pounding or thumping sound. <i>Mihugalbung ang usa ka búlig lubi nga nah&umacracu;g,</i> The bunch of coconuts fell and hit the ground with a loud thumping sound. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> continuous or off-and-on pounding or thumping sound.

<p id=6641><form>hugalbut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make a popping or plopping sound. <i>Mihugalbut ang luthang dihang gikalit ug hulbut ang bakíta,</i> The popgun popped when the plunger was suddenly pulled out. <i>Naghugalbut ang íyang sapátus sa lápuk,</i> His shoes went plop plop in the mud.

<p id=6642><form>hugangkul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>clank</tr>, <tr>clatter</tr>. <i>Mihugangkul ang kaldíru nga nalígid sa hagdanan,</i> The pot clattered as it rolled down the stairs. <number>2</number> land in jail. <i>Mihugangkul siya sa prisuhan kay nangáwat man,</i> He landed in jail because he stole.

<p id=6643><form>hugan-ub</form> <xr>= <sc>LUGAN-UB</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6644><form>hugar<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get the chance to do mischief by being momentarily free from s.o.&apos;s watchful eyes. <i>Nakahugar mi sa balay kay wà ang íyang ginikánan,</i> We had a chance to do mischief because her parents were gone. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> impose one&apos;s wishes on s.o. <i>Ngánung maghugar ka sa ákung kaugalíngun?</i> Why do you tell me what to do in my own house?

<p id=6645><form>hugar<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. institution during pre-war times that gave out mortgages on real estate. <i>Naimbargu sa hugar ang ílang balay,</i> The bank foreclosed the mortgage on their house. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> be mortgaged to the <ix>hugar.</ix> <i>Ihugar nátù ning átung yútà pára ipuhúnan,</i> We&apos;ll mortgage our land to the <ix>hugar</ix> to get capital.

<p id=6646><form>húgas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b6(1)]</itype> wash anything but clothes. <i>Hugási ang prútas únà kan-a,</i> Wash the fruit before you eat it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> make clean <pb n=340>in a religious or moral sense, purify. <i>Hugási ang ímung kangil-ad pinaági sa pagbag-u,</i> Cleanse yourself of your immoral deeds by reforming. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>exterminate</tr>, <tr>rid</tr> a place of s.t. <i>Wà mahúgas ni Hitlir ang mga Hudíyu,</i> Hitler did not succeed in exterminating the Jews. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to <tr>clean</tr>, esp. the swab for cleaning palm toddy dregs out of the tube in which it had been gathered. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>wash</tr> oneself. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dishwater</tr>. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dishes</tr> to be washed. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> place for washing. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>HUGASUN</sc>.</xr> <form>paN-an(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>HUGASAN</sc>, <i>n 1.</i></xr>

<p id=6647><form>húgaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dirty</tr>, <tr>unclean</tr>. <i>Húgaw na ang íyang sinínà,</i> His shirt is soiled. <i>Húgaw kaáyu nang kan-anána,</i> That eatery is terribly unclean. <number>2</number> <tr>dirty</tr>, of questionable morality. <i>Ayg panarátu ánang bayhána kay húgaw nà,</i> Don&apos;t court that girl. She is of questionable morals. <i>Húgaw kaáyu ang kagamhánan,</i> We have a corrupt government. <i>Húgaw kaáyu muáway tung baksíra,</i> That boxer fights dirty. <number>2a</number> <formx>&mdash; ug batásan</formx> having <tr>bad traits</tr>, ugly ways of conducting oneself. <i>Húgawg batásan kay isipan,</i> He has a bad character because he counts favors he did for people. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>soil</tr>, make s.t. <tr>dirty</tr>. <i>Ayaw hugáwi ang ákung ngálan,</i> Do not besmirch my name. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> do s.t. in a dirty way. <i>Ayaw hugáwa ang inyung pagdúlà,</i> Don&apos;t play dirty. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> make oneself ridiculous by doing s.t. one is not capable of accomplishing. <i>Naghúgaw kag aswat ánang batu, mu ra kag kusgan,</i> You are making yourself ridiculous lifting that stone as if you were strong. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dirt</tr>. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; sa laláki</formx> <tr>semen</tr> (euphemism). <number>3</number> <tr>waste</tr> matter. <i>Ang húgaw ánang pabrikáha anhà ra áwas sa subà,</i> The waste products from that factory go into the river. <i>Bátang nagdúlà sa kaugalíngun níyang húgaw,</i> A child playing with his own feces. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> given to dirty habits. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become given to dirty habits. <form>ma-</form> <xr>= <sc>HÚGAW</sc>, <i>a</i>.</xr> <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> dirtiness. <number>2</number> corruptness. <form>hugawhugaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <i>1</i> dirty oneself up. <i>Ngánung naghugawhugaw man ka dihà sa yánang?</i> Why are you dirtying yourself in the mire? <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>HÚGAW</sc>, <i>v 2.</i></xr>

<p id=6648><form>hugay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>device</tr> consisting of strings to which noisemakers are hung to scare away birds that feed on rice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put up such a device.

<p id=6649><form>hugáyaw</form> <xr>= <sc>HUGYAW</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6650><form>hughug</form> <xr>= <sc>HALUGHUG<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=6651><form>hugità</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; a12]</itype> for corn grits that are supposed to be cooked dry to come out wet and unevenly cooked. <i>Maghugità ang kan-un ug dílì nímu sugkáyun,</i> Corn grits will not cook evenly if you don&apos;t keep stirring them. <pos>a</pos> corn grits that are wet and unevenly cooked.

<p id=6652><form>hugkal</form> (from <ix>hukal</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> for s.t. that is spread over a surface and stuck to it to loosen. <i>Mihugkal na ang kupras,</i> The coconut meat is loose in the shell now. <i>Nagkahugkal na ang manikiyur sa ákung mga kuku,</i> My nail polish is getting loose. <number>2</number> for a cough to loosen. <i>Tambal nga nakahugkal (nakapahugkal) sa ákung ubu,</i> Medicine that loosened my cough.

<p id=6653><form>hugkas</form> <xr>= <sc>HUBKAS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6654><form>hugkat</form> (from <ix>lúkat</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> dig up s.t. out from under s.t. else. <i>Daghang nahugkatan (hihugkatan) nílang mga karáang kabtángan sa Maktan,</i> They have unearthed lots of old treasures on Mactan. <number>2</number> dig out to find s.t. not known. <i>Ímu pa bang hugkátun ang nangági?</i> Do you still have to dig to find out about what has long since been water over the dam?

<p id=6655><form>hugmad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> clean rice and let it dry part way before storing it. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> rice cleaned and half-dried, ready for storing.

<p id=6656><form>hugnà</form> <pos>n</pos> one of a series of events or subdivisions in a sporting event. <i>Únang hugnà sa lumbà sa bisiklíta,</i> The first lap of the bicycle race. <i>Ang únang hugnà sa íyang pánaw,</i> The first leg of his trip. <i>Ang ikaduhang hugnà sa súlung,</i> The second phase of the assault. <form>hugnàhugnà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> do s.t. by laps, installments. <i>Hugnàhugnáun nátug túkud ang taytáyan,</i> Let&apos;s construct the bridge in phases. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> make repeated attempts. <i>Gihugnàhugnáan na nákung iprinda ning singsínga,</i> I&apos;ve made repeated attempts to pawn this ring (without much success). <number>3</number> <itype>[B13]</itype> for rain to fall heavily at short intervals. <i>Ayaw na lang panghayhay kay naghugnàhugnà ang ulan,</i> Don&apos;t hang out the wash because it is showering. <pos>n</pos> s.t. that comes at intervals, e.g., rain showers.

<p id=6657><form>hugnù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3PB12; a1]</itype> for structures to collapse, cause them to do so. <i>Mahugnù ang taytáyan ug mabug-atan,</i> The bridge will collapse if too heavy a weight passes over it. <i>Nagkahugnù na ang balayng karáan,</i> The house is about to collapse because it is so old. <number>1a</number> for a person to collapse. <i>Nahugnù siya pagkadungug sa balità,</i> She collapsed when she heard the news. <number>1b</number> for hopes, peace, life to collapse. <i>Nahugnù ang ílang kalípay pagkamatay sa bátà,</i> When their child died, their happiness was destroyed. <i>Hugnúun ku ang íyang pagláum sa ákung balíbad,</i> I&apos;ll refuse him and destroy his hopes. <i>Nahugnù ang kagamhánan tungud sa <pb n=341>mga kumunista,</i> The government was toppled because of the communists. <number>3</number> <itype>[AP; bc1]</itype> harvest coconuts. <i>Maghugnù (magpahugnù) mi sa lubi káda trimistri,</i> We harvest the coconuts every four months. <pos>n</pos> yield of coconuts. <i>Dyis míl ang hugnù sa kalubinhan,</i> The coconut plantation has a yield of ten thousand nuts.

<p id=6658><form>hugpà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> alight in a swarm. <i>Mihugpà ang dúlun sa maisan,</i> The locusts alighted on the cornfield in a swarm. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> descend on s.t. like a swarm. <i>Mihugpà ang kangitngit,</i> Darkness settled over the area. <i>Gihugpáan sa gútum ang tibuuk prubinsiya,</i> Famine descended on the province.

<p id=6659><form>hugpit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> extract s.t. by picking it off with the tip of the fingers. <i>Hugpítig madyung ang ímung sinínà,</i> Pick the sand-spurs from your dress.

<p id=6660><form>hugpung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a6]</itype> take long things in the two hands and bunch them together. <i>Hugpúnga ang ímung buhuk,</i> Tie your hair into a bunch. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do s.t. by the whole bunch. <i>Hugpúngun (ihugpung) pagtanyag ang tulu ka mátang sa tablíta,</i> The three kinds of tablets are offered as a group. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12C; c16]</itype> unite together in a group. <i>Hugpúngun (ihugpung) nátù ang mga mamumuu,</i> Let&apos;s organize the laborers into a union. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> bunch, a number of long things of the same kind tied in a bunch. <i>Usa ka hugpung nga sibúyas,</i> A bunch of green onions. <number>2</number> a group of people having a common purpose or interest. <i>Hugpung nga pulitikanhun,</i> A political faction. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> group of people having s.t. in common.

<p id=6661><form>hugpuy</form> <pos>a</pos> having a downcast, depressed look from a feeling of disappointment, guilt, or humility. <i>Hugpuy kaáyu siyang midúul sa íyang amahan kay may salà man,</i> She came to her father with her head bowed, because she had done him wrong. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for the face to assume such a look.

<p id=6662><form>hugsaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>mischievous</tr>, moving about all the time. <i>Hugsaw nga pagkabátà, gitágù níya ang antiyúhus sa íyang lúlu,</i> He is a mischievous child. He hid his grandfather&apos;s eyeglasses. <i>Ang hugsaw nga bátà dì mahimutang,</i> A restless child will not sit still. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b1]</itype> be mischievous, moving about all the time.

<p id=6663><form>hugù</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>frail</tr>, <tr>emaciated</tr>. <i>Hugù kaáyug láwas ning batáa kay walay maáyung káun,</i> This child has a very frail body because it doesn&apos;t get good food. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B24; b3]</itype> lose weight, become thin, esp. due to sickness. <i>Mihugù si Bin gíkang nauspital,</i> Ben had lost weight considerably when he returned home from the hospital.

<p id=6664><form>hugung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P]</itype> get away in great speed. <i>Mihugung (mipahugung) ug dágan ang mangunguut,</i> The pickpocket ran away at top speed.

<p id=6665><form>húgung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S3]</itype> produce a steady <tr>humming sound</tr>. <i>Unsa rung naghugung sa radiyu?</i> What&apos;s that humming sound in the radio? <form>hugunghúgung</form> <pos>n</pos> a humming device installed on the top part of a kite, shaped like a small bow and strung with a strip of dry buri leaf, which is raised and hums in the onrush of wind.

<p id=6666><form>hugunhúgun</form> <pos>n</pos> talk about doing s.t., speculation or plans. <i>Adúnay hugunhúgun nga dismisun ang ílang kásu,</i> There is talk that their case will be dismissed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b15]</itype> for there to be talk about s.t. <i>Gihugunhugúnan (gihugunhúgun) nga sugdan na gayud ang taytáyan,</i> There is talk that at last they will begin work on the bridge.

<p id=6667><form>hugup, húgup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> go s.w. in a <tr>large group</tr>, <tr>throng</tr> s.w. <i>Mihúgup ang mga táwu sa artista,</i> The people all thronged around the actress. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be united in a desire. <i>Naghúgup sila pagpalagput sa ílang kapitan dil baryu,</i> They were unanimous in their call to dismiss the barrio captain.

<p id=6668><form>húgus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> raise or lower s.t. with a string or rope over a stick or pulley. <i>Siyay mihúgus sa bandíra,</i> He raised the flag. <number>2</number> pull pursing strings. <i>Hugúsa ang písì pagsira sa bág,</i> Pull the purse strings to close the bag. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> action of raising or lowering s.t. carefully or on ropes. <number>2</number> name given to the <ix>súgat</ix> ceremony of Easter Sunday, so called because at the point that Christ and the Holy Mother meet, angels (<ix>alilúya</ix>) are lowered. <number>3</number> the name given to the procession in the evening of Good Friday which represents the carrying of the body of Christ to the grave. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> string used for raising or moving s.t. <i>Hugus sa tilun,</i> The curtain string. <form>hugushúgus</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. manipulated by pulleys or drawstrings.

<p id=6669><form>hugut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> firmly <tr>tied</tr>, <tr>attached</tr>, <tr>closed</tr>. <i>Hugut kaáyu nga pagkasira sa garapun,</i> The jar lid is closed very tight. <i>Hugut níya ang sinínà,</i> Her dress is tight on her. <number>2</number> <tr>taut</tr>, holding tight. <i>Ang kwirdas sa sista hugut kaáyu,</i> The guitar strings are very taut. <i>Hugut nga ginaksan,</i> A firm embrace. <i>Hugut ang íyang impluwinsiya sa gubirnadur,</i> He has a strong influence on the governor. <number>3</number> firm in belief, purpose, feeling. <i>Hugut ákung pagtúu,</i> I am of the firm belief... <i>Hugut íyang pagsúpak,</i> She was strongly opposed. <i>Hugut kaáyu ang ílang paghinigugmaay,</i> They love each other <pb n=342>very deeply. <number>3a</number> <formx>&mdash; ang puása</formx> for there to be intense <tr>fasting</tr>. <number>4</number> be in a <tr>tight</tr> situation financially. <i>Hugut ang íyang kahimtang kay way trabáhu,</i> He&apos;s in a tight situation because he lost his job. <number>5</number> for the voice to be <tr>strained</tr> in trying to reach a high note. <i>Ug muhugut ang batingting, mangugat ang magkanta,</i> If the singer strains to reach a high note, his veins stand out prominently. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; b5]</itype> become <tr>tight</tr>, <tr>firm</tr>, <tr>taut</tr>; cause s.t. to be so. <i>Mihugut ang íyang apapángig kay nasukù,</i> His jaws tightened in fury. <i>Luktan ang tiil sa bábuy ug muhugut ang hukut,</i> The pig&apos;s feet will have rope marks if the tether rope is too tight. <i>Átung hugtun (hugtan) ang sira sa butilya,</i> Let&apos;s tighten the bottle cap. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2C; b8]</itype> be <tr>intent on</tr>, <tr>sincere</tr> about doing s.t., become sincere. <i>Mihugut siya pag-ampù,</i> He prayed intensely. <i>Naghúgut sila paghinigugmaay,</i> They were deeply in love with each other. <i>Hugti (hugta) pagdisiplína ang ímung anak,</i> Keep your child under tight discipline. <number>3</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for one&apos;s financial situation to become <tr>tight</tr>. <number>4</number> <formx>&mdash; ang, sa bakus</formx> <number>a</number> <itype>[A1C12; b5c1]</itype> <tr>sacrifice</tr> in a difficult financial situation (lit. tighten the belt). <i>Hugti (hugta, ihugut) inyung bakus kay dì ku kasúd ug trabáhu,</i> You&apos;ll have to make sacrifices because I cannot find a job. <number>b</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> <tr>intensify</tr> a drive against s.o. <i>Gihugtan na sa bakus sa písi ang mga ismaglir,</i> The P.C. is now intensifying their drive against smugglers. <number>c</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> <tr>resolve</tr> firmly. <i>Hugta ang ímung bakus ug mangasáwa ka ba,</i> Resolve firmly to do it if you get married.

<p id=6670><form>húgut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>pull</tr> in rope or the like. <i>Kinsay naghúgut sa pasul nga ákung gituntun?</i> Who pulled in the fishing line that I lowered? <i>Ayaw hugúta ang lagdà sa sinínà,</i> Do not pull out the temporary stitches in the dress. <number>2</number> <tr>pick</tr> nits from a strand of hair. <i>Hugúta ang mga lusà arun dì makapanguyamad,</i> Remove the nits so they won&apos;t hatch.

<p id=6671><form>húguy</form> <xr>= <sc>HUGUYHÚGUY</sc>.</xr> <form>huguyhúguy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> <tr>pal</tr> around with s.o. in a spirit of camaraderie, <tr>associate</tr> with s.o. for purposes of fun. <i>Paúlì dáyun. Ayawg huguyhúguy sa ímung kaúban,</i> Come straight home. Don&apos;t pal around with your friends. <i>Dì makighuguyhúguy sa íyang sákup,</i> He won&apos;t pal around with his workers. <pos>n</pos> palling around, association for pleasure.

<p id=6672><form>hugyaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> for a crowd to <tr>roar</tr> in laughter, excitement, and the like. <i>Mihugyaw pagpangatáwa ang mga táwu,</i> The people roared in laughter. <pos>n</pos> roar from a crowd.

<p id=6673><form>hugyun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do s.t. <tr>together</tr> in a group, <tr>en masse</tr>. <i>Gihugyúnan aku pagbíyà sa ákung mga sákup,</i> All my employees walked out on me en masse.

<p id=6674><form>huhungíhung</form> <xr>= <sc>HULUNGÍHUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6675><form>huhu</form> <pos>n</pos> word used in writing to represent the sound of slightly nasal laughter.

<p id=6676><form>hùhù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> empty a container of its contents by turning it upside down and agitating it. <i>Hùhúag maáyu ang butilya arun muági ang kitsup,</i> Shake the bottle hard so the catsup will come out. <i>Ihùhù ang sinapilya didtu sa kanal,</i> Empty the shavings into the ditch.

<p id=6677><form>huk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Huks</tr>, a dissident guerilla group or a member thereof. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; b6]</itype> be, become a <tr>Huk</tr>.

<p id=6678><form>huk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hook</tr>, a closing device on a garment. <form>&mdash; an ay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hook and eye</tr>, device to close a garment. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> use a hook.

<p id=6679><form>hukà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>loosely packed</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> for things of various sizes not to be firmly packed. <i>Ug mahukà ang ímung pagsulud sa kamúti gamay ray masúd,</i> If you pack the sweet potatoes loosely like that, you won&apos;t get many in.

<p id=6680><form>hukà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> take, serve more food than can be consumed. <i>Ayaw hukaa ang sud-an arun dì mapan-us,</i> Don&apos;t serve more food than we can eat so that it won&apos;t spoil.

<p id=6681><form>húkà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; a4]</itype> have a vigorous <tr>coughing fit</tr>. <i>Hukáun (maghúkà) ka sa ubu ug magpatun-ug ka,</i> You&apos;ll have a coughing fit if you expose yourself to the draft.

<p id=6682><form>hukab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a]</itype> open, remove a cover through forceful or nonhuman action. <i>Ang hángin ang mihukab sa íyang sayal,</i> The wind raised her skirt. <i>Mahukab nang malíta ug ímung ibundak,</i> That suitcase will burst open if you throw it down. a open with the cover removed. <i>Hukab na ang kartun sa pag-abut niíni,</i> The cardboard box was torn open when it arrived. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> for an opening to become big and wide. <i>Nahúkab ang íyang kílid nga natigbasan,</i> S.o. hacked him in the side, and he had a gaping hole in it.

<p id=6683><form>hukabhukab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be stimulated in expectation of doing s.t. <i>Naghukabhukab ang ákung ginháwa nga nagtan-aw sa mga lamíang mga pagkáun,</i> My appetite was stimulated as I looked at all the appetizing foods.

<p id=6684><form>hukad, húkad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> take s.t. out of a container by lifting it out. <i>Akuy muhúkad íning mga butang sa íyang malíta,</i> I&apos;ll take the things out of his suitcase. <i>Hukára ang kan-un,</i> Take the rice out of the pot. <number>1a</number> <formx>gi-, -in- sa ginhawaan</formx> born of one&apos;s own flesh, not adopted. <i>Kini ang ákung anak nga gihúkad <pb n=343>sa ákung ginhawaan,</i> This is my child, born of my flesh and blood. <number>2</number> express emotions. <i>Usa ka láwum nga pangaghu ang íyang gihúkad gíkan sa íyang dughan,</i> He let out a deep sigh from inside his breast. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23; b6]</itype> give s.o. an occasion to do s.t. <i>Gihukáran siya sa babáyi sa lawasnung pangindáhay,</i> The girl offered him the opportunity to relieve his carnal desires. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> food taken out of the pot. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; sa ginhawaan</formx> one&apos;s own child.

<p id=6685><form>hukahuk</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>greedy</tr>, having an intense desire to possess. <i>Ang táwung hukahuk gustung íya tanan,</i> An avaricious person wants to have everything. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become <tr>greedy</tr>.

<p id=6686><form>hukal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB3(1); c1]</itype> <number>1</number> for a cough to loosen, make it loose. <i>Muhukal ang ubu sa tambal,</i> The cough will be eased by medicine. <i>Kining tambála muhukal sa ímung ubu,</i> This medicine will loosen your cough. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>UKAL</sc>.</xr> <pos>n</pos> <tr>phlegm</tr>. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for phlegm in a cough to be loose. <number>2</number> for two flat surfaces to be adhering loosely.

<p id=6687><form>húkas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P; a2]</itype> take clothing off of the top part of the body. <i>Hukása na nang púlu mu,</i> Take off your shirt. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> expose a secret. <i>Ang kaatbang níyang pulitiku ang mihúkas sa íyang kangil-ad,</i> His political opponent exposed his shady deals. <number>3</number> strip or deprive s.o. of his position, duty, rights. <i>Gihukásan siya sa íyang katungud pagpakahilum,</i> He was deprived of his right to remain silent. <i>Gihukásan siya sa íyang pagkaabugádu,</i> He was debarred. <form>hukashúkas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> keep taking off clothes. <pos>n</pos> <tr>stripping</tr> scenes in a show.

<p id=6688><form>hukaw</form> <xr>= <sc>HUKAL</sc>, <i>v1;</i> <pos>n</pos>; <i>a</i>.</xr>

<p id=6689><form>húkaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a1]</itype> awaken s.o. by disturbing his sleep. <i>Mahúkaw ang bátà ug maglangas ka,</i> You&apos;ll wake the child if you make noise.

<p id=6690><form>hukbaláhap</form> <pos>n</pos> the name of the Communist organization in the Philippines and its members. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be, become a <ix>hukbaláhap.</ix> <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> the community of huks.

<p id=6691><form>hukdung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> rest one&apos;s chin or forehead on s.t. usually in meditation or grief. <i>Mihukdung siya sa lamísa sa kakápuy,</i> He rested his head on the table because he was tired. <i>Naghukdung siya sa bintánà,</i> She is resting her chin on the window sill. <i>Gihukdungan níya ang lamísa sa íyang pagtuun,</i> She rested her chin on the table as she studied.

<p id=6692><form>hukhuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> get money or valuables from s.o. for nothing in return. <i>Hukhukun (hukhukan) ta sa ímung mga paryinti,</i> Your relatives will just milk us dry. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> eat greedily (contemptuous or humorous usage). <i>Ikaw bay naghukhuk sa ákung kík?</i> Did you eat my cake? <form>-íru</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become a milker of persons. <form>-íra</form> <xr>= <sc>HUKHUKÍRU</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=6693><form>hukhuk<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>HALUKHUK<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=6694><form>hukhuk<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos><corr sic=.></corr> k.o. <tr>nutmeg</tr> shell.

<p id=6695><form>hukihuk</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish very similar to the <ix>súlid</ix> in appearance and flavor, but smaller.

<p id=6696><form>hukip</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> include s.t. in a package or letter that is sent to include it. <i>Wà ku makahukip ug litrátu sa ákung sulat nímu,</i> I didn&apos;t enclose a picture in my letter to you. <i>Hukipi ug diyis písus ang ímung aplikasiyun,</i> Include a ten-peso bill in your application.

<p id=6697><form>húkip</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> <tr>bribe</tr>. <i>Kadtu rang muhúkip ang dawátun sa supirbisur,</i> Only those who give bribes are accepted by the supervisor. <i>Pilay átung ihúkip sa aprísir?</i> How much are we going to bribe the customs appraiser?

<p id=6698><form>huklub</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. sorcery using a doll dressed in red and black which is struck. The parts of the doll&apos;s body that are struck correspond to the parts of the victim&apos;s body that are afflicted.

<p id=6699><form>hukmuy</form> <xr>= <sc>LUKMUY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6700><form>huks</form> <xr>= <sc>HUK<sub>1</sub></sc> (plural).</xr>

<p id=6701><form>hukùhúkù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; b3]</itype> be doubled over in suppressed laughter. <i>Naghukùhúkù mig katáwa sa maistrung wà makapamutúnis,</i> We practically died trying to hold back our laughter because our teacher forgot to button his pants.

<p id=6702><form>hukum</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>pass judgment</tr>, give a verdict. <i>Gihukman siyang sunúgun sa silya iliktrika,</i> He was sentenced to death in the electric chair. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> decide to do s.t. <i>Mihukum siya sa pag-apil sa banggà,</i> She decided to participate in the contest. <number>3</number> have one&apos;s say about an unresolved matter. <i>Ug akuy muhukum sa pagbáhin, tung-un lang ang yútà,</i> If I were to get my say, my advice would be just to divide the land between us. <pos>n</pos> <tr>judgment</tr>, <tr>verdict</tr>, <tr>decision</tr>. <form>hukmánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>court</tr>. <form>hukmánan sa únang lakbang</form> <pos>n</pos> Court of First Instance.

<p id=6703><form>hukut</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>HIGUT</sc>, <ix>v, n</ix>.</xr> <number>2</number> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>keepsake</tr> or token of relationship between lovers. <i>Panyù ang hukut sa ílang panaghigugmaay,</i> A <corr sic=handkerdhief>handkerchief</corr> was the keepsake of their love.

<p id=6704><form>*hukyaw</form> <form>&mdash; ang dughan, ginhawaan, kabúhì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> get an intense pang in the stomach and rapid beating of the heart at some horrifying experience. <i>Mihukyaw ang ákung ginhawaan pagkakità nákù sa bátang naligsan,</i> I was overcome with horror when I saw the child run over by a truck.

<pb n=344>

<p id=6705><form>Hul.</form> <pos>n</pos> abbreviation for <ix>Hulyu,</ix> July.

<p id=6706><form>húlab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN2; b6]</itype> boast by telling a lie. <i>Gihuwában mi níyang dakù siyag swildu,</i> He boasted that he had a huge salary (when he didn&apos;t). <pos>n</pos> lying boast. <form>-un</form> <tr>boastful</tr>.

<p id=6707><form>húlad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> <tr>describe</tr>, <tr>depict</tr>. <i>Mihúlad (nahúlad, gihúlad) sa íyang panagway ang túmang kabaláka,</i> Extreme anxiety appeared on her face. <number>2</number> <itype>[c]</itype> publish s.t. in the newspapers and magazines. <i>Ang gisangpútan sa piniliay mauy ihúlad sa tanang mantaláan dinhi,</i> The results of the elections will be published in all the papers here. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> copy s.t. on the pattern of s.t. else. <i>Kining dibuhúa mauy hulári sa ímu,</i> Pattern your drawing after this one. <i>Ihúlad sa Katidral ang kapilya,</i> Pattern the barrio chapel after the Cathedral. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>translate</tr>. <i>Hulára (ihúlad) ning bálak sa Ininglis,</i> Translate the poem into English. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. which is exactly like s.t. else. <i>Ang átung mga batan-ung nagpataas sa ílang buhuk mauy húlad sa mga hípi sa Amirika,</i> Our young men who wear their hair long are just like the hippies in America. <number>2</number> <tr>copy</tr>, full <tr>reproduction</tr>. <number>3</number> an issue of a magazine or newspaper. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>HUWAD</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6708><form>hulagway</form> (coined from <ix>húlad</ix> plus <ix>dagway</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>picture</tr>, <tr><corr sic=protrait>portrait</corr></tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>image</tr>, mental picture of s.t. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB23; b4c1]</itype> <tr>portray</tr>, <tr>picture</tr>, be shown. <i>Ang íyang mga sinulat mihulagway sa kangil-ad sa kahiladman sa táwu,</i> His writings portray how evil men are deep down inside them. <i>Mihulagway sa íyang <corr sic="náwung">nawung</corr> ang túmang kabaláka,</i> Extreme worry showed in her face. <i>Hulagwáya (ihulagway) sa mga namínaw ang mga taras sa mga Muslim,</i> Describe the traits of the Muslims to the audience. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> <tr>imagine</tr>, picture for oneself. <i>Makahulagway ku kun unsa ang íyang kalípay,</i> I can just picture how happy she is. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> take s.o.&apos;s picture. <i>Hulagwáyi nang nindut nga talan-áwun,</i> Take a picture of that beautiful scenery.

<p id=6709><form>hulahúla</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>hula-hula</tr>, a Hawaiian dance performed by women. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC12; c1]</itype> <tr>dance</tr>, do the hula-hula.

<p id=6710><form>hulahup</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> hula hoop. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC12; b6(1)]</itype> play with a hula hoop.

<p id=6711><form>húlak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B246]</itype> for the delicious taste of food to come out. <i>Muhúlak ang lamì sa tinap-ánan basta utánan,</i> The delicious taste of smoked fish comes out if you cook it with vegetables.

<p id=6712><form>hulam</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>borrow</tr> s.t. <i>Gihulaman (gihugman, gihudman) nákù ang íyang lápis,</i> I borrowed his pencil. <number>2</number> adopt, take over as one&apos;s own. <i>Ang mga Pilipínu daghang gihulaman (gihugman) nga kinaíya,</i> The Filipinos have adopted many foreign traits. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab]</itype> lend. <i>Pilay ímung pahuwaman?</i> How much are you going to lend? <pos>n</pos> loan. <form>-anan(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> one one borrows from. <i>Kinsa may ímung hulamánan ug kwarta?</i> Who do you borrow from? <form>-in-an</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. <tr>borrowed</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>adopted</tr>, taken over as one&apos;s own. <number>2a</number> <tr>affected</tr>, <tr>put on</tr>. <i>Wà ku kaangay sa batásan níyang hinulaman,</i> I don&apos;t like her affected manners. &dagger;

<p id=6713><form>hulangyud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> <tr>slip and fall</tr>. <i>Nahulangyud ku sa sínaw nga salug,</i> I slipped and fell on the slippery floor.

<p id=6714><form>hul-ap</form> <xr>= <sc>HULD-AP</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6715><form>hular</form> <xr>= <sc>HURAR</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6716><form>hulas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13P]</itype> <number>1</number> feel uneasy and restless. <i>Naghulas ang bátang gitulug,</i> The child is fidgety because he&apos;s sleepy. <i>Ang íyang pagpatay mauy nakahulas (nakapahulas) níya,</i> The murder he had committed caused him to feel uneasy. <number>2</number> restlessly eager to do s.t. <i>Naghulas giyud nang bayhána nga muadtu sa bayli,</i> That girl is itching to go to the dance.

<p id=6717><form>hulat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>wait</tr>, don&apos;t do s.t. now but do it later. <i>Huwat únà, kay wà pa malútù, Wait a minute.</i> It&apos;s not done. <number>2</number> <tr>wait for</tr>. <i>Huwata únà ang paghunas únà ka manginhas,</i> Wait for the tide to go out before you gather seashells. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> expect s.t. to happen. <i>Naghulat ku nga mubutu tung granáda,</i> I expected that the grenade would go off. <form>-anan(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> place one waits. &dagger;

<p id=6718><form>hulaw, húlaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>drought</tr>, prolonged period without rain. <i>Ang mga sapà nangaúga tugnud sa hulaw,</i> The brooks dried up in the drought. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; a4b4]</itype> be a drought. <i>Ang mga tanum mangamátay kung huwawun (huwawan),</i> The crops will wither if there is a drought. <form>ting-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dry season</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B256]</itype> be the dry season.

<p id=6719><form>húlay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> be given <tr>respite</tr>, an interval of <tr>rest</tr>. <i>Ang daruhan nga gihuwáyan sa mais naulian,</i> The field that was given a respite from corn regained its fertility. <i>Huwáyi sà ang inyung pagpúnayg harána,</i> Leave off your nightly serenading for a while. <pos>n</pos> interval of rest. <i>Trabáhu nga way húway,</i> Work without respite. <form>pa-, pa-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c2]</itype> rest, take a rest. <i>Ipahuway (pahuwayun) níya ang íyang láwas,</i> He will give his body a rest. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> have <tr>eternal rest</tr>. <i>Dúgay nang mipahuway ang íyang Lúlu,</i> His grandfather has long been laid to his eternal rest. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> retire from work. <i>Mipahuway na ang tigúwang nga maistra,</i> The old teacher has retired. <form>lawak pa-an</form> <pos>n</pos> place one rests. <form>igpa-r-, igpa-l-</form> <pb n=345><pos>n</pos> time to rest. <i>Igpapahúlay (igpalahúlay) na rung urása,</i> It&apos;s now time to rest.

<p id=6720><form>huláyà</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. woody, erect herb of open wastelands, of two species: <bx>&mdash; bayi</bx> edible sort of <ix>huláyà,</ix> the leaves of which are eaten fermented: <bio>Gynandropsis gynandra</bio>. <form>&mdash; laki</form> inedible, smelly type: <bio>Polanisia icosandra</bio>.

<p id=6721><form>hulbà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB126]</itype> for the bottom or a piece of s.t. horizontal to give way. <i>Ang lamísa muhulbà ug tungtúngan ug bug-at,</i> The table-top will give way if you put s.t. heavy on it. <i>Ang lubut sa kahun nahulbà kay bug-at ang gisulud,</i> The bottom of the box gave way because s.t. heavy was put inside it.

<p id=6722><form>hulbad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>undo</tr> s.t. tied, <tr>untie</tr>. <i>Akuy mihulbad sa íyang gapus,</i> I untied his ropes. <i>Hubára nang panyù mung may súd nga kwarta,</i> Undo your handkerchief which has the money in it.

<p id=6723><form>hulbaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>shout loudly at</tr>. <i>Hulbáwi ang táwu nga túa sa tapun sa sapà,</i> Shout to the man who is at the opposite bank of the river. <pos>n</pos> <tr>loud shout</tr>. <form>ka-un</form> <pos>a</pos> feel like shouting.

<p id=6724><form>hulbù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB2; a1b2]</itype> <tr>give way</tr>, <tr>collapse</tr> under pressure<corr sic=",">.</corr> <i>Sapnáya nang sáku kay nagkahulbù na,</i> Carry that sack under your arms because the bottom has just about broken through. <i>Hulbúun ku nang hubun mu niíning bunal,</i> I&apos;ll smash your fontanel with this club. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> break the nodes inside a bamboo. <pos>n</pos> particles of broken bamboo nodes.

<p id=6725><form>hulbut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC2; a]</itype> pull out s.t. long from a place it has been inserted. <i>Paghulbut ug baráha,</i> Take a card. <i>Mihulbut siyag sigarilyu,</i> He pulled out a cigarette. <i>Ayaw hulbúta ang hílu,</i> Don&apos;t pull the thread out<corr sic=",">.</corr> <i>Hulbúta sa dì pa ka gul-an,</i> Pull it out before you have your orgasm. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> pick s.o. out from a group. <i>Hulbúta lang siya sa kumpirinsiya. Dì lagi masukù,</i> Just call him out of the conference. He won&apos;t really mind. <number>3</number> abduct secretly, usually for liquidation. <i>Gihulbut ang inpurmir sa mga Huks,</i> The Huks abducted the informer. <form>hulbuthulbut</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> drawing of lots. <number>2</number> a gambling game of drawing out rolled-up pieces of paper which are pasted to cardboard. A number is printed on each rolled piece of paper to be matched with winning numbers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC12; b6(1)]</itype> play this game. &dagger;

<p id=6726><form>huldam</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. craps played with three dice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> play this k.o. craps.

<p id=6727><form>huld-ap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; ab2]</itype> <tr>hold up</tr>, <tr>rob</tr>. <i>Huld-apun ka giyug muági ka sa ngitngit,</i> You&apos;ll be held up if you go through a dark area. <pos>n</pos> <pos>a</pos> <tr>hold-up</tr>. <form>-ir</form> one who pulls hold-ups. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; b6]</itype> become a hold-up artist.

<p id=6728><form>hulding</form> <pos>a</pos> holding in volleyball. <i>Hulding kaáyu siyang mutús sa búla,</i> He holds a lot when he hits the ball. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> commit the offense of holding in volleyball. <i>Nahulding siya maung gipitúhan sa ripiri,</i> He was holding the ball so the referee blew the whistle on him.

<p id=6729><form>huldir</form> <pos>n</pos> one who is most influential and feared in a certain place for his power and toughness (slang). <i>Si Nardung Pútik mauy huldir sa Bilyagunsálu,</i> Nardong Putik is the number one tough in Villagonzalo. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> become the number one tough in a place (slang). <i>Ang tibuuk Pásil mauy íyang gihuldíran,</i> He is the acknowledged number one tough in the whole Pasil district. <form>istak &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stockholder</tr>.

<p id=6730><form>hulgà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>threat</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>threaten</tr>. <i>Ang ulan mihulgà pagbundak,</i> The rain threatened to pour down. <i>Gihulgà mi sa dakung gútum,</i> We were threatened with starvation. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>threatening</tr>. <i>Mahulgáung púlung,</i> Threatening words.

<p id=6731><form>hulhug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>urge</tr> s.o. to do s.t. bad, stir s.o. up. <i>Ang wilgista gihulhúgan sa mga istudiyanti,</i> The students egged the strikers on. <number>2</number> give s.o. bad ideas. <i>Kinsa may naghulhug sa bátà sa pagpangáyug dulsi?</i> Who gave the child the bright idea of asking for candy? <pos>n</pos> <tr>urging</tr>, <tr>incitation</tr>.

<p id=6732><form>hulhul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>bark</tr>. <i>Gihulhul ang kawatan sa irù,</i> The dog barked at the thief. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>shout halt</tr>. <i>Mihulhul ang sintiníla sa táwu,</i> The guard shouted for the man to halt. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>barking</tr>. <number>2</number> shout to halt.

<p id=6733><form>hulì</form> (short form for <ix>hiulì</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a3]</itype> go home, return to the place one lives or stays. <i>Tagdugay giyud nà siyang mahulì sa balay,</i> He always goes home late. <form>pa-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> place s.t. back in its proper place or form. <i>Kamau kung mupahúlì sa makinang distrungkahun,</i> I know how to assemble the machine if it is dismantled. <i>Ipahúlì sa kahun ang gigámit nímung gabas,</i> Put the saw that you used back in its box.

<p id=6734><form>hulíbis</form> <xr>= <sc>HILÍBIS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6735><form>hulihud</form> <pos>n</pos> awl-like device which is heated and used for making holes in burnable materials. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make holes with this device.

<p id=6736><form>hulíkab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a12P]</itype> <number>1</number> make a huge hole in s.t. with an explosion or violence. <i>Ang tuung kílid sa barku nahulíkab sa bumba,</i> The starboard side of the ship had a huge hole in it after the bombing. <number>2</number> take a huge portion of s.t. forcefully, leaving a hole. <i>Hulikábun lang nà sa mga pumapálit ang pinatungpátung nga mga sáku,</i> The customers <pb n=346>will considerably reduce that pile of sacks. <pos>n</pos> large hole resulting from violent removal of s.t. <i>Ang hulíkab sa bukubuku nga gilapsan sa bála ingun sa pálad,</i> The hole in the back where the bullet emerged was as big as the palm of the hand.

<p id=6737><form>húlin</form> <xr>= <sc>DYÚLIN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6738><form>huling</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> examine s.t. carefully touching it to see what is there. <i>Akuy mihuling (nanghuling) sa kúlun ug náa pa bay kan-un,</i> I examined the pot to find out if there was still any food left. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> do a <tr>physical examination</tr>. <i>Hulingun usab ug apil ang ímung kinatáwu,</i> Your genitalia will also be examined.

<p id=6739><form>húlip</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>fill in for</tr>, cover up s.t. vacant or lacking. <i>Akuy muhúlip níya samtang nagbakasiyun siya,</i> I&apos;ll fill in for her while she is on vacation. <i>Íyang gihulípan ang gisì sa banig,</i> He patched up the holes in the mat. <i>Kinahángan hulípan ang ímung napaltahan,</i> You have to make up for your absence. <i>Wà siyay kwartang ikahúlip sa kantidad nga íyang nadispalku,</i> He had no money to replace the amount that he had embezzled. <pos>n</pos> s.t. that fills up or covers for what is lacking. <i>Ang pag-inum-ínum dílì paígung húlip sa kaguul nga ákung gibátì,</i> My sorrow is too great to drown in drink. <form>-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. that needs to be filled in, covered up, filled in for.

<p id=6740><form>hulma</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1B2; a2]</itype> <tr>mold</tr>, take form. <i>Mihulma (nahulma) sa íyang mga ngábil ang usa ka matam-is nga pahíyum,</i> A sweet smile formed on her lips. <i>Naghulma mig bíku nga ipamaligyà,</i> We molded sweetened rice cakes to sell. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23; b6]</itype> leave an imprint. <i>Ang túnub mihulma sa basà nga simintu,</i> The footstep left an imprint on the wet cement. <number>3</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for a shape to show through s.t. that covers or contains it. <i>Ang tútuy muhulma sa íyang hugut nga sinínà,</i> Her breasts stood out clearly in her tight dress. <pos>n</pos> s.t. molded. <i>Pila ka hulma sa bibingka ang ímung nabúhat?</i> How many rice cakes have you made? <form>hulmahan, hulmahánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mold</tr>.

<p id=6741><form>hulmígas</form> <pos>n</pos> small biting <tr>red ants</tr>. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> infested with red ants. <form>-an, ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>anthill</tr>.

<p id=6742><form>hulpà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> for a surface to lower. <i>Mihulpà ang <corr sic=kik>kík</corr>,</i> The cake fell. <i>Nahulpà ang lubung,</i> The grave sank. <i>Nagkahulpà ang túbig sa línaw,</i> The water-level in the lake is dropping. <pos>n</pos> lowering of a surface. <i>Ang hulpà sa hubun timáan nga gibutdan ang bátà,</i> A concavity in the fontanel is a sign that the child has a digestive upset.

<p id=6743><form>hulsil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wholesale</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> buy, sell by wholesale. <i>Muhulsil mig mga manggad,</i> We will sell dry goods wholesale.

<p id=6744><form>hult</form> call to stop s.o. approaching: <tr>halt</tr>! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> call &lsquo;halt!&rsquo; <i>Húnung basta hultun mu sa gwardiya,</i> Stop when the guard shouts halt at you.

<p id=6745><form>hulu<sub>1</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> strong in character, not affected by emotions or sadness. <i>Hulu ug balatían ning batáa kay walà muhílak paglubung sa íyang inahan,</i> The child has a strong character because he did not cry when his mother was buried. <number>2</number> not afraid of danger. <i>Hulu ka giyud ug mutubagtubag ka níya,</i> You really are brave if you talk back to him. <number>3</number> able to eat sickening food or in a sickening environment. <i>Hulu kaáyu siyag ginháwa kay mukáug ilagà,</i> That man has a strong stomach. He can eat rats.

<p id=6746><form>hulu<sub>2</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>molt</tr>, shed off skin or shell. <form>hinulhan</form> <pos>n</pos> cast-off skin or shell.

<p id=6747><form>hulud, húlud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6c1]</itype> place a barrier around plants to prevent animals from eating the leaves of the trees or persons from stealing the fruits.

<p id=6748><form>húlug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>drop</tr>, <tr>fall</tr> freely, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Usa ka hinug nga búnga nahúlug,</i> A ripe fruit fell. <i>Nahulúgan siya ug lubi,</i> A coconut fell on him. <i>Ihúlug ta ka run sa hagdanan,</i> I&apos;ll throw you down the stairs. <number>1a</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> for s.t. one wears to slide downwards. <i>Síging kahúlug ákung antiyúhus,</i> My glasses keep slipping down my nose. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> deposit s.w. a mail a letter. <i>Ihúlug ning suláta, Mail this letter.</i> <number>b</number> deposit in bank. <i>Dílì ku muhúlug rung bulána,</i> I will not deposit any money this month. <i>Ihúlug ang sinsíyu sa alkansíya,</i> Deposit the change in the piggy bank. <number>c</number> pay installments, buy on installment. <i>Naghúlug kug pyánu,</i> I&apos;m paying installments on a piano. <number>3</number> give money to carolers. <i>Hulúgan ta mug písus ug mukanta mug usab,</i> I&apos;ll give you a peso if you sing again. <number>4</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> fall, come under a group or classification. <i>Kining isdáa nahúlug sa klási nga mga mulmul,</i> This fish is in the family of the parrotfish. <number>4a</number> result in being called. <i>Ug mau nay ímung buhátun mahúlug ka sa pagkaturut,</i> If you do that, you will wind up being called a fool. <number>4b</number> turn into s.t. worse. <i>Kanang mga kinalutána mahúlug sa kabahung ug dílì tambálan,</i> Those scratches will turn into sores if you do not treat them. <i>Nahúlug sa walay hinungdan ang ákung pangandam,</i> My preparations turned into nothing. <i>Ug mabálì ang ímung kamut mahúlug ka sa pagkainútil,</i> If you break your arm, you will become an invalid. <number>5</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> for a coconut grove to yield a certain number of nuts. <i>Muhúlug <pb n=347>ning kalubihána ug líbu,</i> This coconut plantation yields one thousand nuts. <number>6</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> fall into sin or disgrace. <i>Nahúlug si Adan tungud ni Íbà,</i> Adam fell because of Eve. <number>7</number> <itype>[c]</itype> hold a festive activity on a certain date or occasion. <i>Pitsa kinsi ang gihulúgan sa pista,</i> The feast falls on the fifteenth. <number>8</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> fail s.o. in school. <i>Ihúlug (hulúgun) ta ka ug magliguylíguy ka,</i> I&apos;ll fail you if you are absent all the time. <number>9</number> <formx>&mdash; sa kamut</formx> <itype>[B126]</itype> fall captive, victim to s.o. <i>Mahúlug ka sa kamut sa palikíru,</i> You&apos;ll lose your chastity (fall into the clutches of the philanderer). <number>10</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> in <ix>hantak,</ix> for the three coins to turn out to be tails. <i>Ganíha ra giyud nà níyang umantug, walà pa giyud mahúlug,</i> He has been tossing the coins for quite a time, but he still hasn&apos;t gotten all tails. <number>11</number> <itype>[A23PB126; c1]</itype> lose a game in gambling. <i>Gihúlug níya ang primírung dúwà arun musakay ang kuntra,</i> He threw away the first game so his opponent would be trapped into playing with him. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> deposit. <number>2</number> installment. <number>3</number> money given to carolers. <number>4</number> yield of coconuts. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> weft. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> use s.t. as weft. <i>Maáyung ihulug ang naylun sa hablun,</i> Nylon makes good weft thread in weaving. <form>tig-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23P]</itype> move downward. <i>Mitighulug (mipatighulug) ang ayruplánu,</i> The plane moved downward. <number>2</number> go on down to a place after having gone s.w. else. <i>Gíkan sa kapitulyu mutighulug (mupatighulug) ku sa pantalan,</i> From the capitol I will go on down to the waterfront. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> day of festivities, celebration. <number>2</number> meaning. <i>Unsa may kahulúgan áning pulúnga sa ininglis?</i> What is the meaning of this word in English? <i>Ang kahulúgan sa isturya,</i> The moral of the story. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>KAHULÚGAN</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13N]</itype> mean. <i>Ang pagmahal sa gasulína nagkahulugan (nangahulugan) sa pag-usbaw sa plíti,</i> The rise in the price of gasoline means the fare will rise. <form>ka-ánun, maka-ánun, makahulgánun</form> <pos>a</pos> meaningful.&dagger;

<p id=6749><form>húlum</form> <xr>= <sc>HÚMUL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6750><form>hulunghúlung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> look for s.t. very intently. <i>Gihulunghúlung ang bátà nga nawálà,</i> The people were searching for the lost child. <number>2</number> look around for s.t. without publicising that one is looking around. <i>Naghulunghúlung kug láing trabáhu kay tagdugay ming swildúhan sa ákung gialagáran karun,</i> I&apos;m secretly looking around for a new job because we&apos;re always late in getting our pay where I&apos;m working now.

<p id=6751><form>hulungíhung</form> <pos>n</pos> rumors. <i>May hulungíhung nga patyun ang prisidinti,</i> There are rumors that the president will be assassinated.&dagger;

<p id=6752><form>húlup</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> alight on. <i>Ang sanga nga gihulúpan (gihudpan) sa mga langgam,</i> The branch the birds are perching on. <i>Pagkáun nga hihulupan (hihudpan) ug lángaw,</i> Food that the flies alighted on. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> for a bird to swoop down on its prey. <i>Mihúp ang banug ug nakadagit ug pisù,</i> The hawk swooped down and got a chick.

<p id=6753><form>hulus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> strip leaves off the stem. <i>Paghulus ug dáhun sa kamunggay kay utánun,</i> Strip off some malunggay leaves to cook. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>HURUS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6754><form>hulus<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> lower s.t. attached on a string which passes through a pulley. <i>Hulusun (ihulus) nátù ang láyag kay mudunggù na ta,</i> Let&apos;s lower the sail now because we are going to drop anchor.

<p id=6755><form>húlut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c]</itype> threaten s.o. with an instrument or, by extension, to do s.t. serious to him. <i>Muhúlut nang banáha ug sundang ug mag-áway ug ang asáwa,</i> That husband threatens his wife with a bolo when they quarrel. <i>Ang maistrung naghúlut sa paghagbung sa mga istudiyanti,</i> The teacher who threatened to fail the students.

<p id=6756><form>huluy</form> <xr>= <sc>HILUY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6757><form>Hulyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> July. <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ABRIL</sc> <i>for verb forms.</i></xr> <number>2</number> time of the year when there is little to eat, so called because the year&apos;s big harvest, the <ix>panúig,</ix> comes just after July, and the previous harvest does not last until the <ix>panúig.</ix> <i>Ang mga datù wà makailag hulyu,</i> The rich haven&apos;t experienced hard times.

<p id=6758><form>hulyut</form> <pos>a</pos> lax in carrying out a course of action. <i>Ang mga ginikánan nga hulyut kaáyu ug disiplína tubagun ug anak,</i> Children answer back if parents are lax in their discipline. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> be easy-going, relaxed about doing s.t. <i>Klási ni sa trabáhu nga dílì ka makahulyut,</i> With this sort of work you can&apos;t just take it easy.

<p id=6759><form>húm</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1a</number> home base in games. <number>1b</number> shout uttered upon reaching home. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23; b6]</itype> run for home. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> reach home base, make a home run. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> engage in sexual intercourse (humorous). <i>Wà makahúm ang bána gabíi kay hubug,</i> The husband couldn&apos;t do it last night because he was drunk. <form>-anan(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> place used as home base.

<p id=6760><form>humabdus</form> <xr>= <sc>HUMABLUS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6761><form>humablus, humabus</form> <pos>n</pos> stepchild.

<p id=6762><form>humad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> clean rice and let it dry partially to store it. <i>Humara (ihumad) ang humay úsà hipúsa,</i> Clean the rice and let it dry partially before you store it.

<p id=6763><form>humagbus</form> <xr>= <sc>HUMABLUS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6764><form>human</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> finished, done. <i>Human na ang lamísa,</i> The table is finished. <i>Human na nag <pb n=348>laba,</i> (I) already washed it. <i>Human dáan nga sinínà,</i> A ready-made dress (finished beforehand). <i>Ibítay ang ímung human,</i> Hang the things you have finished up. <number>2</number> <ix>initial in phrase:</ix> <number>a</number> after. <i>Human (inigkahuman) sa klási adtu mi sa sini,</i> We will go to the movies after the class. <i>Namatay siya human (pagkahuman) sa dúgayng sakit,</i> He died after a long sickness. <number>b</number> after doing [so-and-so], after [so-and-so] happens. <i>Human níya kan-a,</i> After he ate it. <i>Human siya mulakaw,</i> After he left. <number>3</number> <ix>following the word it modifies:</ix> looking completely like s.t. <i>Sa mau nga sinínà makililímus ka nga human,</i> With such clothes, you look exactly like a beggar. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> finish doing s.t. <i>Humanun (humnun) ba nímu ang ímung trabáhu u dílì?</i> Are you going to finish your work or not? <i>Mahuman tingáli ang prugram sa mga alas nuybi,</i> The program will probably be over at around nine o&apos;clock. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be through with s.t., have had enough of s.t. <i>Nahuman na ku ánang ímung paníkas,</i> I&apos;ve had enough of your cheating. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> for s.t. to get broken, done for. <i>Ug ímung ibundak ang duwáan, mahuman,</i> If you throw the toy down, it will be done for. <i>Nahuman ang mga tulisan dihang gimasinggan,</i> The bandits were wiped out in the machinegun raid. <number>4</number> <itype>[A12; c1]</itype> lift s.t. heavy from the ground. <i>Ayawg humana paglúgus nang baul,</i> Don&apos;t force yourself to lift that trunk. <form>humanhúman</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125]</itype> be almost finished. <i>Nahumanhúman (nagkahumanhúman) na ang ámung sakayan,</i> Our boat is almost finished. <form>ka-an(&larr;), ka-un</form> <pos>n</pos> reaching a conclusion. <i>Walay kahumánan (kahumanun) ang trabáhu,</i> There is no end to the work.

<p id=6765><form>humay</form> <pos>n</pos> general term for <tr>rice</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa bantuk, kamad-an</form> <pos>n</pos> upland rice. <pos>a</pos> two-faced (slang&mdash;on analogy of milled rice grains which are pointed at both ends). <i>Humay nang bayhána, paayuáyu sa atúbang, apan nanglibak diay inigtalikud,</i> That woman is two-faced. She is nice to your face, but when you turn your back, she talks against you. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> have rice for a meal, cook rice. <i>Gihumayan nákug lúgaw ang bátà,</i> I cooked rice porridge for the baby. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> plant rice and not some other crop. <i>Humaya (ihumay) na lang nang parsiláha,</i> Just plant that parcel to rice. <form>humayhúmay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> ersatz rice made of dried cassava shreds, eaten in place of rice or corn. <number>2</number> k.o. plant similar to cattails: <bio>Typha capensis</bio>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make ersatz rice. <form>-an, ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> rice field. <form>-ánun</form> <pos>n</pos> rice magnate. <form>ting-</form> <pos>n</pos> harvest season for rice. <form>-únun</form> <pos>n</pos> piece of land intended to be planted to rice.

<p id=6766><form>humbà</form> <pos>n</pos> a dish made of pork hocks, feet, and fat cooked long in a sauce of salt, vinegar, and condiments to soften and preserve it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> prepare, eat this dish.

<p id=6767><form>humbíngay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46N; b6]</itype> for s.t. to be hanging and drooping in large quantities. <i>Mihumbíngay (nanghumbíngay) ang búnga sa mangga (sa búnga ang mangga),</i> The mango tree is laden with fruit. <i>Gihumbingáyan (nanghumbíngay) sa búnga ang káhuy,</i> The tree is laden with fruits.

<p id=6768><form>humbíngil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> touch s.t. with the thumb and forefinger. <i>Naghumbíngil siyang nag-ihap sa papil dibangku,</i> She fingered the banknotes in counting them. <i>Ayawg humbingíla ang ákung trabáhu,</i> Keep your hands off my work.

<p id=6769><form>humbis</form> <pos>n</pos> home base in baseball, also in children&apos;s games. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> reach home base. <i>Ug nakahumbis pa ta, daug tà ta,</i> Had we made it home, we would have won.

<p id=6770><form>humhum<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>HALUMHUM</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6771><form>humhum<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>LATÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6772><form>humígas</form> <xr>= <sc>HULMÍGAS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6773><form>humil</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>soft</tr>, <tr>pliant</tr>, and <tr>supple</tr>. <i>Ug dílì humil ang tabákù, dílì matustus,</i> If the tobacco is not soft, you can&apos;t roll it into cigars. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get soft. <i>Ug sigíhan mug dukduk nang pánit sa káhuy, magkahumil pud,</i> If you continue to pound that bark, it will gradually become soft and pliant. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>softness</tr>, <tr>suppleness</tr>.

<p id=6774><form>humisayid</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>homicide</tr>. <form>&mdash; pulis</form> section of the police that is charged with investigating murders.

<p id=6775><form>humpal</form> <pos>a</pos> long and heavy of stride. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c16]</itype> for the steps to be long and heavy. <i>Muhumpal ang átung linaktan ug luag tag sapátus,</i> We have to take long and heavy steps if our shoes are too big. <i>Naghumpal ang linaktan sa sundálung gikápuy,</i> The soldier is tired, and he is taking long and heavy strides.

<p id=6776><form>humpay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3PB2; a1]</itype> <tr>assuage</tr>, <tr>relieve</tr>. <i>Álak ray muhumpay sa ákung kaguul,</i> Only liquor can relieve my sorrow. <i>Muhumpay (mahumpay) ang kasakit kun manghaplas kag linimintu,</i> The pain will be relieved when you rub liniment on it. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. that gives relief. <i>Panghumpay sa mga iritasiyun sa pánit,</i> Medicine to relieve skin irritations. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>relief</tr>. <i>Kahumpay sa panakit,</i> Quick relief from pains. <form>ka-an, ka-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> relief, assuagement as an end effect. <i>Walay kahumpayun (kahumpáyan) ning íyang kaguul,</i> There is no end to her sorrows. <form>ma-un, maka-r-</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>soothing</tr>.

<pb n=349>

<p id=6777><form>humpid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>arrange</tr>, <tr>stack</tr> things in a neat and orderly way. <i>Akuy mihumpid (naghumpid) sa mga basíyung butilya,</i> I arranged the empty bottles in order. <i>Íyang humpírun (ihumpid) ang íyang mga papílis,</i> He&apos;ll stack the papers neatly. <number>2</number> <tr>smooth out</tr>, <tr>flatten</tr> out. <i>Pisun ang nakahumpid sa sín,</i> A steam roller flattened out the galvanized iron sheets. <pos>a</pos> neatly arranged, flat. <i>Humpid kaáyu ang íyang buhuk,</i> His hair is neatly groomed and flat.

<p id=6778><form>humpil</form> <xr>= <sc>HUMPID</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6779><form>humran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>home run</tr> in baseball. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> make a home run. <form>tig-</form> <pos>a</pos> one who usually hits a home run.

<p id=6780><form>humrum</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>homeroom</tr> in school. <form>&mdash; pitii</form> <pos>n</pos> organization of the parents of children in a certain homeroom and their teacher.

<p id=6781><form>humtáwun disisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> fraudulent decision in boxing made in favor of a boxer who is a native of the place the match is held. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> make a hometown decision in boxing.

<p id=6782><form>humud</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>wet</tr>. <form>&mdash; ug papil</form> having a ruined reputation. <i>Humud ug papil nang tawhána pagkakiriwan,</i> That fellow has the reputation of being a thief. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make s.t. wet. <i>Humda ang trápu úsà inusnus,</i> Wet the rag before you wipe. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> wear s.t. in bathing. <i>Walà siya maghumud nga nalígù sa dágat,</i> She went swimming without anything on. <form>humdunun</form> <pos>n</pos> thing worn for swimming. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> thing put on during one&apos;s bath.

<p id=6783><form>húmuk</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1a</number> <tr>soft</tr>, not rigid or hard. <i>Húmuk nga yútà,</i> Soft earth. <i>Húmuk nga unlan,</i> A soft pillow. <number>1b</number> <tr>tender</tr>, not tough or hard. <i>Húmuk na ang linat-an,</i> The stewed meat is tender now. <number>2</number> easy to do s.t. to. <i>Húmuk mabálì,</i> Easy to break. <i>Húmuk siya tudlúan,</i> It&apos;s easy to teach her. <i>Húmuk siyang dad-ug baylíhan,</i> She is easy to lead in dancing. <number>2a</number> easily affected by s.t., easily made to do s.t. <i>Húmuk ra nang bayhána pasugtun,</i> That girl is easy to win over. <i>Húmuk siyang masukù,</i> He easily gets angered. <i>Húmuk ug balatían nang tiguwánga. Manggihatágun kaáyu sa mga pubri,</i> That old man is kindhearted. He is very generous to the poor. <number>3</number> supple in mind, easily adaptable. <i>Húmuk kaáyu ug láwas nga bayhána. Maáyung musáyaw,</i> The lady is graceful. She dances well. <i>Húmuk siyag salabútan; dalì rang musabut,</i> She is intelligent; she easily understands. <number>4</number> <formx>í nga &mdash;</formx> <number>a</number> letter <ix>a</ix> as opposed to <ix>e</ix> (in English). <number>b</number> letter <ix>e</ix> as opposed to <ix>i</ix> (in Spanish). <form>&mdash; ug ilung</form> <number>1</number> easily influenced, told to do s.t. <i>Húmuk siyag ilung kay bísag kinsa ray musúgù,</i> He lets himself be led around by the nose. He does whatever anyone tells him to do. <number>2</number> for girls to give in easily to the advances of men. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2SB; a2P]</itype> <number>a</number> <tr>soften</tr>; become soft. <number>b</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> do s.t. in a soft way. <i>Humúka kanà paglútù,</i> Cook it soft. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1PB2; a2]</itype> make s.t. supple, adaptable. <form>pahumukhúmuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> pretend to go along with s.t. <i>Nagpahumukhúmuk ang administrasiyun sa mga dimanda, balubálu wà diay,</i> The administration pretended to go along with the demands, but when the time came, nothing was granted. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to soften s.t. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> of a soft, supple type.

<p id=6784><form>húmul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>soak</tr>, <tr>steep</tr>. <i>Nakahúmul ka sa mga nuug nga átung labhan?</i> Have you soaked the rags we are going to wash? <i>Humúli ang isdà sa súkà,</i> Marinate the fish in vinegar. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> <tr>immerse</tr>, put oneself or s.t. in water so as to cover most of it. <i>Ug maghúmul ka sa túbig dílì lagi tugnaw,</i> Once you get in the water, it is not cold after all. <i>Humúli ang kábaw sa túbig,</i> Put the carabao in the water. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> pack s.t. in ice for preservation. <i>Ihúmul ang isdà sa yílu arun dì madubuk,</i> Pack the fish in ice so that it won&apos;t spoil. <form>(&rarr;), -in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> fish packed in ice for preservation.

<p id=6785><form>humulhúmul</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>soft</tr>, <tr>fluffy</tr>. <i>Alpumbrang humulhúmul,</i> A fluffy rug.

<p id=6786><form>humut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sweet-smelling</tr>. <i>Humut nga búlak,</i> Fragrant flowers. <i>Humut nga bàbà,</i> Sweet-smelling mouth. <i>Humut nga pagkáun,</i> Good-smelling food. <number>2</number> for s.o. to be dear to one despite his bad traits. <i>Daghan siyag bisyu apan humut siya gihápun kanákù,</i> He has lots of vices, but I love him all the same. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become pleasant-smelling. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> make s.o. or s.t. pleasant-smelling. <i>Magpahumut ta kay mangadtu tas bayli,</i> Let&apos;s put on perfume because we&apos;re going to a dance. <i>Pahumti ang kík ug banilya,</i> Flavor the cake with vanilla. <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to make s.t. pleasant-smelling. <form>-an(&larr;)</form> k.o. aromatic herb, similar in appearance to <ix>sangig</ix> but sweeter in smell. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> pleasant smell. <form>ma-</form> <pos>a</pos> very sweet-smelling. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> of a <corr sic="sweet smelling">sweet-smelling</corr> sort.

<p id=6787><form>húmut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> seriously plan to do s.t. of a momentous nature. <i>Aku gánì makahúmut pagpatay, tinuúrun giyud nákù,</i> If I plan to kill, I&apos;ll kill, believe me. <number>2</number> seriously think about buying s.t. <i>Dúgay na kung naghúmut ánang rilúha,</i> I have long been obsessed by the thought of buying that watch.

<p id=6788><form>Hun.</form> <pos>n</pos> abbreviation for <ix>Hunyu,</ix> <tr>June</tr>.

<p id=6789><form>hún</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> for birds, esp. poultry to <tr>roost</tr> to sleep. <i>Kilumkílum na gánì muhún dáyun ang mga manuk,</i> When it&apos;s twilight, the chickens roost for the night.

<pb n=350>

<p id=6790><form>húnad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> wash wounds, sores. <i>Hunári ug alkuhul ang langgus arun dílì ansúyan,</i> Wash the abrasions with alcohol so they won&apos;t get infected. <pos>n</pos> s.t. used in cleaning wounds.

<p id=6791><form>hun-ag<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a1b2]</itype> <number>1</number> for a structure to collapse. <i>Nahun-ag ang Rubi Táwir sa paglínug,</i> The Ruby Tower collapsed in the earthquake. <number>2</number> for hopes, ambitions, etc. to collapse.

<p id=6792><form>hun-ag<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB2]</itype> <number>1</number> for s.t. dark, dirty to become clear and white, cause it to do so. <i>Mihun-ag (nahun-ag) ang linabhan nga giladlad sa ínit,</i> The clothing became white when it was bleached in the sun. <number>2</number> for the face to brighten. <i>Mihun-ag ang íyang nawung sa kahimuut,</i> Her face shone with pleasure. <number>2a</number> <itype>[B1245]</itype> for dawn to break (literary). <i>Nagkahun-ag nga kaadláwun,</i> The breaking dawn. <pos>a</pos> free from dirt, shining of face.

<p id=6793><form>hunàhúnà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3S; a2b2]</itype> <tr>think about</tr> s.t. <i>Ug hunàhunáun tug maáyu, sayup giyud tu,</i> If you think about it, it was a grave mistake. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3S; b8]</itype> think of doing s.t. <i>Walà ka ba makahunàhunà ug hulam?</i> Have you not thought of borrowing some? <number>3</number> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> think of s.t. or s.o., <tr>consider</tr>. <i>Hunàhunáa ang ímung mga bátà unsay dangátan níla,</i> Think of what will happen to your children. <number>4</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> think s.t. over, <tr>ponder</tr>. <i>Ákù sang hunàhunáun. Dì úsà tikaw tubagun,</i> I&apos;ll think it over. I won&apos;t give you an answer yet. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>belief</tr>, <tr>opinion</tr>. <i>Unsa may ímung hunàhúnà (panghunàhunà) báhin ánà?</i> What is your opinion about that? <number>1a</number> <tr>decision</tr>. <i>Dì giyud mausab ang ímung hunàhúnà?</i> Is your decision completely irreversible? <number>2</number> <tr>thought</tr>, <tr>idea</tr>. <i>Púru mga hunàhúnà (panghunàhunà) nga bastus ang náa sa íyang úlu,</i> He has nothing but indecent thoughts in his head. <number>3</number> thoughts regarding s.o., <tr>attitude</tr>. <i>Wà kuy maáyung hunàhúnà níya human sa íyang gibúhat,</i> I don&apos;t have a good attitude towards him after what he did. <form>paN-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>HUNÀHÚNÀ</sc> <ix>1, 1a, 2.</ix></xr> <number>2</number> the process of thinking. <i>Tin-aw pa ang panghunàhunà ni Lúlu,</i> Grandfather can still think clearly. <form>manggi-un, ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>thoughtful</tr>, marked by consideration for others.

<p id=6794><form>hunas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>low tide</tr>. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>KINHASUN</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>KINHAS</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B3(1)4; b4]</itype> for the tide to go out. <i>Manginhas ta kun muhunas,</i> Let&apos;s gather shellfish when the tide is out. <i>Nagkahunas (naghunas) na ang dágat,</i> The tide is going out. <number>2</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> be stranded in low tide. <i>Sayun dakpun ang isdang nahunsan,</i> Fish are easy to catch when they are trapped by the low tide. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> allow s.t. to be trapped in the low tide. <pos>n</pos> method of catching fish by getting them trapped in the low tide. <form>paN-</form> <xr>= <sc>PANGINHAS</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>KINHAS</sc>.</xr> <form>-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tidal flats</tr>, the part of the seashore which is exposed to low tide. <form>kinahunsan</form> <pos>n</pos> the lowest part of the tidal flat. <form>kinhas</form> listed under <xr><sc>KINHAS</sc>.</xr> <form>-un(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>ebbing</tr> of the sea. <i>Sulug iniglíhuk sa hunásun,</i> The current is strong during the ebb tide. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56]</itype> for the sea to be ebbing.

<p id=6795><form>hunat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1c]</itype> for horses to run fast, gallop. <i>Wà ku níla hiapsi kay mihunat ang kabáyù,</i> They did not overtake me because the horse galloped. <i>Ayawg kahadluk bisag ihunat kas kabáyù,</i> Don&apos;t get scared even if the horse gallops away with you. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; bc6]</itype> go into action exerting one&apos;s fullest efforts. <i>Tápus makahunat, íyang giluksuan ang alíwas,</i> Gathering all his strength he jumped at the gorilla. <pos>n</pos> impetus, force exerted in starting s.t. <i>Kusgánung hunat,</i> Having a strong starting motion. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> exert pressure on s.o. to come to a decision. <i>Ísug siyang nagpahunat sa íyang kuntra,</i> He challenged his enemy (pressured him to decide whether or not to fight). <i>Gipahunat ni Hiktur ang dalága kun kinsa ang íyang sugtun,</i> Hector put pressure on the girl to decide whom she was going to choose. <form>-in-</form> force mustered. <i>Hinunat ang tanan níyang kusug,</i> Mustering all his strength. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> demanding, putting pressure on.

<p id=6796><form>hunaw</form> <xr>= <sc>HINAW</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6797><form>hunda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>motorcycle</tr> (so called from the brand Honda). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b5]</itype> ride a motorcycle. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain a motorcycle.

<p id=6798><form>hundunghundung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a12]</itype> walk with the head hanging and swaying from side to side. <i>Naghundunghundung ang hubug sa karsáda,</i> The drunk walked on the street with his head drooping and swaying.

<p id=6799><form>hungakhúngak</form> <xr>= <sc>HINGAKHÍNGAK</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>HÍNGAK</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6800><form>hungaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b8]</itype> for wind to blow. <i>Dílì ta makalawud ug muhungaw ang amíhan,</i> We can not go to sea if the northwind blows. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for air to leak out. <i>Muhungaw ang hángin kay daut ang balbula,</i> The tank will leak because the valve is defective. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> for the ground to exude a stench after rain. <i>Naghungaw ang yútà human sa ulan,</i> The ground is exuding a stench after the rain. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> for body heat to escape, lending relief. <i>Kalígù arun hungawan ka sa kaínit,</i> Take a bath to get relief from the heat. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A1BP; b4]</itype> be affected by the disease <ix>hungaw</ix>. <i>Gihungawan siya kay natúlug nga basà ang buhuk,</i> She got <ix>hungaw</ix> because <pb n=351>she went to sleep with her hair wet. <number>3b</number> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> for anger to be vented and cooled off. <i>Dalì nga mihungaw íyang kasukù,</i> His anger easily cooled off. <pos>a</pos> tending to leak gas. <i>Ang ímung bumba sa hángin hungaw kaáyu,</i> Your air pump is very leaky. <pos>n</pos> name of an affliction leading to blindness caused by the escape of hot air through the eyes. It is brought on by prolonged exposure to the sun or sleeping with wet hair. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> give vent to one&apos;s emotions. <i>Mipahungaw siya sa íyang kaguul sa paghílak,</i> She gave vent to her sorrows by crying. <number>1a</number> relieve one&apos;s emotions. <i>Nagpasupásu siya sa kwartu nagpahungaw sa íyang kasukù,</i> She paced the room, working off her anger. <number>1b</number> get relief from boredom, drudgery. <i>Suruysúruy ta sa pwinti, pahungaw sa átung kaláay,</i> Let&apos;s take a walk in the park to relieve ourselves of boredom. <form>&mdash; sa angsu</form> get respite from drudgery, boredom (lit. from the smell of urine). <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> leave the body or part of the body uncovered (as if to give it air&mdash;humorous). <i>Nagpahungaw síyang naglingkud,</i> She is sitting so as to give her crotch a breath of air (i.e. exposing herself indecently). <form>-anan(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a person upon whom one vents his anger. <number>2</number> hole where air or gases leak. <form>-l-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>-ANAN</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr> <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> gas or air exuded. <number>2</number> natural effect or repercussions. <i>Ang íyang ulsir hinungaw sa subrang pag-inum,</i> His ulcer is the result of drinking too much. <i>Kining kanúnayng pag-ulan dinhi hinungaw ni sa bagyu sa láing lugar,</i> The rain here is the effect of a typhoon elsewhere.

<p id=6801><form>hungay</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>loose</tr>, not firmly embedded. <i>Hungay kaáyu ákung tangu,</i> My tooth is very loose. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> get, be loose. <i>Naghungay ang halígi. Pakáli ug batu ang lungag,</i> The post is loose. Put more stones into the hole.

<p id=6802><form>húngay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> set s.t. aside for a special purpose. <i>Dì siya magpakasal kun dì ka makahúngay ug salapì nga gastúhun,</i> She will not marry you if you do not set aside money for the expenses. <i>Ihúngay nátù ning kík sa mga bisíta,</i> We will set this cake aside for the visitors.

<p id=6803><form>hunggal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> <number>1</number> make a hollow, empty sound. <i>Mihunggal ang basíyung kahun nga nahúlug,</i> The empty box that fell went bonk. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> for s.t. normally solid throughout to be, become hollow. <i>Muhunggal (mahunggal) ang pán ug palabian ug butang ug patúbù,</i> The bread will become hollow inside if too much baking powder is added. <pos>a</pos> for s.t. usually solid to be hollow. <pos>n</pos> <tr>hollow space</tr>, <tr>void</tr>.

<p id=6804><form>hunggaw</form> <xr>= <sc>HUNGGAL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6805><form>hunghung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>whisper</tr> into the ear, say s.t. privately. <i>Mihunghung siya nákù nga muhuwam siyag kwarta,</i> She whispered to me that she would like to borrow some money. <number>1a</number> say s.t. in a whisper. <number>2</number> cure an illness by whispering a prayer or formula over the affected area. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>whisper</tr>. <number>2</number> method of treating an illness by whispering.

<p id=6806><form>hungíhung</form> <xr>= <sc>HULUNGÍHUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6807><form>hungit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <number>1</number> put s.t. into the mouth. <i>Hungita ang bátà,</i> Put the food into the child&apos;s mouth. <i>Hungiti siyag linúgaw,</i> Feed him some porridge. <number>1a</number> <itype>[b5c]</itype> spoon-feed a lesson to. <i>Hungiti sila sa liksiyun iyáwat makasabut,</i> Spoon-feed the lesson to them. Maybe they&apos;ll understand. <number>1b</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> have s.t. to eat. <i>Wà nay ikahungit apan manan-aw pa giyud ug sini,</i> They don&apos;t have anything to eat, but they have to go to the movies nevertheless. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> feed, put materials into a machine. <i>Hungiti ang makina ug káhuy,</i> Feed lumber into the planing machine. <number>2a</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> put a limb into machinery. <i>Naputul ang íyang tudlù kay íya mang gihungit sa makina,</i> He lost his finger because he stuck it into the machine. <number>3</number> pass on gossip, rumors. <i>Kinsay mihungit nímu ánang mga tabía?</i> Who passed that gossip on to you? <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> amount put into the mouth, machine at one time. <number>1a</number> food one eats for subsistence. <i>Ang kwartang ámung makítà dílì gánì paigù sa hungit,</i> We don&apos;t even earn enough money for food. <number>2</number> passing on of gossip. <form>ig-r-(&larr;), ig-l-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> utensil used to put s.t. into the mouth.

<p id=6808><form>hungkad</form> <xr>= <sc>HUKAD</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr>

<p id=6809><form>hungkag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> <number>1</number> for s.t. spacious to look empty. <i>Nagkahungkag ang balay kay gianam pagpamaligyà ang mga kabtángan,</i> The house gradually became empty when the things were sold one by one. <number>2</number> have an uneasy feeling of emptiness. <i>Naghungkag ang ákung tiyan,</i> My stomach feels empty.

<p id=6810><form>hungkagul, hungkarul</form> <xr>= <sc>HUGANGKUL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6811><form>hungkiyang</form> <xr>= <sc>KUNGKIYANG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6812><form>hungkung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> Hong Kong. <number>2</number> name of notorious red-light district in Cebu City, so called from the name of its principal street, Junquera. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> go to Junquera St. to a house of prostitution.

<p id=6813><form>hunglus<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>ALÁYUN</sc>, <ix>n, v1.</ix></xr>

<p id=6814><form>hunglus<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>HUNLUS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6815><form>hungù</form> <xr>= <sc>NGUHÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6816><form>hungug</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>stupid</tr>, lacking in intelligence and capacity to perceive, learn. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become stupid. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stupidity</tr>. <i>Sa ímung kahungug nabuak ang básu,</i> Because of your stupidity the glass broke. <form>sa ímung ka-</form> expression <pb n=352>of disgust at s.o. for saying s.t. stupid. <i>Dag-an sa ímung kahungug. Pildi bayà ku,</i> What do you mean I won? You ass, I lost.

<p id=6817><form>hungus</form> <xr>= <sc>HUNGLUS<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=6818><form>hungut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4]</itype> for a boil to swell. <i>Talibutu ang hubag nga maghungut,</i> The boil that is swelling is about to erupt.

<p id=6819><form>húngut</form> <pos>n</pos> bowl made out of three-quarters of a coconut shell. <formx>nawung ug &mdash;</formx> round faced, like a <ix><corr sic=hungut>húngut</corr>.</ix> <formx>dílì &mdash; ang kalibútan</formx><corr sic=","></corr> there are plenty of fish in the ocean (lit. the world is not a coconut shell). <i>Sahug dì ka mangasáwa nákù. Maáyu mag húngut ning kalibútan,</i> So what if you don&apos;t marry me. Fine, if this world were a coconut shell (but it&apos;s not). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make, make into a coconut-shell bowl.

<p id=6820><form>hunguy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> do s.t. <tr>stealthily</tr> without anyone&apos;s notice. <i>Muhunguy lang mug pangáun dì mu mangagda?</i> Are you going to eat by yourselves in secret without inviting us? <i>Nakahunguy ang mga girilya pagsulud sa garisun,</i> The guerrillas were able to sneak into the garrison. <i>Ihunguy ning sulat pagtúnul níya,</i> Give her this letter secretly.

<p id=6821><form>hunhun</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> pull down s.t. which wraps or encloses s.t. <i>Duha ka táwu ang nagpugung sa íyang buktun ug láin ang mihunhun sa íyang panti,</i> Two men held her arms while another pulled her panties down. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> for solids (grains, sand, powder) to settle, sink gradually to a level. <i>Muhunhun ang bugas kun uyúgun ang gisudlan niíni,</i> The rice grains will settle if you shake the container. <i>Naghunhun ang bungdù sa lubung,</i> The mound of the grave is gradually settling. <number>3</number> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> for the hair to fall out. <i>Mihunhun (nahunhun) ang ákung mga buhuk nga kaspahun,</i> I lost lots of hair because of dandruff. <pos>n</pos> hair which has fallen out. <i>Daghang hunhun nga nadá sa ákung pagsudlay,</i> My comb was full of hair after I finished combing it.

<p id=6822><form>húni</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>song</tr>, musical sounds. <i>Ang paburítu kung húni,</i> My favorite song. <i>Ang húni sa busay,</i> The song of the waterfall. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make melodious sounds. <i>Naghúni na ang mga mangliw,</i> The katydids are singing. <form>mag-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>musician</tr>. <form>mahuníun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>melodious</tr>. <form>paN-, panúni</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> quality of singing, intonation and pitch. <number>2</number> tone of voice. <i>May dalang kasukù ang panúni sa íyang tíngug,</i> His voice carried a note of anger. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> for the voice to sound a certain way.

<p id=6823><form>húnit</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tough</tr> and <tr>resilient</tr>. <i>Húnit ang tsitsarun, lisud usápun,</i> These pork rinds aren&apos;t crisp. They&apos;re tough and resilient and difficult to chew. <number>2</number> being strong and firm, resistant to breakage. <i>Húnit kaáyu ning plastíka, Dì man mabuak ug dukdúkun,</i> This is tough plastic because it doesn&apos;t break when you pound it. <number>3</number> difficult to come by. <i>Húnit kaáyu ang trabáhu run,</i> Work is hard to come by these days. <number>4</number> resistant to doing s.t. <i>Húnit nga mga dalikdik,</i> Stubborn streaks of dirt that won&apos;t come out. <i>Húnit siya nga musugut,</i> It is difficult to get her to accept the marriage proposal. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be <tr>tough</tr> and <tr>resilient</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> become tough, resistant to breakage. <number>3</number> <itype>[B4; b6]</itype> put up resistance to doing s.t. <i>Naghúnit ku sa pagrikumind&acaron;r níya,</i> I am hesitant to recommend him. <number>4</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> hold s.t. nearly severed by a thread. <i>Gamayng pánit na lang naghúnit sa ákung tudlù nga natigbasan,</i> A little bit of skin was all that was holding my finger when it chopped off. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> strength to resist tension, <tr>tensile strength</tr>. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having great <tr>tensile strength</tr>.

<p id=6824><form>hunlak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> throw, knock s.t. down from the place it is resting. <i>Nahunlak siya sa lubing íyang gisak-an,</i> He fell from the coconut tree he climbed. <i>Ihunlak ang mga kargang baril ug mukusug ug bawud,</i> Throw the gasoline drums overboard if the waves grow big. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23P; b4]</itype> for a plane to collapse. <i>Nahunlak ang salug tungud sa kadaghan sa bisíta,</i> The floor gave way because of the many visitors.

<p id=6825><form>hunlus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> lower s.t. that is attached on a rope at a higher point. <i>Ihunlus (hunlúsun) ang bandíra mahápun,</i> The flag is lowered in the afternoon. <number>2</number> for anything attached s.w. to come down. <i>Nahunlus ang íyang karsúnis,</i> His pants slipped down.

<p id=6826><form>hunsuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pipe</tr> for smoking. <number>2</number> <tr>pistol</tr> (slang). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23; a12]</itype> make into a pipe. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN]</itype> smoke s.t. with a pipe. <form>hunsuyhunsuy</form> <pos>n</pos> name for <tr>auger shells</tr>: long, slender shells which resemble cigarette holders.

<p id=6827><form>hunta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>board of directors</tr> of a civic unit or enterprise. <i>Hunta munisipal,</i> Municipal board. <i>Ang hunta sa maghuhukum,</i> The board of judges. <i>Hunta diriktíba,</i> Board of directors.

<p id=6828><form>huntà</form> <pos>n</pos> section of structures arranged on top of one another or behind one another. <form>huntàhuntà</form> <pos>n</pos> sections of s.t. <i>Duha ka huntàhuntà ang ílang balay,</i> Their house has two stories. <i>Ang huntàhuntà sa sayal sa baylirína,</i> The tiers of the ballerina&apos;s dress. <i>Ang huntàhuntà sa káha,</i> The sections of the till. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> be sections or divisions arranged one above or behind another. <i>Naghuntàhuntà ang húnus sa lamísa,</i> The drawers are <pb n=353>stacked on top of each other on the table.

<p id=6829><form>hunub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>seep</tr> through pores. <i>Mihunub ang túbig sa yútà,</i> The water seeped into the ground. <i>Nabasà ang lamísa kay gihunuban sa túbig sa tadyaw,</i> The table got wet because the water seeped out from the jar onto it. <number>2</number> <tr>leak</tr> through small holes. <number>3</number> affect slowly, as if seeping in. <i>Mihunub sa íyang hunàhúnà ang usa ka mayugtánung panimalus,</i> Dreams of angry revenge seeped into his mind. <i>Mihunub ang madutlánung katugnaw sa íyang kinahiladman,</i> A penetrating cold seeped into his innermost bones. <pos>a</pos> <tr>leaky</tr>, allowing to seepage. <pos>n</pos> <tr>leak</tr>, <tr>seepage</tr>.

<p id=6830><form>hunulhúnul</form> <xr>= <sc>HUMULHÚMUL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6831><form>húnung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB2S3; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>stop</tr>, cease forward motion, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Kinsay naghúnung (nagpahúnung) sa dyip,</i> Who stopped the jeep? <i>Gihunúngan mi sa dyip,</i> The jeep stopped for us. <number>2</number> stop, discontinue functioning or operating, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Kinsa may muhúnung (mupahúnung) sa ámung dúlà?</i> Who will stop our game? <i>Naghunung ang ákung rilu,</i> My watch has stopped. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> <tr>stop doing</tr> s.t. <i>Mihúnung siya ug hílak,</i> He stopped crying. <form>way &mdash;</form> continuous, unceasing. <form>-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bus stop</tr>.

<p id=6832><form>húnus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> take a human life. <i>Ulípun siya ug mahímung hunúsun ang íyang kinabúhì bisan anus-a,</i> He is a slave, and his life may be snuffed out at any time.

<p id=6833><form>húnus<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>drawer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> pull a drawer out. <i>Nakadungug ku nga dihay mihúnus sa ákung lamísa,</i> I&apos;ve heard s.o. pulling the drawer in my table out. <form>hunushúnus</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>HÚNUS</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=6834><form>Hunyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>June</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ABRIL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6835><form>húp</form> <xr>= <sc>HÚLUP</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6836><form>hupà</form> <xr>= <sc>HULPÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6837><form>hupak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B246]</itype> develop a crack such that the separated pieces are no longer in contact. <i>Mihupak ang simintu paglínug,</i> The concrete cracked in the earthquake. <pos>n</pos> <tr>crack</tr>.

<p id=6838><form>hup-ak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2; a12]</itype> <tr>peel</tr>, <tr>flake off</tr>, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Ang pintal muhup-ak basta dáan na,</i> Paint peels off when it is old. <pos>n</pos> s.t. that has peeled or flaked off.

<p id=6839><form>hupas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B]</itype> for s.t. to lose its aroma, powers, flavor, and the like by being left uncovered. <i>Mihupas ang sigarilyu,</i> The cigarette lost its flavor. <i>Nagkahupas na ang lamì sa bínu,</i> The wine is losing its bouquet. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> for land to lose its fertility. <i>Sa púlù ka túig muhupas ang yútà,</i> In ten years the soil will lose its fertility. <number>3</number> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> for a feeling to wane. <i>Nahupas na ang ákung gána pagbiyáhi,</i> I&apos;ve lost my appetite for travelling. <i>Nahupsan na kug paílub,</i> I&apos;ve run out of patience.

<p id=6840><form>*hupaw</form> <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>sigh</tr>. <i>Nanghupaw siya kay gikapuy,</i> He is sighing because he is tired. <pos>n</pos> <tr>sigh</tr>. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> done with a sigh.

<p id=6841><form>hupay</form> <xr>= <sc>HUMPAY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6842><form>huphup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>subside</tr>, <tr>sink</tr> down to a lower level. <i>Ug muhuphup na ang túbig sa linung-ag hináyi ang síga,</i> When the rice water goes down, lower the fire. <i>Mihuphup na ang hubag pagbutu,</i> The boil went down after it came to a head.

<p id=6843><form>húping</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put long things carefully and neatly together to make a thin flat grouping. <i>Kinsay muhúping sa mga tabákù nga manutúhun?</i> Who will flatten out and pile the tobacco leaves neatly together? <i>Hupínga ang nagkalkag mung buhuk,</i> Smooth out your hair. It&apos;s all disheveled. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> flatten s.t. out by rubbing the hands over it. <i>Hupínga nang mantil nga kunut,</i> Smooth out the tablecloth. <pos>a</pos> smoothed out, piled and pressed together neatly. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> groom the hair flat. <pos>n</pos> preparation for grooming the hair.

<p id=6844><form>húpit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> have s.t. sticking to it such that it is hard to get off. <i>Naghúpit ang samput sa tái,</i> Feces are sticking to his rump. <i>Nahúpit (gihupítan) ang buhuk kay napitlan sa tsuwinggam,</i> Her hair is all stuck together because chewing gum got into it. <i>Naghúpit ang papílis kay basà,</i> The papers stuck together because they were wet. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be soaked through so that the clothing, hair, feathers stick to the body.

<p id=6845><form>hupù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> crouch down to stay hidden. <i>Mihupù ang kawatan likud sa kural,</i> The thief crouched behind the fence. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> duck, lower the head. <i>Wà ku maigù sa búla kay mihupù ku pagkalit,</i> The ball didn&apos;t hit me because I ducked suddenly.

<p id=6846><form>hupukhupuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46N]</itype> for the body to be pale and swelling slightly. <i>Muhupukhupuk (manghupukhupuk) ang ákung bitíis ug mukáun kug bábuy,</i> My legs swell slightly and get pale if I eat pork.

<p id=6847><form>hupung, húpung</form> <pos>n</pos> sickness characterized by swelling or puffiness all over the body. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B3N; a4]</itype> swell with this disease. <i>Mihupung (mihúpung) ang íyang áping ug túhud. Gihúpung tingáli siya,</i> Her face and knees are swollen. She probably has <ix>húpung</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> become full of an emotion or feeling. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> swollen with this sickness. <number>2</number> full of an emotion. <i>Hupung sa pagmáhay ang íyang tubag,</i> Her answer was full of regrets. <form>paN-</form> <xr>= <sc>HÚPUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6848><form>huput</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> obtain, possess s.t. abstract or s.t. rare and especial. <i>Wà pay nakahuput ánang matánga sa aláhas dinhi,</i> No <pb n=354>one here has ever come to possess that sort of jewelry. <i>Talagsaung katakus nga íyang gihuptan,</i> The extraordinary ability that he possesses. <number>2</number> <tr>have dominion</tr>, <tr>rule over</tr>. <i>Ang Ispanya mihuput sa Pilipínas ug kapin sa tulu ka siglu,</i> Spain ruled the Philippines for more than three centuries.

<p id=6849><form>húpuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> for s.o. visibly angry to cool off. <i>Nahúpuy ku sa ákung kasukù paghílak níya,</i> I cooled down when she cried. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> having a subdued, not excitable disposition. <i>Gáhì suk-un ang hupuy nga táwu,</i> It&apos;s hard to provoke a mild person.

<p id=6850><form>hupyà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hopia</tr>, a k.o. Chinese rounded pastry consisting of a flaky crust with a bean or meat filling. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make or prepare hopia.

<p id=6851><form>hupyak</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sunken</tr>. <i>Hupyak kaáyu ang dughan sa tisísun,</i> He has T.B. and has a sunken chest. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a12]</itype> become sunken. <i>Muhupyak ang áping basta matigúlang na,</i> The cheeks become sunken when one gets old. <i>Nahupyak ang kík,</i> The cake fell.

<p id=6852><form>hurabhurab, hurabhúrab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> make angry, threatening gestures and words. <i>Kusug siyang muhurabhurab nátù ug masayup ta,</i> He threatens and frightens us when we commit mistakes. <pos>n</pos> angry and threatening words and gestures.

<p id=6853><form>hurádu</form> <pos>n</pos> judge for contests. <i>Gitimbangtimbang sa hurádu ang mananáug sa banggà,</i> The board of judges is deciding on who will be the winner of the contest.

<p id=6854><form>hurahura<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> hurry s.o. up in a bossy manner. <i>Gihurahurahan sa purman ang mga kamaníru,</i> The foreman hurried the street cleaners up.

<p id=6855><form>hurahura<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> be <tr>eager</tr> and <tr>excited</tr>. <i>Naghurahura siyang nagpakisáyud sa risulta sa burd,</i> He was eager and excited asking about the results of the board exams.

<p id=6856><form>hural</form> <xr>= <sc>HURAR</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6857><form>huraminta</form> <xr>= <sc>HIRAMINTA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6858><form>huramintádu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>run amok</tr>. <i>Maghuramintádu ku ug dì ku nímu sugtun,</i> I will run amok if you do not accept me. <pos>n</pos> one who runs amok.

<p id=6859><form>huramintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>oath-taking</tr>. <number>2</number> pledge a soldier makes as to the number of years he will serve. <number>3</number> term of office. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> pledge to serve a number of years. <i>Mihuramintu ug tulu ka túig ang rikulúta sa armi,</i> The army recruit pledged to serve three years.

<p id=6860><form>hurar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> <tr>surrender</tr>, give oneself up to another&apos;s power or control. <i>Ug ikay makigláyug nákù dì ku muhurar nímu,</i> If you want to fight me, I will not surrender to you. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A23; b6]</itype> make attempts at reconciliation by being the first to speak. <i>Nag-úlì na mi kay mihurar siya nákù,</i> We have made up now because she spoke to me. <number>2</number> make an oath to do s.t. <i>Mihurar ang tistígu sa pagtug-an sa tinúud,</i> The witness swore to tell the truth. <i>Mihurar siya pagkamayur,</i> He took the oath of office to become mayor. <pos>n</pos> one who has surrendered.

<p id=6861><form>húrat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> look at s.o. fiercely or show s.t. to s.o. to intimidate him. <i>Gipaguwà níla ang ílang armalayits arun sa paghúrat sa mga butanti,</i> They brought out their rifles to intimidate the voters. <i>Mikúrug ku dihang gihurátan ku sa bágis,</i> I trembled when the toughie glowered at me. <pos>n</pos> display of s.t. that threatens.

<p id=6862><form>húraw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> drive s.o. or s.t. away. <i>Huráwa ang bábuy nga nangáun sa kamúti,</i> Drive away the pig that is eating the sweet potatoes. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>scold</tr> s.o. severely and loudly using abusive language and, usually, gestures. <i>Ang inahan sa dalágang ámung gibugalbugalan mauy mihúraw námù,</i> The mother of the girl we made fun of scolded us severely. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>threaten</tr> gravely. <i>Gihúraw sa blakmílir nga itug-an ang asáwang naglaki,</i> The blackmailer threatened to divulge the wife&apos;s illicit relations. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> drive s.o. into working faster. <i>Ayaw kug huráwa kay magkasáyup hinúun,</i> Don&apos;t hurry me because I&apos;ll only botch it up. <pos>n</pos> <tr>threat</tr>. <form>hurawhúraw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> for a person of lower station to make an improper joke with a person of higher station. <i>Gihurawhuráwan ku sa bátà nga nakísì nu ákung karsúnis kay giut-an,</i> The child made a disrespectful joke when she asked me if my pants were torn because I broke wind. <pos>n</pos> <tr>disrespectful</tr> banter. <form>hurawhurawan</form> <pos>a</pos> given to disrespectful jokes.

<p id=6863><form>huríkì</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. lizard fish.

<p id=6864><form>hurimhurim</form> <pos>n</pos> magical prayers said to give supernatural powers or protection from harm (slang).

<p id=6865><form>hurisdiksiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jurisdiction</tr>.

<p id=6866><form>hurnáda</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> work bee where the members may or may not be paid. <number>2</number> round in a contest, e.g. boxing. <i>Sa únang hurnáda natikíu dáyun siya,</i> He was felled by a T.K.O. on the first round. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; abc3]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. by a work bee. <i>Mihurnáda ang tanan paghinlù sa plása,</i> Everybody participated in a work bee to clean the town plaza. <number>2</number> do s.t. in a large group. <i>Naghurnáda silag ínum pagkadawat sa búnus,</i> They went together on a drinking spree upon receiving their bonus.

<p id=6867><form>hurnu</form> <xr>= <sc>HUDNU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6868><form>hurs</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> horse in a chess piece. <number>2</number> one&apos;s girl <pb n=355>friend or mistress (from <xr><ix>kabáyù,</ix> <pos>n</pos> <i>2</i></xr>&mdash;slang).

<p id=6869><form>hurspáwir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>horsepower</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> have, provide with [so-and-so] much horsepower.

<p id=6870><form>huruhuru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a throbbing, continuous sound of &lsquo;broom broom&rsquo;. <number>2</number> action which could be characterized by this sound. <pos>v</pos> do actions which cause this sort of sound: <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> shiver with cold. <i>Naghuruhuru siya sa katugnaw,</i> He was shivering with cold. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> burn with a roaring flame. <i>Naghuruhuru ang dakung dáub,</i> The big bonfire is roaring. <number>2a</number> for one&apos;s love to be intense. <i>Naghuruhuru giyud tingáli ang pagbátì sa duha kay nalímut man sa ílang kaugalíngun,</i> The two must have fallen uncontrollably in love, for they have forgotten themselves. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>scold</tr> severely and abusively. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> drive s.o. to work in a hurry. <i>Naghuruhuru siya nga ipahuman ang trabáhu,</i> He rushed us up to finish the job. <number>5</number> <itype>[A]</itype> be eager to do s.t. <i>Naghuruhuru siyang mupaúlì sa bakasiyun,</i> She waited eagerly to go home for the holidays.

<p id=6871><form>hurung</form> <pos>a</pos> slow of understanding, not possessing much sense. <i>Dì ka pa hurung, gipangáyù tà tu nímung suklì,</i> If you were not stupid, you would have asked for the change. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B135; b6]</itype> be, become <tr>stupid</tr>.

<p id=6872><form>hurus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for the wind to blow hard. <i>Ug muhurus ang hángin mapadpad ang balay,</i> If the wind blows hard, the house will be blown down. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be blown off from an attachment as if stripped. <i>Nahurus ang dáhun sa káhuy sa makusug nga hángin,</i> The leaves of the tree were blown away by the strong wind. <number>3, 4</number> <xr>= <sc>HARUS</sc> <i>1, 3.</i></xr>

<p id=6873><form>hurut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>consume</tr>, <tr>use up</tr> all of s.t. <i>Tulu ka kílung asúkar ámung mahurut káda búwan,</i> We consume three kilograms of sugar every month. <number>1a</number> <itype>[b4(1)]</itype> run out of. <i>Nahutdan mi ug gasulína,</i> We ran out of gas. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> do s.t. to everything or everybody. <i>Hutdun ta mu ug latigu,</i> I will whip every one of you. <i>Hutdan tag kúhag búnga ang mangga,</i> Let&apos;s take all the fruits on the mango tree. <i>Ihurut ug hátag ang mga ituy,</i> Give all the puppies away. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> for everybody to go s.w. at one time. <i>Naghúrut ang ámung mga mutsátsag pamista,</i> All of our maids left us to go to the fiesta. <form>-in-</form> <tr>mustering</tr>, <tr>gathering</tr>. <i>Hinurut ang íyang kusug gitikbas níya ang sawa,</i> Mustering all his strength, he slashed at the snake. <form>hutdanay, hinutdanay, hutdánay, hinutdánay</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. done to the end. <i>Gustu ka diay ug láyug nga hutdanay sa kusug,</i> So you want a fight to the finish. <i>Hinutdánay giyud sa puhúnan nang ílang súgal,</i> They gamble until one of them runs out of money. <form>ka-un(&rarr;), kahutdanun</form> <pos>n</pos> state of being used up as an end effect. <i>Walay kahurutun (kahutdanun) sa túbig kay kusug ang tubud,</i> There&apos;s no using up of the water because the spring flows strong.

<p id=6874><form>hús<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> hose to convey liquids. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> use a hose.

<p id=6875><form>hús<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>HULUS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6876><form>husà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146]</itype> for children to be <tr>restless</tr> and <tr>fidgety</tr>. <i>Naghusà ang bátà kay gihilantan,</i> The child is restless because he has a fever.

<p id=6877><form>húsà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3c]</itype> <tr>mumble</tr> words of anger or displeasure loud enough for the affected party to hear. <i>Naghúsà ang tigúwang kay wà bayri,</i> The old man muttered angrily because they didn&apos;t pay him. <pos>n</pos> word mumbled, action of doing so.

<p id=6878><form>húsay</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>orderly</tr>, without confusion. <i>Húsay kaáyu ang dimunstrisyun gahápun,</i> The demonstration yesterday was very orderly. <number>2</number> well arranged with everything put in its designated place. <i>Húsay kaáyu ang íyang kwartu,</i> His room is very well arranged. <i>Húsay kaáyu ang íyang buhuk,</i> His hair is very well groomed. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> hearing in court or court trial. <i>Sa húsay namatud-an nga tulu ka ripli nawálà,</i> In the hearing it came out that three rifles were lost. <i>Human sa húsay ang sinumbung gisintinsiyahan sa kamatáyun,</i> At the end of the trial the accused was sentenced to death. <number>2</number> settling of accounts. <i>Mahibaw-an unyà nátù ug pilay ákung útang human sa húsay,</i> After we have settled accounts, we will know how much I owe. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> be <tr>peaceful</tr>. <i>Mahúsay lang ang balay ug mubíyà siya sa ínum,</i> The house will only know peace if he quits his drinking. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> put in order. <i>Naghúsay ku sa ákung mga papílis pára sa lún,</i> I am putting the documents for the loan in order. <i>Husáya nang mga pamantaláan ug ayúha ug hapnig,</i> Put the newspapers in order and stack them up. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>untangle</tr>, <tr>unsnarl</tr>. <i>Husáya ang pasul kay ikay nakagubut,</i> Unsnarl the fishline because you tangled it up. <number>3a</number> <tr>comb</tr> or <tr>brush</tr> the hair. <i>Muhúsay ku ánang ímung buhuk nga nagkulipíti pag-áyu,</i> I&apos;ll brush out your hair. It&apos;s all matted. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> hear out two opponents to judge them. <i>Akuy muhúsay ninyu arun mahibalu ku ug kinsay sad-an,</i> I will hear both of you out so I will know who is guilty. <number>4a</number> conduct a court hearing or trial. <number>5</number> <itype>[AC; a12]</itype> settle up accounts. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> done with great ease and convenience. <i>Husay kaáyu kung manarbáhu dinhis balay kun walà ang mga bátà,</i> I can work with ease here in the house if the children are not around. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>peace</tr>, <tr>calmness</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>order</tr>. <form>-in-an</form> <pb n=356><pos>n</pos> threads from which entangling threads have been removed. <form>-únun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> rope, thread to be unsnarled. <number>2</number> protagonist to be heard out and culpability determined. <number>3</number> accounts to be settled.

<p id=6879><form>husg&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>pass judgment</tr>. <i>Muhusg&acaron;r ang huwis human sa bista,</i> The judge passes judgment after the hearing. <i>Makasalà ta ug maghusg&acaron;r ta sa átung isig ka táwu,</i> We sin if we judge our fellowman. <i>Si Maríya Magdalína gihusgahang usa ka dakung makasasálà,</i> Mary Magdalene was adjudged a great sinner. <pos>n</pos> <tr>judgment</tr>. <form>husgádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>court</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; c]</itype> be brought to court. <i>Mahusgádu giyud ka,</i> You will certainly be hailed into court. <i>Ngánung ihusgádu pa man ninyu ang inyung kásu?</i> Why must you bring your case to court?

<p id=6880><form>hushus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> for s.t. fitted around the body or limbs to slip down. <i>Nagkahushus ang karsúnis sa bátà,</i> The child&apos;s pants are slipping down.

<p id=6881><form>húsi</form> <pos>n</pos> a fine, plainly woven fabric from pineapple leaf fibers.

<p id=6882><form>huslà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2; a]</itype> for s.t. to come out of a place it is stuck in, cause it to do so. <i>Muhuslà ang unud sa kinhasun kun supsúpun,</i> The flesh of the seashell will come out if you suck on it. <i>Siya ray naghuslà sa udyung nga nagtaruy sa íyang buktun,</i> He pulled out the arrow that pierced his arm by himself. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; b8]</itype> remove an affliction. <i>Kining tambála muhuslà sa nirbiyus,</i> This medicine relieves nervous tension. <i>Human gwai nahusláan siya sa hígal,</i> After his orgasm his sexual desires were relieved.

<p id=6883><form>huslir</form> <xr>= <sc>HASLIR</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6884><form>huslù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> for s.t. that is loosely fitted around s.t. to come off, cause it to do so. <i>Huslúa ang didal,</i> Take the thimble off. <number>2</number> take off anything that is fitted around or take s.t. out of s.t. that fits around it. <i>Nagkahuslà na ang pul-an sa sundang,</i> The handle of the sword is coming off.

<p id=6885><form>huslut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a2]</itype> take s.t. that is tightly fitted around s.t. off usually with a jerking motion. <i>Dì na mahuslut ning singsing kay nanagkù ákung tudlù,</i> This ring won&apos;t get off any more because my fingers have gotten too big.

<p id=6886><form>huspital</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hospital</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A123P; a3]</itype> hospitalize. <i>Nahuspital kug lima ka adlaw,</i> I was hospitalized for five days. <number>2</number> <itype>[a2]</itype> build a hospital.

<p id=6887><form>hustis</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> hostess in a night club. <number>2</number> hostess at a party. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B16; b6c1]</itype> be a hostess in a night club. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> host a party. <i>Si Máma ang muhustis sa ílang dispidída,</i> Mother will host a going-away party for them.

<p id=6888><form>hustisya<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>justice</tr>. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>HUSG&Acaron;R</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>HUSG&Acaron;R</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6889><form>hustisya<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> an ornamental potted shrub bearing orange or deep pink flowers: <bio>Crossandra infundibuliformis</bio>.

<p id=6890><form>hustiyas</form> <xr>= <sc>USTIYAS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6891><form>hustu</form> <number>1</number> proper in time. <i>Hustu na rung ilarga, Now is a good time to leave.</i> <number>2</number> <tr>enough</tr>, <tr>sufficient</tr>. <i>Duha ka buuk pán hustu pára pugung sa gútum,</i> Two pieces of bread are enough to stave off hunger. <i>Hustu sa kaínit ang kapi,</i> The coffee is just hot enough. <number>3</number> <tr>fitting</tr>. <i>Hustu ba ang sukud?</i> Is it the right size? <number>4</number> <tr>right</tr>, <tr>correct</tr>. <i>Hustu ang ímung tubag,</i> You gave the right answer. <number>5</number> having reached exactly [so-and-so] much. <i>Hustu nang usa ka dusína,</i> This makes it exactly one dozen. <number>5a</number> be <tr>complete</tr>. <i>Íning instulmína, hustu na ang báyad,</i> With this installment the payment is complete. <i>Hustu pa ba ang baráha?</i> Is the deck still complete? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>fit</tr>. <i>Muhustu ba sa ímung tiil ning sapatúsa?</i> Will these shoes fit you? <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> be <tr>correct</tr>. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> reach a certain number. <i>Makapanunud ka ug mahustu ka na sa idad,</i> When you reach legal age, you can claim your inheritance. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for a debt to be paid off entirely. <form>kahustúan</form> <pos>n</pos> completion or arrival at a quantity as an end. <i>Way kahustúan sa átung bihilya kay pirming kabuk-an,</i> We can never complete our china set because s.t. or other always breaks.

<p id=6892><form>husù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2C; c1]</itype> pull out s.t. that is fitted tightly into s.t. <i>Wà maghúsù ang irù nga naghábal,</i> The two dogs that were copulating couldn&apos;t get apart. <i>Gihus-an ku níya sa íyang sundang,</i> He pulled his bolo out at me. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; b4]</itype> for s.t. fitted tightly into s.t. to work loose. <i>Nagkahusù ang pul-an sa kutsilyu,</i> The handle of the knife is coming loose. <number>2a</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> for the blade of an instrument to fly off on one and hit him. <i>Hihus-an siya sa prákul,</i> The head of the axe came off and injured him. <pos>a</pos> loose inside s.t.

<p id=6893><form>husù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> bearing a close resemblance to one&apos;s parents or forebears. <i>Husù kaáyu ka sa ímung inahan,</i> You look exactly like your mother. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; b6]</itype> look exactly like one&apos;s parents.

<p id=6894><form>husud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> for several persons to take turns carrying a load to a distant place in relays. <i>Kay layù mag huspital husuran lang nátug dáyung ang masakitun,</i> The hospital is far away, so we&apos;ll take turns carrying the patient.

<p id=6895><form>húsud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> buy part of s.o.&apos;s purchases from him, esp. food. <i>Way makahúsud ning <pb n=357>sud-ána kay pára ni sa masakitun,</i> I won&apos;t sell any of this food I bought because it is for the patient.

<p id=6896><form>huswà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ABN; a2]</itype> slowly pull off s.t. that is around s.t. else; pull off, come out. <i>Kinsay naghuswà sa pánit nga gúma áring alambri?</i> Who slipped the insulation off of this wire? <i>Muhuswà (manghuswà) usáhay ang pánit sa bátang mga usa ka búlan sa maháyag,</i> An infant&apos;s skin sometimes peels off a month after it is born. <i>Ug huswáun (ihuswà) ku ning ákung antipára, bulanun ang ákung tinan-awan,</i> If I take my eyeglasses off, my vision will get dim. <form>&mdash;ang katahum</form> for a dressed-up woman to lose her beauty by doing s.t. to spoil her looks. <i>Muhuswà ang ímung katahum ug maglampásu kang nakaílis na,</i> You won&apos;t look nice any more if you scrub the floor after you have put on your good clothes.

<p id=6897><form>hut</form> <ix>expression said to incite a dog to attack:</ix> sic him.

<p id=6898><form>hút</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> set food aside for s.o. <i>Naghút kug isdà pára ra giyud nímu,</i> I set aside some fish just for you.

<p id=6899><form>húta</form> <pos>n</pos> letter J.

<p id=6900><form>hútak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1P]</itype> do s.t. to excess. <i>Ayaw dihag pahútak ug káun kay náa pay wà kakaun,</i> Don&apos;t eat so much. Other people haven&apos;t eaten yet.

<p id=6901><form>hutay</form> <pos>n</pos> line hung for drying. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> string a line for drying. <i>Kining alambri ákung ihutay pára sa hayhayan,</i> I&apos;ll string this wire up for a clothesline.

<p id=6902><form>hútay</form> <pos>a</pos> s.t. crisp that has softened due to exposure to air. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> for s.t. crisp to become soft and soggy. <i>Mahútay ang inarmirulan ug matun-ugan,</i> Starched clothing will lose its crispness if you don&apos;t keep it out of the damp.

<p id=6903><form>hutbà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B256]</itype> for a surface to give way under weight. <i>Nahutbà ang kát sa síyang íyang gitungtúngan,</i> He stepped on the caned seat and it gave way.

<p id=6904><form>hutbaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B246; b6]</itype> for the eyelids to swell from too much crying, sleeping, or overindulgence in salty foods. <i>Mihutbaw ang íyang mata ug hinílak,</i> Her eyes swelled from crying so much.

<p id=6905><form>huthut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> drain, exhaust s.o.&apos;s wealth. <i>Muhuthut sa katigayúnan ang súgal,</i> Gambling drains off one&apos;s resources. <i>Gihuthut (gihuthútan) lang ka ánang babayhána,</i> That woman is just sucking your money.

<p id=6906><form>huthut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the coo of the turtledove or imitation of such a sound. <number>2</number> barking of a dog. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> coo or imitate cooing by blowing through the hands formed into a hollow cone. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>bark</tr>.

<p id=6907><form>huthut<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> <tr>collapse</tr> under heavy weight. <i>Mahuthut ang salug ug palabian sa mga bisíta,</i> The floor will collapse if there are too many visitors.

<p id=6908><form>huthut<sub>4</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>HALUTHUT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6909><form>hutik</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> for fish to <tr>snap</tr> at the bait. <i>Ígù lang hutikan sa isdà ang paun. Mau nga dílì giyud matag-an,</i> The fish just snap at the bait. That&apos;s why you can&apos;t hook them. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> slightly <tr>hurt</tr> s.o. <i>Gihutikan nákù ang bátag latigu,</i> I struck the child once lightly with the whip. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> engage in <tr>petting</tr> or <tr>making love</tr> (humorous). <form>(&larr;)<sub>1</sub></form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>HUTIK</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr> <form>-ay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> <tr>pet</tr> or have <tr>intercourse</tr>. <pos>n</pos> action of <tr>snapping</tr>.

<p id=6910><form>hútik<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> be all <tr>mud</tr>. <i>Hútik ang tugkaran,</i> The front yard is all mud. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for an area to turn to mud. <i>Muhútik (mahútik) nang dapíta ug dì butangag balas,</i> That place will become muddy if you don&apos;t put sand on it.

<p id=6911><form>hutil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hotel</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> stay at, make into a hotel.

<p id=6912><form>hutináni</form> <pos>n</pos> name of a modern <tr>dance</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do this dance.

<p id=6913><form>hutluk</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>drunk</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> be, become drunk or intoxicated with liquor. <i>Nahutluk siyag ininum sa lambanug,</i> He became intoxicated from drinking the nipa alcohol.

<p id=6914><form>huts</form> <xr>= <sc>HUT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6915><form>hutúhut</form> <pos>n</pos> cool <tr>breeze</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> for a cool breeze to blow. <i>Mihutúhut ang hángin gíkan sa búkid,</i> A cool breeze came down from the mountain.

<p id=6916><form>hutukhutuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b3]</itype> stay <tr>motionless</tr>, <tr>staring</tr> into space and blinking the eyes. <i>Naghutukhutuk ka man. Nagdamgu ka?</i> Why are you staring into space? Are you daydreaming?

<p id=6917><form>hut-ung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>layer</tr> or <tr>section</tr>. <i>Kík nga duhay hut-ung,</i> A cake in two layers. <i>Hut-ung sa dag-um,</i> A layer of clouds. <i>Kinahitas-ang hut-ung sa katilingban,</i> The highest layer of society. <number>2</number> <tr>section</tr> of an organization. <i>Ang mga kadíti nagmartsa sa parid sa ikaduhang hut-ung,</i> The cadets are marching in the parade in the second section. <number>3</number> a <tr>quantity</tr> of s.t. usually set apart from others. <i>Usa ka hut-ung sa mga bátà nagdúlà pud sa sísu,</i> A group of children also played on the see-saw.

<p id=6918><form>hutútay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. Chinese <tr>soup</tr> with wanton noodles in it.

<p id=6919><form>hútuy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> heavy, prolonged <tr>coughing</tr>. <i>Gihútuy ku sa pagkinatáwa,</i> I broke into a coughing fit from laughing so much.

<p id=6920><form>hutwang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> for the rumps to be <tr>exposed</tr>. <i>Nahutwang ang lubut kay nawalis <pb n=358>ang sinínà,</i> Her behind was exposed because her skirt was blown upwards.

<p id=6921><form>hutwang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for dogs to howl. <i>Muhutwang ang irù ug makakitag panulay,</i> Dogs howl when they see devils. <pos>n</pos> <tr>howl</tr>.

<p id=6922><form>huum</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> put a mouthful of food into the mouth to eat. <i>Muhuum kug diyútayng kan-un kay gigútum ku,</i> I&apos;ll stick a mouthful of food into my mouth because I&apos;m hungry. <pos>n</pos> <tr>mouthful</tr>.

<p id=6923><form>húum</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B16]</itype> be confined such that air, gas cannot escape. <i>Naghúum ang nagkalainláing báhù sulud sa sinihan,</i> Various odors were stored up in the theater. <i>Mihubag ang íyang núka kay nahúum kini iláwum sa plastir,</i> His boil swelled because the plaster kept the noxious gas in it. <number>2</number> <itype>[B156; c6]</itype> for s.t. that provokes an intense unpleasant feeling to be pent up. <i>Ang suliran nga naghúum sa íyang dughan,</i> The problems that have been suppressed in her breast. <i>Ayawg ihúum ang kayugut,</i> Don&apos;t repress anger.

<p id=6924><form>huung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> get food that hasn&apos;t been served. <i>Hung-un sa iring ang tinúlang isdà,</i> The cat will get at the fish stew. <number>2</number> eat s.t. right out of the pot. <i>Maghuung na lang ku diri kay kapuy nang magkúhag plátu,</i> I&apos;ll just eat from the pot, because it&apos;s too much trouble to get a plate. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> do illicit acts with another man&apos;s wife. <i>Dúnay muhuung sa asáwa inigbyáhi sa bána níyang kapitan,</i> S.o. takes over after the husband, who is a ship captain, goes off.

<p id=6925><form>huut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> tight in fit. <i>Huut kaáyu ang ákung sapátus,</i> My shoes are very tight. <i>Huut ang takub. Gáhing tangtángun,</i> The cover is on very tight. It&apos;s hard to get it off. <number>2</number> tight in feeling. <i>Huut kaáyu ang ákung tunlan tungud sa kahadluk,</i> My throat was tight with fear. <number>3</number> <tr>crowded</tr>. <i>Huut kaáyu ang sinihan,</i> The moviehouse was very crowded. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23; acP]</itype> stuck or wedged tight. <i>Ang bábuy mihuut sa imburnal,</i> The pig got stuck in the culvert. <i>Ihuut ang kálù sa úlu,</i> Put the hat tightly on the head. <number>1a</number> <itype>[B4]</itype> for the chest, throat to tighten. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> fill up a space entirely. <i>Ang íyang nawung mihuut sa ritrátu,</i> Her face filled up the photograph. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> very <tr>crowded</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be <tr>jampacked</tr>. <i>Naghúut ang mga pumapálit sa baratilyu,</i> The buyers jampacked the bargain sale. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> jam s.t. in s.w. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> practice <ix>pahuut</ix> sorcery on s.o. <pos>n</pos> k.o. sorcery causing swelling and rapid death. The leaves and bark of a tree with magical properties are caused to come into contact with the skin of the intended victim either by hanging them in his path or by rubbing them onto him.

<p id=6926><form>huut<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>HUUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6927><form>huwà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> separate things from each other by distance or by a division. <i>Ang ámung lúti gihuwaan ug subà,</i> Our lots are separated by a river.

<p id=6928><form>huwa-</form> for words with <bx>huwa-</bx> see also under <xr><sc>HULA-</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6929><form>huwad</form> (from <ix>húlad</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> pour s.t. off into a container or some place to be kept. <i>Kinsay naghuwad sa mais diri sa salug?</i> Who poured the corn grains here on the floor? <i>Ihuwad ang súkà sa butilya,</i> Pour the vinegar into the bottle. <number>2</number> pour money into an area. <i>Ang Sibu gihuwaran ni Markus ug duha ka milyun,</i> Marcos poured two million into Cebu. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> for an image or likeness to appear in one&apos;s offspring or on s.t. it was transferred to. <i>Ang ímung kaguwápa mihuwad ngadtu sa ímung bátà,</i> Your daughter has inherited your beauty. <i>Ang hulagway sa palutup wà makahuwad kay dílì hustug ínit ang plansa,</i> The image didn&apos;t transfer because the iron was not hot enough. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> action of intense pouring. <form>huwaránan</form> <pos>n</pos> receptacle, dumping place.

<p id=6930><form>huwag, huwaghuwag</form> <pos>n</pos> slender vine, the split stems of which are used for tying purposes: <bio>Flagellaria indica</bio>.

<p id=6931><form>Huwan</form> <ix>name</ix> <tr>John</tr>. <form>&mdash; dila krus</form> the Filipino John Doe, name given to represent the average Filipino. <form>&mdash; Púsung</form> character in folk tales of low position but great cleverness who succeeds in getting the better of people in high positions.

<p id=6932><form>húwap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>stroke gently</tr>. <i>Natúlug ang bátà nga ákung gihúwap (gihuwápan),</i> The child that I stroked gently went to sleep.

<p id=6933><form>huwas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2PB; b4]</itype> <number>1</number> bring relief, be relieved. <i>Kining tablitása daling muhuwas (mupahuwas) sa hilánat,</i> These tablets quickly relieve fever. <i>Mihuwas (nahuwas) na ákung sakit,</i> My pain has been relieved. <i>Nahuwasan na siya sa kahadluk,</i> He has recovered from his fear. <number>1a</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> vent one&apos;s anger on. <i>Siyay gihuwasan sa ákung kalágut,</i> I vented my anger on him. <number>2</number> get over some bad character trait. <i>Nahuwasan na siya sa binúang human hikastiguhi,</i> He got over his foolishness after he got punished. <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to relieve.

<p id=6934><form>huwas<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. catfish.

<p id=6935><form>huwásay</form> <xr>= <sc>WÁSAY</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=6936><form>huwásù</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>shoddily made</tr>. <i>Huwásù nga pagkaáyu sa sapátus, daling naukab,</i> The shoes were poorly repaired. They came apart again. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; c1]</itype> for workmanship to be poor.

<pb n=359>

<p id=6937><form>huwat</form> (from <ix>hulat</ix>) <ix>expression commanding a draft animal to stop:</ix> <tr>whoa</tr>.

<p id=6938><form>huwátid</form> <xr>= <sc>HUYÁTID</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6939><form>huwi-</form> for words with <ix>huwi-</ix> <xr>see also <sc>HUY-</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6940><form>huwis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>judge</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B16]</itype> be, become a judge. <i>Huwisun siya sa Bugu,</i> He will be made a judge in Bogo. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> autopsy a murder victim to gather evidence. <i>Gihuwisan únà ang minatay únà dad-a sa punirarya,</i> The body was autopsied before it was brought to the funeral parlor. <form>&mdash; dikutsilyu</form> <pos>n</pos> massacre of all civilians caught in an area. <i>Tungud kay gipatay ang upisyal mimandù ang mga Hapunánun ug huwis dikutsilyu,</i> Because an officer was murdered, the Japanese put out the order for a mass murder. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> conduct a <tr>massacre</tr>. <form>&mdash; dipas</form> <pos>n</pos> justice of the peace. &dagger;

<p id=6941><form>huy<sub>1</sub></form> exclamation used upon greeting s.o. with whom one is intimate. <i>Huy, Abil! Kumusta ka!</i> Hey, Abel! How are you! <form>huyhúy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> associate in a friendly way with (be on <ix>huy</ix> greeting terms). <i>Dílì siya makighuyhúy sa íyang silíngan,</i> She keeps aloof from her neighbors. <pos>n</pos> friendly association. <form>panaghuyhúy</form> <pos>n</pos> having feelings of amity toward one another.

<p id=6942><form>huy<sub>2</sub>, hùy</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <ix>exclamation to attract immediate attention:</ix> hey! <i>Hùy, nag-unsa ka man dihà!</i> Hey! What do you think you&apos;re doing? <number>2</number> exclamation uttered upon being provoked. <i>Huy! Ngánung manghíkap man ka!</i> Hey! What do you think you&apos;re doing touching me!

<p id=6943><form>húy</form> <xr>= <sc>HILUY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6944><form>huy-ab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2N]</itype> <tr>yawn</tr>. <i>Nagpanghuy-ab kung nagpaábut nímu, I kept yawning,</i> waiting for you. <form>paN-</form> <xr>= <sc>HUY-AB</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6945><form>huyad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> raise the arms preparatory to striking. <i>Gihuyad níya ang pinútì,</i> He brandished his sword. <pos>n</pos> action of doing so.

<p id=6946><form>huyamì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> poorly built, rickety in build. <number>2</number> fragile in health. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> come out poorly built. <i>Mahuyamì (muhuyamì) ang ímung lamísa ug dì butangan ug brís,</i> Your table will be weak if you don&apos;t put braces on it.

<p id=6947><form>huyamì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> clumsy, awkward in movement. <number>2</number> moving lazily, without energy. <i>Dúgayng makapanlimpiyu ang táwung huyamig linihukan,</i> A person who moves lazily takes forever to get the cleaning done. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> be wanting in gracefulness and agility. <i>Magkahuyamì ang linihukan sa usa nga hápit nang maulitáwu,</i> A youth nearing adolescence gets awkward in his body movements.

<p id=6948><form>húyang</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> rickety, shaky. <i>Húyang nga hagdan,</i> Rickety staircase. <number>2</number> lacking in firmness, resolve, or will power. <i>Húyang siya kaáyu. Dì makabalíbad,</i> He&apos;s weak-willed. He can&apos;t say &lsquo;no&rsquo;. <i>Ang táwung húyang húmuk matintal,</i> A weak person easily gets tempted. <number>3</number> weak, not said with conviction or persuasiveness. <i>Misugut siya sa usa ka húyang nga tangdù,</i> He agreed with a weak &lsquo;yes&rsquo;. <i>Húyang kaáyung pangatarúngan,</i> Shaky arguments. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> for s.t. built to be or become rickety, shaky or for s.o.&apos;s will, argument to become weak. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>weaker sex</tr>, <tr>women</tr>. <i>Ang mga húyang nagpabílin sa báy,</i> The weaker sex remained at home. <number>2</number> homosexual, man affecting effeminate behavior. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>HÚYANG</sc>, <i>a</i>.</xr> <form>ma-</form> <pos>a</pos> very weak. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>weakness</tr>, <tr>shakiness</tr>.

<p id=6949><form>huyátid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN]</itype> stretch the body or limbs. <i>Pagmata nákù mihuyátid (nanghuyátid) ku,</i> When I woke up, I stretched.

<p id=6950><form>Huybis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Thursday</tr>. <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>BIRNIS</sc> <i>for verb forms.</i></xr> <form>&mdash; Santu</form> <tr>Maundy Thursday</tr>.

<p id=6951><form>huygu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. in a lively and uninhibited way. <i>Mihuygu ug panáyaw ang mga batan-un pagtukar sa kumbu,</i> The young people danced animatedly when the band played. <i>Dílì mi makahuygug tábì basta náa ang prinsipal,</i> We can&apos;t gossip freely if the principal is around. <number>1a</number> have freedom to do s.t. <i>Dì nang bayhána makahuygug pangílad dinhi sa Sibu kay nutádu na nà,</i> That woman can&apos;t get away with her swindling in Cebu because she is well known. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> perform an action, make a move. <i>Naghulat lang ang babáyi nga makahuygu ang ulitáwu,</i> The woman is just waiting for her suitor to propose. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> freedom to do what one wants. <i>Hatágan kug huygu ang ákung anak sa pagpílì sa babáying íyang pangasaw-unun,</i> I will give my son the freedom to choose whoever he wishes to marry. <number>2</number> animated portion of the <ix>kuratsa</ix> dance. <number>2a</number> exclamation encouraging brisk movement, esp. in the <ix>kuratsa.</ix> <number>3</number> baby&apos;s trick. <i>Dúna na say bag-ung huygu nga nakat-unan si Dyí. Matas dága na sad,</i> Jay learned a new trick&mdash;blinking his eyes. <form>&mdash; túdu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> do s.t. as much as one can or wants to. <i>Mihuygu túdu kug dágan pagkakità ku sa anínu,</i> I ran as fast as I could when I saw the shadow. <i>Wà mi makahuygu túdu ug ínum kay kúlang ang ámung kwarta,</i> We could not drink to our hearts&apos; content because we didn&apos;t have enough money.

<p id=6952><form>huygu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> gambling game. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> engage in gambling. <i>Nanghuygu na pud ka bisag way kwarta,</i> There you are gambling again, even though you have no money. <pos>n</pos> the activity of gambling.

<p id=6953><form>huygu<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>complete</tr> set of utensils or equipment. <pb n=360><i>Huygu nga plátu,</i> Set of china. <i>Huygu sa sála,</i> Living room set.

<p id=6954><form>huyhuy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for the shoulders to <tr>slump</tr>. <i>Huyhuy ang abága nga miulì si Nistur tungud sa kapakyas,</i> Nestor went home with drooping shoulders because he failed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN; c1]</itype> for the shoulders to droop.

<p id=6955><form>huyhuy<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sound</tr> of repeated <ix>huy</ix>&apos;s said to make a horse get going. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> command a horse to go. <i>Mitarúti ang kabáyung gihuyhuy sa kutsíru,</i> The horse trotted when the rig driver said getty-up.

<p id=6956><form>huyhúy</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>HUY<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=6957><form>huyù</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>compassion</tr>, <tr>tender</tr>. <i>Huyù ang panagway ni Hisus nga nakigsulti sa mga tinun-an,</i> Jesus talked to his disciples with a tender look on his face. <number>2</number> <tr>soft</tr>, <tr>courteous</tr>. <i>Mibalíbad siya sa huyung tíngug,</i> She refused in a soft and courteous tone of voice. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be tender, soft-tempered. <i>Way makahuyù sa gáhì níyang kasingkásing,</i> Nothing can soften his hard heart. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> state of being compassionate.

<p id=6958><form>huyúhuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>breeze</tr>.

<p id=6959><form>húyung, huyunghúyung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mire</tr>, a place which looks like solid ground but is deep mud.

<p id=6960><form>huyup</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> blow air. <i>Tugnaw basta muhuyup ang amíhan,</i> It&apos;s cold when the northeast wind blows. <i>Huypa ang ákung samad,</i> Blow on my wound. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; a2]</itype> blow s.t. away. <i>Gihuyup sa hángin ang mga papílis,</i> The wind blew the papers away. <i>Gihuypan níya ang libru sa abug,</i> He blew the dust off the books. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> treat an ailment by <ix>huyup.</ix> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> action of blowing. <number>2</number> folk treatment of illness whereby the doctor whispers magical words on the ailing portion of the body and blows softly on it three times. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> a children&apos;s game of blowing rubber bands with the mouth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; a]</itype> play this game. <form>huypanay</form> <xr>= <sc>HÚYUP</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6961><form>huyut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> for s.t. to bend in the middle under weight. <i>Húyang ang salug kay muhuyut kun tumban,</i> The flooring is weak because it sags when you step on it. <i>Mihuyut (nahuyut) ang kisami,</i> The ceiling sagged in the middle. <i>Nagkahuyut ang salug nga húyang,</i> Loose floor is becoming wobbly. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> sink, as objects do in the sand or mud. <i>Muhuyut (mahuyut) ang ímung tiil kun itunub sa lápuk,</i> Your feet will sink if you step in the mud. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> tending to sag. <number>2</number> allowing the feet to sink when stepped in.

<p id=6962><form>húyut</form> <xr>= <sc>HÚSUD</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6963><form>hwasa, hwasà</form> <xr>= <sc>ALIWÁSA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=6964><form>hwisyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sense</tr>, <tr>judgment</tr> of right and wrong. <i>Walay hwisyu ang paggastu sa tibuuk puhúnan,</i> It was showing poor judgment to spend all the capital. <number>2</number> state of <tr>consciousness</tr>. <i>Gianistisyáhan ku, piru wà giyud ku mawad-i sa hwisyu,</i> I was anesthetized, but I did not lose consciousness.

</body>
</text>
</TEI.2>
