<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN" [

<!ENTITY larr       CDATA "&#x2190;"            -- leftwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY rarr       CDATA "&#x2192;"            -- rightwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY glots      CDATA "&#x0294;"            -- glottal stop -->

<!ENTITY amacr      CDATA "&#x0101;"            -- a with macron -->
<!ENTITY imacr      CDATA "&#x012B;"            -- i with macron -->
<!ENTITY umacr      CDATA "&#x016B;"            -- u with macron -->

<!ENTITY amacrgra   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0300;"    -- a with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY imacrgra   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0300;"    -- i with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY umacrgra   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0300;"    -- u with macron and grave -->

<!ENTITY amacracu   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0301;"    -- a with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY imacracu   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0301;"    -- i with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY umacracu   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0301;"    -- u with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY Umacracu   CDATA "&#x016A;&#x0301;"    -- U with macron and acute -->

<!ENTITY amacrcir   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0302;"  -- a with macron and circumflex -->
<!ENTITY imacrcir   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0302;"  -- i with macron and circumflex -->
<!ENTITY umacrcir   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0302;"  -- u with macron and circumflex -->

<!ENTITY Acaron     CDATA "&#x01CD;"            -- A with caron -->
<!ENTITY acaron     CDATA "&#x01CE;"            -- a with caron -->
<!ENTITY Icaron     CDATA "&#x01CF;"            -- I with caron -->
<!ENTITY icaron     CDATA "&#x01D0;"            -- i with caron -->
<!ENTITY Ucaron     CDATA "&#x01D3;"            -- U with caron -->
<!ENTITY ucaron     CDATA "&#x01D4;"            -- u with caron -->

<!ENTITY schwa      CDATA "&#x0259;"            -- schwa (turned e) -->
<!ENTITY N          CDATA "N"                   -- N symbol (as used in this dictionary) -->

<!ENTITY prime      CDATA "'"            -- prime -->
<!ENTITY Prime      CDATA "''"            -- double prime -->

]>
<TEI.2 lang=en>
<teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
        <titleStmt>
            <title>A Dictionary of Cebuano Visayan</title>
            <author>John U. Wolff</author>
        </titleStmt>
    </fileDesc>
    <profileDesc>
        <langUsage>
            <language id=en>English</language>
            <language id=en-US>English (United States)</language>
            <language id=ceb>Cebuano</language>
        </langUsage>
    </profileDesc>
</teiHeader>
<text>
<front>
<pb n=1072>
</front>
<body>


<div1 type=Letter id=letter.u n=U>
<head>U</head>


<p id=19924><form>u<sub>1</sub></form> <tr>or</tr>. <i>Kinsa may muadtu, ikaw u aku?</i> Who will go, you or me? <i>Muadtu ka ba u pabilin ba,</i> Are you going or staying here? <form>&mdash; byín, bín</form> <ix>particle offering two choices of action:</ix> or, if you wish. <i>Ikaw bay muanhi u <corr sic=byin>byín</corr> aku bay muanhà?</i> Are you coming here, or shall I go there?

<p id=19925><form>u<sub>2</sub></form> <number>1</number> <ix>particle initial in the sentence:</ix> exclamation of surprise upon finding out s.t. <number>1a</number> expressing annoyed surprise. <i>U, ngánung kúlang man ning suklì!</i> Hey, this isn&apos;t enough change! <i>U, ngánung mipaúlì ka pa man!</i> What are you doing back here! <i>U, ngánung wà man siya mukúyug!</i> Why? How come she&apos;s not with you? <i>U, mudílì ka na hinúun nga náa gitúnul na?</i> You mean you are going to refuse it when you already have it in your hand? <number>1b</number> expressing pleasant surprise. <i>U, Ting! Nía man diay ka!</i> Hey, Ting. You&apos;re here! <number>1c</number> exclaiming surprise at having made a mistake: Oh! <i>U, singku písus ba diay tu ímung gihátag nákù?</i> Oh! Was it five pesos you gave me? <number>2</number> exclamation preceding an emphatic denial. <i>U dílì, dílì nà mahímù,</i> Oh no, that can&apos;t be done. <number>2a</number> preceding a statement that s.t. is not the way the interlocutor thought. <i>U, sayun ra nang lutúun. Lat-i lang,</i> Oh, that&apos;s easy to cook. Just boil it. <number>3</number> pause before speaking. <i>U, ári diri nà ibutang,</i> Oh, just put that over here. <number>4</number> (most often at the end of the clause) particle to draw s.o.&apos;s attention. <i>U, Dyú, dalì ra kadiyut,</i> Oh, Joe<corr>,</corr> would you come here a second. <i>Ambi ra nang lápis u,</i> Would you hand me that pencil, that one over there. <i>Díay písus u. Patupi didtu,</i> Here, here&apos;s a peso. Go get a haircut.

<p id=19926><form>u<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> letter O.

<p id=19927><form>&umacracu;<sub>1</sub></form> expression of frustration. <i>&Umacracu;, ngánu ug ngánu gayud nga nahitabù tu,</i> Oh why, oh why did that have to happen?

<p id=19928><form>&umacracu;<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>úu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19929><form>&umacracu;<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>úlu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19930><form>úbak</form> <pos>n</pos> trunk of a banana or abaca tree. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> separate layers of the banana trunk. <i>Ubáka ang baláni para kan-an,</i> Separate the banana trunk layers to use as plates.

<p id=19931><form>uban</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>companion</tr>, s.o. together with s.o. else. <i>Kinsay ímung uban?</i> Who is your companion? <number>1a</number> s.t. that belongs together with s.t. else. <i>Kining mayka uban adtung tiprikurdíra,</i> This mike belongs with that tape recorder. <number>1b</number> <formx>&mdash; sa</formx>, [dat.] together with. <i>Mianhi ku dinhi uban níya,</i> I came here together <pb n=1073>with him. <i>Misugut siya uban sa pagtúu nga ...</i> He agreed in the belief that ... <number>1c</number> <formx>&mdash; ang</formx> including, [so-and-so] is also along. <i>Milakaw siya uban ang íyang masusu,</i> She left taking her baby with her. <number>1d</number> one&apos;s wife or husband, referred to in the third person. <i>Ákung ingnun ang ákung uban inig-abut níyas trabáhu,</i> I&apos;ll tell my husband when he gets home from work. <number>2</number> the other ones, additional ones. <i>Háin na man ang uban,</i> Where are the others? <i>Unsa pay uban,</i> What else? <ix>ug uban pa</ix> and so forth (abbreviated <bx>ubp.</bx>). <number>3</number> some of a group, but not all. <i>Mauy buhátun sa uban,</i> Some people do that. <i>Ságad barátu ang prútas, piru uban mahal,</i> Usually fruit is cheap, but some kinds are expensive. <number>4</number> <formx>mau rang -a(&larr;)</formx> of the same class. <i>Ang tulíngan ug barílis mu rang ubána,</i> The mackerel and tuna are in the same family. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> go with, accompany s.o. <i>Muuban ku nímu,</i> I&apos;ll go with you. <i>Nagkaúban mi pag-adtu sa Manílà,</i> We happened to go to Manila together. <i>Unsa pa may ímung ubanun ngadtu sa dawuntáwun?</i> What do you want to go downtown with me for? <i>Ubanan ku siya kanúnay,</i> I always go with her. <i>Kinsa may ákung iuban dinhi,</i> Who will I bring here with me? <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> escort s.o. in an affair or any gathering. <number>2</number> <itype>[c]</itype> include in a group. <i>Nauban nà diri sa ákung lista,</i> That is included here on my list. <number>3</number> <itype>[b]</itype> give s.t. else in addition. <i>Mutúu ku nímu ug ímung ubanag pasálig,</i> I&apos;ll trust you if you give me additional assurances. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> <number>1</number> be, do together with s.o. <i>Nagkaúban mi sukad sa gagmay pa mi,</i> We have been together since childhood. <i>Makig-úban ku níyag puyù didtu sa syudad,</i> I&apos;ll stay with him in the city. <number>2</number> share happiness, difficulties, etc. with s.o. <i>Nag-úban mi kanúnay sa mga kasákit,</i> We share each other&apos;s sorrows. <form>uban-úban</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> participate in things one should not. <i>Wà na ku muuban-úban sa ílang mga binúang,</i> I no longer take part in their foolishness. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> common-law spouse. <number>2</number> s.t. taken along on short notice. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab]</itype> have s.o. go with s.o. else or oneself. <i>Mupauban ka pa ba?</i> Do you still need s.o. to accompany you? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> do s.t. unnecessary in addition to s.t. <i>Dì ku mupauban (magpauban) ug púng bísan unsay ákung ihátag,</i> When I give s.t., I don&apos;t say a lot of unnecessary things. <number>2a</number> <itype>[c]</itype> take in, send together with s.t. else. <i>Paubanan nákù ug túbig iniglamuy sa tablíta,</i> I&apos;ll wash the tablet down with water. <i>Ipauban ang unum ka kutsárang mantikilya,</i> Add the six tablespoons of butter. <form>-ay (pa) untà</form> [so-and-so] should have been done under the rules of propriety. <i>Ubánay pa untà mananghid,</i> The least you could have done is asked. <i>Ubánay pa untà mutábang ka nákù imbís maghinan-aw lang,</i> You should have helped instead of just looking at me. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> done together with s.t. else. <i>Inubanan ug kasábà ang íyang pagtúgut,</i> He agreed to it but not without a good cussing out first. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>companion</tr>. <i>Irù ray ákung kaúban dinhi,</i> A dog is my only companion here. <form>ka- sa kinabúhì</form> one&apos;s <tr>spouse</tr>. <number>2</number> one who is together with s.o. in a job or in a place. <i>Kaúban sa klási,</i> A classmate. <number>2a</number> <formx>ka- nga</formx> <tr>fellow-</tr>. <i>Kaúban nákung maistru,</i> A teacher that teaches in the same school as I do. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> happen to be together with s.o. <form>ka-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>kin</tr>. <i>Daghan mig mga kaubánan sa Mindanaw,</i> We have many <tr>relatives</tr> in Mindanao. <number>2</number> people belonging to the same large group. <i>Mga kaubánan níya sa partídu,</i> His fellow party members.

<p id=19932><form>úban</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gray hair</tr>. <i>Daghan na ku ug mga úban,</i> I have lots of gray hair. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4b6]</itype> have gray hair. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having grey hairs. <i>Ubánun na ang tigúwang,</i> The old man has lots of gray hair. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to have grey hair.

<p id=19933><form>ubaryu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ovary</tr> in women.

<p id=19934><form>úbas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>grapes</tr>.

<p id=19935><form>úbas<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> refuse from soft-boiled rice or cooked cassava flour after extracting the starch used for starching clothes. <number>2</number> pulp of citrus fruits. <number>3</number> chips or curled up slivers that result from drilling wood or metal.

<p id=19936><form>ubaub</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>eyelid</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>temple</tr> of the head.

<p id=19937><form>ubaug</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>eye socket</tr>. <i>Ang ubaug mauy nagsanggà sa mata,</i> The eye socket supports the eyeball.

<p id=19938><form>ubay</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>parallel</tr> to, <tr>along</tr> the lines of, <tr>in line with</tr>. <i>Ang dálan mitúlin ug usa ka kilumitru ubay sa subà,</i> The path ran for a kilometer along the river. <i>Ang íyang gitambag ubay sa mga lagdà sa maáyung pamatásan,</i> The advice he gives is <tr>in accordance with</tr> the rules of proper behavior. <i>Ubay sa prugráma sa pagdagínut,</i> In line with the austerity program. <i>Ubay sa panahun ang pagpangarsúnis sa mga babáyi karun,</i> It is <tr>in accordance with</tr> the times the way women wear pants these days. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> go along the side of, be situated <tr>alongside</tr>, put s.t. parallel. <i>Daghang táwu ang miubay sa kutsi nga gisakyan sa pamúnù,</i> Many people went along beside the car bearing the president. <i>Nag-úbay kami pagkatúlug,</i> We slept lying down <tr>beside</tr> each other. <i>Nag-ubay sa baybáyun ang mga payagpáyag,</i> The shacks <tr>lined</tr> the beach. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> do s.t. in <tr>accordance</tr> with <pb n=1074>s.t. else. <i>Kung iubay nímu sa katárung ang ímung líhuk,</i> If you act <tr>according to</tr> the rules of right conduct. <form>pa-un(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> <tr>concur</tr>, <tr>go along with</tr> s.o.&apos;s decision. <i>Gipaubayúnan níya ang tanang hangyù sa asáwa,</i> He <tr>consented</tr> to everything his wife wanted to do. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. parallel with s.t. else.

<p id=19939><form>ubay-ubay</form> <pos>a</pos> of a <tr>considerable</tr> number or amount. <i>Ubay-ubay mi ug kuhà run,</i> We had a <tr>good-sized</tr> catch today. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; c1]</itype> be of a good number. <i>Ubay-ubaya (iubay-ubay) ang ímung pagkáun arun dì na ku magbálun,</i> Fix a <tr>good amount</tr> of food so I won&apos;t have to take any along.

<p id=19940><form>úbi</form> <pos>n</pos> widely grown <tr>yam</tr> of variable color and size; used mainly as an ingredient in sweet dishes: <bio>Dioscorea alata</bio>. <form>&mdash; nga gataw</form> <pos>n</pos> variety, the tuber of which becomes exposed above the ground. <form>&mdash; nga kinampay</form> variety with purple meat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> make s.t. of <ix>úbi</ix>. <form>kulur di-</form> violet-colored. <form>ubihan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>yam patch</tr>.

<p id=19941><form>ubíhas</form> <pos>n</pos> word used in the <ix>gúsus</ix> of certain novenas to refer to the souls who have joined the angels.

<p id=19942><form>úbir<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> beyond the allowed limit. <i>Bug-at ra kaáyu. Úbir nas timbangan,</i> It&apos;s too heavy. It weighs way more than the scale indicates. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> go beyond the limit. <i>Miúbir siyas linya maung napáwul,</i> He went <tr>over the line</tr> and so he was declared foul. <form>&mdash; drap</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>overdraft</tr>. <number>2</number> shortage of money. <pos>a</pos> being <tr>short</tr> of money. <i>Dì kung kapalit kay úbir drap ku run,</i> I can&apos;t buy any right now because I&apos;m short of money. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become short of money. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> be <tr>bankrupted</tr>. <form>&mdash; dus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>overdose</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> take an overdose of s.t. <form>&mdash; hid</form> <pos>n</pos> violation in basketball where a player dribbles the ball above his head. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> commit this violation. <form>&mdash; hit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> for engines to overheat. <form>&mdash; hul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>overhaul</tr> a vehicle. <form>pa- hul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> have a general physical check-up. <i>Kinahanglang magpaúbir hul ta kausa sa usa ka túig,</i> We need a general physical check-up once a year. <form>-ispíding</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>speeding</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> be speeding. <form>&mdash; kut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jacket</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> wear, make into a jacket. <form>&mdash; lan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> go s.w. overland rather than by sea. <form>&mdash; lap</form> <pos>n</pos> trousers made to be worn without a belt, having an overlapping closing in the waist. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> make trousers in this style. <form>-lúdid</form> <pos>a</pos> for a vehicle or boat to carry a load greater than the legal limit. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be <tr>over-loaded</tr>. <form>-nayit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> stay s.w. <tr>overnight</tr>. <pos>n</pos> <tr>overnight bag</tr>. <form>-nayit bag</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>overnight bag</tr>. <form>-prayis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>overprice</tr> s.t., jack up the price. <form>&mdash; sis</form> <pos>n</pos> vessel that goes overseas out of the Philippines. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> sail or work on an overseas vessel. <form>-tayim</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>overtime work</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>overtime pay</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> work <tr>overtime</tr>. <i>Náay ámung giubirtayman,</i> We&apos;re working overtime on s.t. <form>&mdash; tik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>pass</tr> another vehicle. <i>Ayaw pag-ubir tik sa kurbáda,</i> No overtaking on a curve. <number>2</number> get a girl to say yes to one before s.o. else does. <i>Naguul si Huwan tungud kay giubirtikan siya ni Pidru sa pagpangulitáwu ni Maríya,</i> Juan is sad because Pedro beat him to Maria (and Maria accepted Pedro). <form>&mdash; ul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>overalls</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> wear, make overalls.

<p id=19943><form>úbir<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> in volleyball, toss the ball back to the opponents.

<p id=19944><form>úbir<sub>3</sub></form> humorous reference to the song <i>U Bírhin Maríya.</i>

<p id=19945><form>ubispu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bishop</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> be, become a bishop. <form>ubispádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bishopric</tr>.

<p id=19946><form>ubligar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> <tr>force</tr>, <tr>compel</tr> s.o. <i>Kanang ímung sakit mauy muubligar nímu sa kamatáyun,</i> Your illness will bring you <tr>inexorably</tr> to your death. <i>Wà siya nákù ubligara (ubligaha) pagbáyad sa íyang útang,</i> I didn&apos;t force him to pay his debt. <i>Naubligar ku sa pagpangútang ug kwarta pára sa masakitun kung anak,</i> I was forced to borrow money for my sick child. <form>ubligádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>must</tr> do. <i>Ug gustu kang muabut sa pyista, ubligádu kang mularga run,</i> If you want to make it to the feast you must leave today. <i>Dílì ubligádu ang pagsimba sa mga Hudíyu,</i> It is not <tr>obligatory</tr> for Jews to attend church. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> be <tr>obliged</tr> to do s.t <form>ubligasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>obligation</tr>, <tr>moral compulsion</tr> to do s.t. <i>Ubligasiyun sa usa ka ginikánan pagbuhì sa íyang mga anak,</i> Parents have an obligation to raise their children. <number>2</number> <tr>financial obligation</tr>. <i>Wà kuy ikabáyad sa ákung ubligasiyun,</i> I don&apos;t have the means to pay my obligations. <form>may &mdash;</form> a married man.

<p id=19947><form>ublung</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>oblong</tr> in shape. <number>2</number> for s.t. normally round not to be so. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> for s.t. round to get out of shape. <i>Kun ímung padagánun nang bisiklítang plát muublung (maublung) ang yantas niánà,</i> If you ride the bicycle flat, the rims will get out of shape.

<p id=19948><form>ubp.</form> abbreviation for <ix>ug uban pa</ix> &lsquo;and so forth&rsquo;.

<p id=19949><form>ubra</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>work</tr>, esp. manual. <i>Nag-ubra ku sa báy ni Andis,</i> I&apos;m working on Andis&apos; house. <number>2</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> <tr>work off</tr> a debt. <i>Ákung ubráhan tung bayinti nga útang nákù,</i> I will work off my twenty-peso debt to you. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23; b(1)]</itype> for medicine to take effect. <i>Wà pa ka ubráhi sa purga?</i> Hasn&apos;t the purgative taken effect yet? <number>4</number> <itype>[B; b4]</itype> for menstruation to flow freely. <i>Dì muubra <pb n=1075>ang ákung dugù ug malígù ku,</i> My menstruation won&apos;t flow freely if I take a bath. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>work</tr>, esp. manual or heavy. <form>gíkan sa &mdash; padúlung sa trabáhu</form> going from work to more work. <i>Wà kuy diskansu kay gíkan sa laba padúng sa kusína, padúng sa bátà &mdash; gíkan sa ubra padúng sa trabáhu,</i> I have no rest. From the laundry to the kitchen, to the baby. I go from work to more work. <number>2</number> <tr>finished works</tr>. <form>&mdash; maistra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>masterpiece</tr>. <i>Nahálin ug dakù ang ubra maistra sa pintur,</i> The masterpiece of the artist sold for a good price. <form>ubríru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>manual laborer</tr>. <number>2</number> member of a household (humorous). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; a12]</itype> be a <tr>worker</tr>. <form>ubrírus</form> <xr>= <sc>ubríru</sc> (plural).</xr> <form>pina-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hired hands</tr>, <tr>workers</tr>. <form>inubráhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>remuneration</tr> for one&apos;s work. <form>ulubrahun, ubrahúnun</form> <pos>n</pos> things to be done. <form>-s publikas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>public works</tr>.

<p id=19950><form>ubríru</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ubra</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19951><form>ubsirbar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make an observation, <tr>keep an eye on</tr>. <i>Ubsirbahan úsà nákù ang ímung trabáhu úsà ku muumintu sa ímung swildu,</i> I will <tr>see</tr> how you work before I give you a raise. <i>Giubsirbahan sa dukt&ucaron;r ang ipiktu sa iniksiyun sa masakitun,</i> The doctor <tr>observed</tr> the effect of the injection on the patient. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> <tr>notice</tr>. <i>Hiubsirbahan ta ka nga naghinuktuk usáhay,</i> I&apos;ve noticed you have been wrapped in deep thought from time to time. <form>ubsirbádu</form> <number>1</number> be one&apos;s observation. <i>Ubsirbádu na nà nákù sa muguwà gánì ang mga úbus, muulan giyud,</i> I have already observed that when the winged ants come out, it will rain. <number>2</number> having first-hand experience with s.t. <i>Ubsirbádu ku ánang sakíta kay daghan kug anak,</i> I&apos;m familiar with that sickness, because I have lots of children. <form>ubsirbasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> as one looks at it. <i>Sa ákung ubsirbasiyun, mulansad giyud si Imilda,</i> As far as I can see it, Imelda is sure to run.

<p id=19952><form>ubsirbaturyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>observatory</tr>.

<p id=19953><form>ubu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cough</tr>. <form>amígu sa &mdash;</form> one who is susceptible to coughs and colds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; a4]</itype> <tr>cough</tr>. <i>Sap-úngi ang ímung bàbà ug muubu (ubhun) ka,</i> Cover your mouth if you cough. <form>ubuubu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tuberculosis</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146; a4]</itype> have <xr><sc>tb</sc>.</xr> <i>Nag-ubuubu (giubuubu) ku,</i> I have <xr><sc>tb</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19954><form>ubù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[c]</itype> lie down on the stomach. <i>Ákung iubù ning ákung tiyan arun maw&amacrgra; ang bútud,</i> I&apos;ll lie on my stomach to get rid of my gas pains. <number>1a</number> for a baby to be able to turn over on its stomach. <i>Kining batáa kay muubù na, maáyu na ni pasundan,</i> This child can turn over on his stomach. It&apos;s about time to have another baby. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> crouch or stoop with the body low. <i>Ug dì ka muubù masungkù ka,</i> If you don&apos;t stoop, you&apos;ll bump your head. <number>3</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> throw oneself on s.o. to protect him. <i>Ákung giub-an ang bátà sa nagpungasì na ang bála,</i> I threw myself on the child when the bullets came fast and thick. <form>bilat sa íyang &mdash;</form> a coarse and humorous euphemism for <xr><sc>bilat sa iyang ina</sc>.</xr> <form>pa- sa bága</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> broil s.t. over hot coals. <i>Paub-a (ipaubù) sa bága ang manuk,</i> Broil the chicken over the coals.

<p id=19955><form>ub-ub</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> chew and eat s.t. crunchy between the molars. <i>Ub-úba ang tablítas,</i> <tr>Chew</tr> the tablets. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>eat</tr> (slang). <i>Muub-ub siya bísan unsa,</i> He eats anything.

<p id=19956><form>ubud</form> <pos>n</pos> general name for <tr>marine eels</tr>. <form>&mdash; itúhun</form> k.o. <tr>eel</tr> the head of which is shaped like a catfish&apos;s (<ix>ítu</ix>).

<p id=19957><form>úbud</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the tender heart of the trunk of palms, bananas, bamboos, rattans. <i>Lamì lumpiyáun ang úbud sa lubi,</i> The heart stem of the coconut is good for egg rolls. <number>2</number> <tr>bamboo shoots</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> get, gather hearts of stems and trunks. <form>ubúrun</form> <pos>a</pos> having the whiteness and smoothness of the heart of a banana stem. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> develop a white, fine texture.

<p id=19958><form>úbug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>wade</tr> or walk through shallow water. <i>Tagahawak ang túbig nga ákung giúbug,</i> I waded through water that was waist-deep.

<p id=19959><form>ubul-úbul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>Adam&apos;s apple</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>trachea</tr> or <tr>windpipe</tr> of vertebrates. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c16]</itype> hit s.o. on the Adam&apos;s apple.

<p id=19960><form>ubus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>beneath</tr>. <i>Ubus sa káhuy may táwu nga naglingkud,</i> Beneath the tree there sat a man. <number>1a</number> the lower part of body. <number>1b</number> <tr>lowlands</tr>, usually coastal areas. <number>2</number> <tr>under</tr>, <tr>subjected to</tr>. <i>Ubus sa íyang pagdumála,</i> Under his management. <i>Magminyù aku nímu ubus sa usa ka kundisiyun,</i> I&apos;ll marry you under one condition. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>low</tr>, not high in price or degree. <i>Ubus kaáyu nang prisyúha,</i> That price was very low. <number>2</number> low, not high in elevation. <i>Itaas ang kutay kay ubus ra kaáyu,</i> Put the strand up higher because it is too low. <number>2a</number> for the womb of a pregnant woman to be low. <number>3</number> low of station or of social rank. <form>&mdash; balauránan, pamalauránan</form> <tr>Lower House</tr>. <number>4</number> arrive s.w. later than s.o. else. <i>Ubus ka nákug singku minútus,</i> You arrived five minutes later than I did. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2; b7Pc]</itype> <tr>decrease</tr>, <tr>go down</tr>. <i>Ug muubus ang ímung grádu,</i> If your grades go down. <i>Ubsi (paubsi) ang ímung tunung, tingáli buls-ay,</i> Lower your aim. You might make a bulls-eye. <number>2</number> <itype>[APB; cP]</itype> be lower in elevation or placement. <i>Miubus ang sawug kay mius-us ang panawganan,</i> The floor sunk because the <pb n=1076>joists sunk. <i>Miubus na ang íyang tiyan. Hapit na manganak,</i> Her baby has <tr>descended</tr>. She is about ready to have it. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> travel, <tr>fly low</tr>. <i>Ang banug talagsa ra nga magpaubus,</i> Hawks seldom fly low. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> go to live in coastal areas. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> be <tr>humble</tr>. <i>Magpaubus ta kay mabà ra ta ug ranggu,</i> We should be humble because we are of low rank. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b7c]</itype> lower one&apos;s voice. <i>Mipaubus siya sa íyang tíngug, hadluk hidunggan,</i> He lowered his voice, afraid of being heard. <number>5</number> <itype>[A1; c2]</itype> <tr>reduce</tr> an amount. <i>Paubsan (ipaubus) sa prisidinti ang sílut,</i> The president will reduce the penalty. <number>6</number> <itype>[A; a1c]</itype> <tr>put down</tr>, <tr>lower</tr>. <i>Ug mupaubus siya sa íyang pusil ayaw ug tirúhi,</i> If he lowers his gun, don&apos;t shoot him. <i>Ipaubus ang inyung bangkaw. Way kásu,</i> Lower your spears. There&apos;s nothing wrong. <form>hi-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b3(1)]</itype> be <tr>offended</tr>, <tr>hurt</tr>. <i>Nahiubus ku sa íyang sulti,</i> I was hurt by what he said. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> condition or state of being <tr>inferior</tr> or <tr>low in rank</tr>. <form>kahi-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hurt feelings</tr>. <form>mapaubsánun, mapahiubsánun, mapinaubsánun, mapainubsánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>humble</tr>. <form>taga-</form> <pos>n</pos> people residing in the coastal areas.&dagger;

<p id=19961><form>úbus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; a12]</itype> be all <tr>consumed</tr>. <i>Kinsay nag-úbus sa kík?</i> Who ate the cake? <i>Átung ubúsun ang pagkáun,</i> Let&apos;s eat all the food.

<p id=19962><form>úbus<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>alibusbus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19963><form>ubuub</form> <pos>a</pos> low-roofed house, building. <i>Ngitngit ning baláya kay ubuub kaáyu ang atup,</i> This house is dark because it has a very low roof. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> make a building or house low-roofed.

<p id=19964><form>&umacracu;d</form> <xr>= <sc>úlud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19965><form>úday</form> <xr>= <sc>úray</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19966><form>udhak</form> <pos>n</pos> deep cough or gasp for breath of the sort one gets from an asthma attack, over-exertion, a blow on the chest, or the like. <i>Ang udhak sa tisísun milánug sa kagabhíun,</i> The coughing of the tubercular resounded in the night. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a4]</itype> have a deep coughing fit or gasp for breath. <i>Mu rag dílì siya makaginháwa ug muudhak (udhákun) siya,</i> It is as if he can&apos;t breathe when he has his attacks.

<p id=19967><form>udhan</form> <pos>a</pos> be mean enough to do s.t. <i>Udhan (udhánun) kang mulakaw bísag nagdaut ang ímung anak?</i> Can you bear to leave the house when your child is sick? <form>-un</form> <xr>= <sc>udhan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19968><form>udíyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>extreme unction</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> give the extreme unction.

<p id=19969><form>udiyung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>arrow</tr>, <tr>dart</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; a2]</itype> make arrows. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> hit with an arrow. <form>-un(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>slender</tr>, <tr>arrow-like</tr>. <i>Udiyúngun ug láwas ang babáyi,</i> The lady has a slender body.

<p id=19970><form>udlut</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> young <tr>leaf</tr>, leaf <tr>bud</tr>. <number>2</number> one who belongs to the upper class or top level of society. <i>Ikaw kay udlut magpataas ug aku kay laylay magpaubus,</i> You, who are of the upper class, should stay on top while I, who am of the dregs, should remain down where I belong. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; b4]</itype> sprout leaf buds. <i>Miudlut (nangudlut, giudlútan) na ang ákung manan-aw,</i> My orchid is budding. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; b4]</itype> for the flesh to swell in forming scar tissue in a place where there was a wound or boil. <i>Kining samára ang giudlútan sa prisku nga unud,</i> This is the wound where scar tissue formed. <number>3</number> <itype>[AN; b5]</itype> pick the top of leafy plants. <i>Ang kanding mauy miudlut (nangudlut) sa ákung agbáti,</i> The goat chewed off the leaf buds of my <ix>alugbáti</ix>. <form>ting-</form> <pos>n</pos> time for sprouting new leaves of plants, trees, etc. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> the topmost part of the tree in monocots.

<p id=19971><form>udtu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>twelve o&apos;clock</tr>, for the sun to be overhead. <form>&mdash; nga láruk, tútuk, tuktuk</form> <tr>high noon</tr>. <number>2</number> for the moon or s.t. else to be overhead in the heavens at the noon position. <ix>see also phases of the moon under</ix> <xr><sc>búlan</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B25; b8]</itype> be <tr>noon</tr>. <i>Muláruk ang adlaw ug maudtu na,</i> The sun reaches its zenith when it is noon. <number>1a</number> <itype>[B]</itype> for a heavenly body to get into the noon position. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b4(1)]</itype> do s.t. till noon. <i>Hiudtuhan (naudtuhan) siyag pagwápa atubángan sa ispíhu,</i> She primped in front of the mirror the whole morning until noon. <number>3</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> do s.t. at noon time. <i>Maudtu ray ákung ipahúway,</i> I take a rest only at noon time. <form>hi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B56]</itype> be almost high noon. <i>Ínit kaáyu ang adlaw ug muhingudtu (mahingudtu) na,</i> The sun becomes hot when it&apos;s almost noon time. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> slice the terminal portion of a coconut bud to induce sap to flow regularly at noon. <number>2a</number> gather coconut palm toddy at noon. <form>panghi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> do s.t. at noon one doesn&apos;t normally do at noon, e.g. have sexual intercourse. <i>Dúgay siyang miabut sa upisína kay nanghingudtu pa man,</i> He arrived late at the office, because he still had his noon intercourse. <form>udtuhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>zenith</tr>. <i>Ang búwan náa sa udtuhan,</i> The moon is at the zenith. <form>kaudtúhun</form> <pos>n</pos> noon time. <i>Ang kaudtúhun ínit kaáyu,</i> At noon time it is very hot. <form>pani-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lunch</tr>, <tr>lunch time</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C12; b6(1)]</itype> have, eat lunch. <form>udtúhun, udtuudtu</form> <pos>n</pos> a tiny, poisonous black snake having bright reddish-orange eyes, so called because its poison is said to kill the victim at noon. <form>tali-</form> <pos>n</pos> time just before noon. <form>udtuhun</form> <pos>n</pos> coconut palm toddy <pb n=1077>gathered at noon.

<p id=19972><form>udù</form> <xr>= <sc>undù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19973><form>ud-ud<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; b5]</itype> dig up the ground with the snout. <i>Ang ákung bábuy ang nag-ud-ud sa ímung nataran,</i> It was my pig that plowed up the ground in your yard. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for an unborn baby to squeeze its head into a position above the groin causing the mother to have difficulty in walking. <pos>n</pos> the condition where an unborn baby presses on its mother&apos;s groin.

<p id=19974><form>ud-ud<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>alud-ud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19975><form>uduy</form> <xr>= <sc>undù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19976><form>ug</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>g.</bx> particle showing grammatical relation between two forms. <number>1</number> preceding non-specific goals. <i>Mipalit siya ug libru,</i> He bought a book. <i>Gitagáan ku níyag kindi,</i> He gave me some candy. <number>1a</number> preceding a noun referring to s.t. specific, but referring to it as s.t. general on any and all occasions. <i>Dì síya muadtug Manílà,</i> He refuses to go to <corr sic="any "></corr>Manila. <number>1b</number> <formx>ása &mdash;</formx> where is one to get. <i>Ása man ka ug kwartang ibáyad ánà?</i> Where will you get the money to pay for that? <number>2</number> preceding infinitives (replacing a prefix <ix>pag-</ix>). <i>Naglísud ku ug saka,</i> I had a hard time going up. <number>2a</number> with adjectives of manner. <i>Milakaw siya ug kusug,</i> He walked away fast. <number>2a1</number> <formx>&mdash; ímu, íya, íla, etc</formx>. by yourself, himself, themselves, etc. <i>Káun ug ímu,</i> Just go ahead and eat on your own. <i>Mutúyuk ug íya ra,</i> It will turn all by itself. <number>2b</number> after <ix>ayaw</ix>. <i>Ayaw siya ug tan-áwa,</i> Don&apos;t look at him. <number>3</number> <ix>adj.</ix> plus <bx>ug</bx> <ix>plus noun:</ix> &lsquo;have&rsquo;. <i>Si Pidru dakù ug buktun,</i> Pedro has big arms. <i>Uy, kanindut bayà níya ug mata!</i> What beautiful eyes she has! <number>4</number> preceding a non-specific genitive. <number>4a</number> marking the possessor. <i>Anak ug hárì,</i> The son of a king. <number>4b</number> marking the agent. <i>Gidágit ug banug,</i> Was taken by a hawk. <number>5</number> if, when. <i>Ug maabut siya, pahibaw-a ku,</i> When he arrives, notify me. <i>Ug aku pa nímu,</i> If I were you. <number>5a</number> <ix>with indirect questions:</ix> whether. <i>Pangutan-a siya ug muabut ba ang barku ugmà,</i> Ask him whether the boat will arrive tomorrow. <number>5a1</number> with indirect questions containing interrogatives. <i>Nangutána aku ug unsa nà,</i> I asked what that was. <number>5b</number> linker for qualifying phrases. <i>Nákù ug ímu nang nahuman,</i> I thought you had finished it already. <i>Tingáli ug muanhi siya ugmà,</i> Perhaps he will come tomorrow. <i>Syáru ug dì nà mahímù,</i> I don&apos;t believe that is impossible. <number>6</number> <tr>or</tr>. <i>Pritúhun ug tuláhun, paríha ra nákù,</i> Deep fried or stewed, it&apos;s all the same to me. <number>7</number> <tr>and</tr>. <i>Lakaw ug ayaw pagbálik!</i> Go away, and don&apos;t come back! <i>Sila si Huwan ug si Pidru ang mianhi,</i> John and Pedro were the ones who came here.

<p id=19977><form>uga</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dry</tr>, having no moisture. <i>Uga na kaáyu ang kupras,</i> The copra is very dry now. <i>Ugang ubu,</i> A dry (hard) cough. <number>2</number> <tr>lifeless</tr>, <tr>dry</tr> in personality. <i>Uga kaáyu nà siyang ikaisturya,</i> He is very lifeless to talk to. <pos>n</pos> <tr>dried fish</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB; c1P]</itype> <tr>dry out</tr>; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Nag-uga (nagpauga) ku ug isdà,</i> I am <tr>drying</tr> some fish. <i>Muuga (mauga) ra nà ug ihayhay,</i> It will get <tr>dry</tr> if you hang it up. <i>Nagkauga na ang atábay,</i> The well is drying up. <i>Hiughan na ang ímung linadlad,</i> The clothes you were bleaching have gotten dry. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> get lifeless and dry in manner. <i>Nauga na man ka run,</i> You have become <tr>cool</tr> to us. <number>3</number> <itype>[b4(1)]</itype> be affected by s.t. being dry. <number>3a</number> have a <tr>dry labor</tr>. <i>Naglísud pagpanganak ang babáyi kay naughan,</i> The woman had a difficult delivery because she had a dry labor. <number>3b</number> for one&apos;s throat to be <tr>parched</tr>. <form>&mdash; ang tutunlan</form> needing a drink (of liquor).

<p id=19978><form>ugáhip</form> <pos>n</pos> a contagious <tr>skin disease</tr> which forms itchy pustules that pop and become painful, forming a crust, found most commonly around the mouth, but spreading over the body. <form>&mdash; likuslikus</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <ix>ugáhip</ix> that spreads over any part of the body. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4b4]</itype> get <ix>ugáhip</ix>.

<p id=19979><form>ugahípun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. very venomous <tr>snake</tr>, short and stout, having dark-grayish body, yellowish front and black spots on the back.

<p id=19980><form>ugáling</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>gáling</bx>. <xr>= <sc>gánì</sc> in all meanings except <i>5.</i></xr> <form>ka-un</form> <number>1</number> one&apos;s <tr>own</tr>. <i>Ákù ning kaugalíngung kutsi,</i> This is my own car. <i>May kaugalíngung banyu ang kwartu,</i> The room has its own bathroom. <i>Gigastu ku ang kaugalíngun kung kwarta,</i> I spent my own money. <number>1a</number> one&apos;s <tr>home</tr>. <i>But-an ku nímu sa ákung kaugalíngun?</i> You dare dictate to me in my own house? <number>2</number> <tr>oneself</tr>. <i>Nagsulti siya sa íyang kaugalíngun,</i> She was talking to <tr>herself</tr>. <form>panga-un</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>manage a home</tr>. <i>Hustu na siya sa idad nga mangugalíngun,</i> She is old enough to manage a home. <pos>n</pos> home, as it is managed. <form>kina-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <number>1</number> live on one&apos;s own. <number>2</number> have one&apos;s meals on one&apos;s own. <i>Dì ta mangasíra. Magkinaugalingun lang ta,</i> Let&apos;s not board. Let&apos;s have our meals on our own. <form>kaugalingnan</form> <pos>n</pos> independence of a nation. <i>Nagpakamatay si Risal álang sa kaugalingnan sa átung násud,</i> Rizal gave his life for the independence of our country.

<p id=19981><form>ugam</form> <pos>n</pos> whitish substance coating the tongue and upper palate. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; b4]</itype> get <ix>ugam</ix>.

<pb n=1078>

<p id=19982><form>ugang</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mother hen</tr>.

<p id=19983><form>ugángan</form> <pos>n</pos> parent of one&apos;s spouse. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be, become one&apos;s father- or <tr>mother-in-law</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> have as a <tr>parent-in-law</tr>. <i>Muugángan ka níla nga pubri man,</i> Would you like them to be your parents-in-law when they are poor? <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> one&apos;s prospective parents-in-law.

<p id=19984><form>ugat</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vein</tr>, <tr>blood vessel</tr>. <form>&mdash; mayur</form> <tr>penis</tr> (humorous). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2NP]</itype> for the veins to come out from exertion or anger. <i>Miugat (nangugat) ang íyang líug sa íyang pagkanta,</i> The veins on her neck bulged out when she sang. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> do s.t. with serious intent. <i>Nangugat giyud siyag hangyù nga muuban,</i> He <tr>seriously</tr> asked to be taken along. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> be <tr>angry</tr>. <i>Pamínaw ug katarúngan. Mangugat ka man lang dáyun,</i> Just listen to reason. You must not get angry right away. <form>pangli-(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>ugat</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr> <form>ugat-ugat</form> <pos>a</pos> leaves having lots of veins. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> for leaves to be veined. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>blood vessels</tr>. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> full of prominent veins.

<p id=19985><form>ugaúga</form> <xr>= <sc>gaugáu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19986><form>úgay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>fondle</tr> or <tr>stroke</tr>. <i>Dúgay na ku nga wà makaúgay sa ákung mga binuhì,</i> It&apos;s been a long time since I stroked my pets. <i>Bátang nag-úgay sa íyang tintin,</i> A little boy playing with his thing.

<p id=19987><form>ugba</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> work arduously, earnestly. <i>Adlaw-adlaw muugba si Pidru sa íyang uma arun mabúhì ang pamilya,</i> Pedro <tr>toils</tr> on his farm all day long so his family may survive. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> <tr>establish</tr>, <tr>found</tr>, <tr>bring into being</tr>. <i>Ílang gipasidunggan ang táwung nag-ugba sa kapunúngan,</i> They conferred an honor on the man who founded the organization. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>reconstruct</tr>, work again on s.t. left to deteriorate or ruin. <i>Mag-ugba ta sa karáan nátung báy nga natun-as,</i> Let&apos;s <tr>rebuild</tr> our old dilapidated house.

<p id=19988><form>ugbáti</form> <xr>= <sc>alugbáti</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19989><form>ugbp.</form> abbreviation for <ix>ug uban pa</ix> &lsquo;etc.&rsquo; <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>uban</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19990><form>ugbuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> plant or stick s.t. upright or erect. <i>Mag-ugbuk mi run sa mga pusti sa kural,</i> We will now set up the fence posts. <i>Kandilíru ang ákung giugbúkan sa mga kandílà,</i> I set the candles upright on a candlestand. <number>1a</number> <formx>&mdash; ang, sa pálu</formx> <itype>[A; c]</itype> have <tr>sexual intercourse</tr> with a woman (lit. implant the mast&mdash;slang). <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>construct</tr>, <tr>build</tr> a structure. <i>Ugbúkun (iugbuk) ba ang inyung balay dinhi?</i> Will you build your house here? <number>3</number> <itype>[a3b8]</itype> <tr>stand still</tr> as if rooted to the ground. <i>Naugbuk siya tungud sa kalísang,</i> He stood <tr>stock-still</tr> in fear. <pos>n</pos> <tr>stake</tr>.

<p id=19991><form>ugbun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>mound</tr>, esp. a <tr>heap</tr> of finely-textured things. <i>Usa ka ugbun nga abu ang nahibilin sa táwung nagsulit,</i> Only a small mound of ash was left of the man who burned himself. <number>2</number> <tr>ashes</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B6]</itype> be, become a small mound. <i>Miugbun (naugbun) ang dapit nga gilubngan sa patayng irù,</i> The place where the dead dog was buried has formed a mound. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> burn to ashes. <i>Naugbun na ang báy pag-abut níla,</i> The house was a heap of ashes when they arrived.

<p id=19992><form>ugbus</form> <pos>n</pos> young and unopened palm frond. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> do by fronds. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> remove young fronds. <i>Ayawg ugbúsi ang lubi kay masálut,</i> Do not remove the young frond from the coconut because it will be stunted.

<p id=19993><form>ugda, ugdà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>initiate</tr>, <tr>introduce</tr> s.t. by first doing it. <i>Kinsa ninyu ang miugda ug kukabáyù sa mga unlan?</i> Who of you started this playing horse with the pillows? <i>Ang mga Amirikánuy nakaugda paggámit sa abúnu,</i> The Americans initiated the use of fertilizer. <form>pasi-</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>ugda</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>sponsor</tr>. <i>Prugráma nga gipasiugdáhan sa sabung Laks,</i> Soap opera sponsored by Lux soap. <i>Banggà sa panugilánung gipasiugdáhan sa LUDÁBI,</i> A short-story contest sponsored by LUDABI. <form>tigpasi-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sponsor</tr> of a program, project.

<p id=19994><form>ugdang</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>heavy</tr> for one&apos;s size. <i>Ugdang kaáyu ning batáa bísan gamay,</i> This child is very heavy though he is small. <i>Ugdang ning kasága kay tambuk man,</i> This is a heavy crab because it is fleshy. <number>2</number> <tr>serious</tr>, <tr>matured</tr> for one&apos;s age. <i>Ugdang na kaáyu siyag nilihukan,</i> She acts <tr>mature</tr> for her age. <number>2a</number> <tr>serious</tr> in demeanor. <i>Ugdang nga paníngug sa agálun,</i> The master spoke <tr>seriously</tr>. <number>3</number> <tr>weighty</tr>, full of meaning. <i>Ugdang kaáyu tung buut níyang ipasabut,</i> What she meant to imply had more meaning than would appear on the surface. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> get to be heavy for one&apos;s size; <tr>mature</tr>, full of meaning. <number>2</number> <itype>[B236; b6]</itype> <tr>sink</tr> into the bottom of water. <i>Miugdang na ang pundu,</i> The anchor has sunk to the bottom. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>weight</tr>, <tr>seriousness</tr>, <tr>meaningfulness</tr>.

<p id=19995><form>ugdaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a12]</itype> burn down completely to ashes with no flames left. <i>Naugdaw na ang ámung báy pag-ulì nákù,</i> Our house was in ashes when I arrived home. <pos>n</pos> burnt to ashes.

<p id=19996><form>ugdu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for a dry measure to be <tr>heaping</tr>. <i>Maigù ug barátu kay ugdu ang takus,</i> It comes out cheap because it is a heaping measure. <number>2</number> <tr>rounded</tr> in shape and <tr>full</tr>. <i>Ugdu kaáyu siya ug dughan,</i> She has very full <pb n=1079>breasts. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> be, become <tr>heaping</tr>, full, or rounded. <number>2</number> <itype>[B3; b6]</itype> be <tr>piled</tr> up high. <i>Muugdu ang labhanan ug paugmaan,</i> The soiled clothes will <tr>pile up</tr> if you leave them for tomorrow. <form>pina-</form> <xr>= <sc>pinaulbu</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ulbu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19997><form>ugdu<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>bugdu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19998><form>ugduk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>stake</tr>. <number>2</number> general name for <tr>eels</tr> of any sort. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> plant a stake in the ground.

<p id=19999><form>ugdul</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>short</tr>, <tr>trimmed</tr>. <i>Gipalabihag ugdul níya ang íyang buhuk,</i> She had her hair cut very short. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> be <tr>trimmed</tr> short. <i>Naugdul ang mga mais kay giharíag tuhak sa manuk,</i> The chickens pecked the corn plants right down.

<p id=20000><form>ugdung</form> <xr>= <sc>ugdu<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=20001><form>ughad</form> <pos>a</pos> for a throat to be sore. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for the throat to get sore. <i>Nag-ughad ang ákung tunlan. Ubhun tingáli ku,</i> I have a sore throat. I&apos;m probably getting a cough. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> expel phlegm by coughing it out hard.

<p id=20002><form>ughak</form> <xr>= <sc>udhak</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20003><form>ugíngut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>body odor</tr> of unwashed perspiration and dirt. <i>Nanimáhù lang kang ugíngut,</i> You have a terrible <xr><sc>b.o</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20004><form>ugis</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having completely white feathers. <i>Limpiyu tan-áwun ang ugis nga manuk,</i> White-feathered chickens look clean. <number>2</number> <tr>fair</tr> of complexion. <i>Ugis kaáyu sila,</i> They are very <tr>white</tr>. <number>2a</number> people belonging to the white race. <number>2b</number> <tr>albino</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; b6]</itype> be, become <tr>white-feathered</tr>, <tr>white-skinned</tr>.

<p id=20005><form>ugíut</form> <xr>= <sc>ígut<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=20006><form>ugkad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> dig, <tr>pull out</tr> s.t. that is completely or partly buried or contained inside s.t. else. <i>Láing dyíp ang miugkad sa dyíp nga nalubung sa lápuk,</i> Another jeep pulled out the jeep that got stuck in the mud. <i>Ang nakaugkad sa buláwang budha,</i> The man who <tr>dug up</tr> the golden Buddha. <i>Giugkad sa kawatan ang ákung kaban,</i> The thief dug up the things in my trunk. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> find s.t. that was in s.t. or buried.

<p id=20007><form>ugkal</form> <xr>= <sc>ukal</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20008><form>ugkat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> dig s.t. out from under s.t. <i>Giugkat níla ang natabunan,</i> They dug out the person who had been buried. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>dig out</tr> or <tr>find out</tr> s.t. not known. <i>Buut ba ninyung ugkátun ang ákung kagahápun?</i> Do you want to <tr>dig into</tr> my past?

<p id=20009><form>ugkay</form> (from <ix>ukay</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>dig out</tr> s.t. buried. <i>Mga pulis ang nag-ugkay sa gilubngan sa gibunù,</i> The policemen <tr>exhumed</tr> the murder victim. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>ransack</tr> things in looking for s.t. <i>Ákung ugkáyun ang mga butang nímu básug túa didtu ang ákung rilu,</i> I&apos;ll ransack your things in case my watch is there. <i>2</i> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>stir</tr> s.t. thoroughly to <tr>mix</tr> it. <i>Ang muugkay sa harína kinahanglang ugag kamut,</i> Whoever wants to mix the flour must have dry hands. <number>2a</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for a home to be broken. <i>Naugkay ang ílang panimalay tungud sa bisyu sa bána,</i> The husband&apos;s vices finally broke their home.

<p id=20010><form>ugmà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tomorrow</tr>. <formx>&mdash; puhun (paabutun pa)</formx> <pos>n</pos> tomorrow, God willing (if I am allowed to see it). <i>Ugmà puhun na ku mularga,</i> I&apos;ll leave tomorrow, God willing. <number>2</number> one&apos;s <tr>future</tr>. <i>Kinsay nasáyud sa átung ugmà?</i> Who knows what the future holds for us? <form>&mdash; damlag</form> <pos>n</pos> in the future, someday. <i>Magkítà ra ta ugmà damlag,</i> We&apos;ll see each other again someday. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B256; b4(1)]</itype> for it to be the next day. <i>Miugmà (naugmà) na lang wà gihápun siya muabut,</i> Another day came and he still hadn&apos;t arrived. <i>Dì na nà siya kaugmaan (hiugmaan),</i> He won&apos;t live till the next day. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put s.t. off till the next day. <i>Ugmáa (iugmà) lang ang ímung híkay,</i> Put your party off till the next day. <form>ugmaugmà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put off doing s.t. <i>Dì ku muugmaugmà ug akuy musáad,</i> If I make a promise, I won&apos;t put it off. <form>pa-, paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> let s.t. be, delay oneself until the next day. <i>Ayawg pakaugmai. Buháta ni dáyun,</i> Don&apos;t let it wait till the next day. Do it right away. <form>ka-un</form> <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s future. <i>Wà kay kaugmáun dinhi sa baryu,</i> You have no future here in the village. <form>panghi-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> get to be about the next day. <i>Muabut si Mirli manghiugmà,</i> Mirlie will arrive by about tomorrow.

<p id=20011><form>ugmad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> till the soil. <i>Upawng yútà nga dílì ángayng ugmárun,</i> Barren land not worth tilling. <number>1a</number> <tr>develop</tr> or <tr>cultivate</tr> a talent. <i>Ang mga magtutudlù mauy muugmad sa mga útuk sa mga bátà,</i> Teachers develop the minds of the children. <i>Masápì ang talintu ug mauy maugmad,</i> Talent that is developed is a source of livelihood. <number>2</number> <tr>build</tr>, <tr>establish</tr>. <i>Siyay nag-ugmad sa dráma balítaw,</i> He wrote the first drama wherein the dialogue was in the <ix>balítaw</ix> form. <i>Giugmad níya ang únang prindahanan,</i> She established the first pawnshop. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>prepare</tr> rice for storage, winnowing it and allowing it to dry out somewhat. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> set a <ix>paugmad</ix> fish corral. <pos>n</pos> a k.o. fish corral set in the deep waters and allowed to remain there until it falls apart. <form>ugmaran</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. which is cultivated, worked on for one&apos;s livelihood. <i>Ang dágat mauy ugmaran sa ílang panginabúhì,</i> The sea is the source of their livelihood. <form>kaugmáran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>development</tr>, s.t. <pb n=1080>attained by cultivation. <i>Siyay nagpaluyu sa kaugmáran sa pruyiktu sa riklamasiyun,</i> He was behind the development of the reclamation project. <form>mag-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>peasant</tr>. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> occupation of tilling.

<p id=20012><form>ugnat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>stretch</tr> out s.t. somewhat elastic. <i>Ugnáta (iugnat) ug maáyu ug dì ba tagù nga hilúha,</i> Stretch the string out hard and see if it is strong. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> <corr sic=loose>lose</corr> elasticity from getting stretched out. <i>Miugnat (naugnat) ang íyang swítir nga gilubágan,</i> His sweater is now all stretched out because he wrung it out when he washed it. <i>Nagkaugnat ang lastiku sa ákung hapslip,</i> The garter of my half-slip is getting loose. <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>exercise</tr> for the purpose of developing the body. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> exercise. <i>Mupaugnat (magpaugnat) ku sa kusug káda buntag,</i> I do some exercise every morning.

<p id=20013><form>ugnuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126P; b3]</itype> be <tr>stunned</tr>, suddenly <tr>surprised</tr>. <i>Naugnuk (napaugnuk) siya sa kalit nga butu nga íyang nadungug,</i> She was stunned by the sudden explosion that she heard. <i>Naugnuk siya dihang gisultían siya nga karnis irù tung íyang gikaun,</i> She did a double take when she was told that what she was eating was dog&apos;s meat. <i>Ang íyang hinanálì nga kamatáyun mauy nakaugnuk (nakapaugnuk) sa mga táwu,</i> His sudden death stunned the people.

<p id=20014><form>ugnut</form> <xr>= <sc>bugnut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20015><form>ugpak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cloth</tr> woven from abaca fiber. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> wear abaca-fiber cloth. <number>2</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> put abaca-fiber cloth as lining to stiffen the cloth. <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> weave into abaca-fiber cloth.

<p id=20016><form>ugpas</form> <xr>= <sc>upas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20017><form>ugpù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> leap up to defend oneself or escape. <i>Wà makaugpù ang kawatan kay hiabtan man sa pulis,</i> The policeman caught the thief before he was able to get out of there. <i>Wà makaugpù ang kuntra sa dihang milayat si Rubinsun arun pagribáwun sa búla,</i> There was nothing the other team could do when Robinson jumped to get the ball on the rebound. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> for a child to bounce up and down when held standing. <i>Miugpù na ang bátà,</i> The child has reached the stage he bounces. <pos>a</pos> characterized with a bounce in walking. <i>Ugpù ug linakwan ning tagabúkid,</i> Mountain folks walk with a bounce. <form>ugpuugpù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <tr>bounce</tr>, <tr>jounce</tr> up and down. <i>Nag-ugpuugpù ang trák sa karsádang batsihun,</i> The bus is jouncing on the road that is full of potholes.

<p id=20018><form>ugpung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for plants that die after maturity to bear their last leaves before bearing fruit. <i>Mamúsù na nang sagínga kay miugpung na,</i> That banana is about to flower because it has born its last leaf buds.

<p id=20019><form>ugput</form> <xr>= <sc>igput</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20020><form>ugsad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B36; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>land</tr>, <tr>touch</tr> the ground in a gentle manner. <i>Sa dihang miugsad ang buwà sa sabun sa yútà, mibutu kini,</i> When the soap bubble landed on the ground, it burst. <i>Ayaw iugsad (ipaugsad) ang tumuy sa kurtína sa sawug,</i> Don&apos;t let the end of the curtain touch the floor. <form>ugsad-ugsad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>ugsud-ugsud</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ugsud</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>bounce</tr> or <tr>jounce</tr> in riding on a rough road or sea. <i>Nag-ugsad-ugsad ang trák sa kabatsihan,</i> The bus is bouncing up and down on the potholes. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>footfalls</tr>. <i>Kláru kaáyu sa sílung ang inugsad sa tiil sa naglakaw sa táas,</i> The <tr>footsteps</tr> upstairs are very loud downstairs.

<p id=20021><form>ugsud</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>stake</tr>, <tr>post</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>firewood</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> drive a stake into the ground. <i>Mag-ugsud na ta sa mga halígi sa kural,</i> Let&apos;s drive in the posts for the fence. <number>1a</number> throw s.t. down with force to the ground as if driving a stake. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> add firewood to make a flame higher. <i>Ákung ugsúran ang ákung gilung-ag arun malútug dalì,</i> I&apos;ll add firewood to the fire beneath the rice I am cooking so that it will get cooked soon. <form>ugsud-ugsud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> stamp the feet lightly, usually in childish refusal. <i>Ayaw ugsud-ugsúra (iugsud-ugsud) nang ímung tiil ug sugúun ka,</i> Don&apos;t stamp your feet when you&apos;re told to do s.t.

<p id=20022><form>ugsuk</form> <xr>= <sc>úsuk</sc> in all meanings except <i>n2.</i></xr>

<p id=20023><form>ugtad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B236]</itype> for ropes or like materials to snap under force or abrasion. <i>Miugtad (naugtad) ang písì sa kakusug sa pagbira,</i> The rope snapped when it was pulled strongly. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> get loose after the tether rope snapped. <i>Muugtad giyud nang kábaw kay gabuk na ang hikut,</i> That carabao will surely get loose because the tether rope is weakened.

<p id=20024><form>ugtak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> for chickens to squawk in fright. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2; c1]</itype> for the voice to be loud and abrupt. <i>Miugtak ang íyang sinultihan karung kwartáhan na siya,</i> He speaks in a loud and gruff tone now that he has become rich. <pos>n</pos> action of squawking. <pos>a</pos> having a gruff and loud voice.

<p id=20025><form>ugtas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1; c1]</itype> tire oneself out, be <tr>exhausted</tr>. <i>Nagkaugtas siya sa nadúgay nang lánguy,</i> He was becoming exhausted after swimming for a long time. <number>1a</number> get <tr>worn out</tr> emotionally. <i>Naugtas na ku ug tambag nímu,</i> I&apos;m exhausted from trying to give you advice. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> for rope or wire to snap and break after heavy use or friction. <i>Muugtas (maugtas) ang alambri sa síging bag-id sa batu,</i> The wire will break from rubbing against <pb n=1081>the stone. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126; b]</itype> for a life to end, usually after long suffering.

<p id=20026><form>ugtud</form> (from <ix>utud</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a12]</itype> <tr>break</tr>, <tr>chip off</tr>, break into pieces. <i>Naugtud ang líug sa butilyang napangkà,</i> The neck of the bottle broke off when he banged it against s.t. <i>Naugtud ang mga halígi nga giánay,</i> The post broke into pieces when the termites attacked it. <pos>n</pos> pieces broken off.

<p id=20027><form>ugtuk</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>still</tr>. <i>Ugtuk karun ang dágat,</i> The sea is <tr>calm</tr> now. <number>2</number> <tr>slow</tr>, almost dragging. <i>Mas ugtuk mulakaw ang kábaw kay sa báka,</i> The water buffalo walks more slowly than a cow. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B46]</itype> <tr>stand still</tr>, <tr>stop</tr>. <i>Muugtuk ang rilu kun dì yawíhan,</i> The clock will stop if it is not wound. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> do s.t. slowly, <tr>drag</tr> in one&apos;s work. <i>Muugtuk (mag-ugtuk) sila sa ílang trabáhu kun way magbantay,</i> They drag their work when nobody is watching. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> <tr>mope</tr> or <tr>brood</tr> over s.t.

<p id=20028><form>ugtus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a12]</itype> exhaust oneself emotionally. <i>Naugtus kug gastu sa ímung pagtuun,</i> I&apos;ve worn myself out paying for your schooling. <i>Ugtúsun pa giyud ku nímu ánang ímung binúang,</i> You still have to worry me to death with your shenanigans. <pos>a</pos> be exhausted emotionally.

<p id=20029><form>ugud</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>gud</bx>. <number>1</number> particle accompanying a statement of explanation. <i>Ang ákù gung gianhi nímu,</i> The reason I came here. <i>Nangutána lang gud ku kay ...</i> I&apos;m asking you because ... <i>Ang ákù gud, ug mahibaw-an unyà,</i> The thing that I&apos;m worried about is if he finds out. <i>Misyágit. Tíaw mu gud sakit kaáyu,</i> He screamed. Because imagine, it was so painful. <formx>man &mdash;</formx> <tr>because</tr>. <i>Wà ku palita kay mahal man gud,</i> I did not buy it because it was expensive. <number>1a</number> <formx>ugud ba</formx> particle initial in a sentence explaining why one has put a certain question. <i>&lsquo;Ngánung nangutána ka?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Ugud ba, arun mahibáwu,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Why do you ask?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Oh, I just want to know.&rsquo; <i>&lsquo;Ngánung nangutána kag muadtu ku?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Ugud ba, náa tay ákung ipadá nímu,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Why do you ask if I&apos;m going?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;I would like to have you take s.t. for me, if you would.<corr>&rsquo;</corr> <number>1b</number> particle affirming s.o.&apos;s statement casting aspersions. <i>&lsquo;Dátù man kahà ngánung nag-antus mag maistra?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Ugud,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;If she is rich, how come she puts up with teaching?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;I&apos;ve been wondering that myself.&rsquo; <number>2</number> in questions or exclamations. <number>2a</number> <ix>with interrogatives:</ix> in the world. <i>Ngánu gud nà!</i> Why in the world should it be like that. <i>Anus-a gud nà nímu humana,</i> When in the world are you going to finish it? <number>2b</number> <ix>with nominal predicates:</ix> what [noun] are you talking about? <i>Sinsíyu gud. Wà man tuy suklì,</i> What change are you talking about? You don&apos;t have any change coming. <number>2c</number> <formx>ba &mdash;</formx> how is it possible that [so-and-so] should happen? <i>Kay wà pa ba guy halin?</i> You mean to say there haven&apos;t been any sales till now? <i>Mangáwat ba gud ku?</i> You think I could possibly steal? <number>2d</number> <ix>in exclamations:</ix> particle exclaiming about s.t. discovered for the first time. <i>Kadakù na gud nímug idad!</i> My! How old you are! <i>Kadaghan gud nímug gihátag,</i> You sure gave me a lot! <number>3</number> <ix>in commands:</ix> [do so-and-so] even though you don&apos;t want to. <i>Sígi gud. Ihatud na lang gud ku,</i> Come on! Take me there already! <i>Ihátag na gud nà,</i> Go on now, give it to him. <number>3a</number> <ix>used sarcastically in commands:</ix> why don&apos;t you just [do]. <i>Buk-a na lang gud nang tanan. Barátu bítaw,</i> Why don&apos;t you just break all of them while you&apos;re at it? They&apos;re so cheap. <number>3b</number> <formx>ra &mdash;</formx> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ra</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20030><form>ug-ug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>jog</tr>, move bouncing up and down. <i>Muug-ug na gánì ning kabayúa timailhan nga gikápuy na,</i> Once the horse starts to jog it shows that it is tired. <number>2</number> <itype>[B3(1)6; b6]</itype> be <tr>jarring</tr>. <i>Muug-ug (maug-ug) gánì ang sakyanan pamaúlan ku,</i> If the vehicle <tr>jounces</tr> up and down, I&apos;ll get fatigued. <number>3</number> <itype>[AB; c16]</itype> <tr>shake</tr>, cause to move up and down or back and forth. <i>Dì mumata ang bátà ug akuy muug-ug,</i> The child won&apos;t wake up if I shake him. <i>Muug-ug (maug-ug) ang mga balay ug maglínug,</i> The houses will shake if there is an earthquake. <i>Nakaug-ug ka na sa midisína?</i> Have you shaken the bottle of medicine? <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>jogging</tr>, <tr>jouncing</tr>. <number>2</number> art of shaking s.t. <pos>a</pos> <tr>jouncy</tr>, <tr>bouncy</tr>. <i>Ug-ug kaáyu ang dálan,</i> The road is very <tr>bumpy</tr>. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bounciness</tr>, <tr>jounciness</tr>. <i>Tungud sa kaug-ug sa dyíp,</i> Because of the way the jeep bounced.

<p id=20031><form>ug-ug<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> for open wounds or sores to putrify.

<p id=20032><form>ug-úg</form> <xr>= <sc>ulug-úlug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20033><form>uguk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>short-necked</tr> due to fat or thickness of the neck. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1N; b6]</itype> have a short and fleshy neck. <i>Ang báka nangúguk,</i> The cow has a hump on its neck. <i>Ang íyang katambuk mauy nakauguk (nakapauguk) sa íyang líug,</i> Obesity has caused his neck to look short.

<p id=20034><form>uguk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>moronic</tr>, having feeble mental capacities. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be moronic.

<p id=20035><form>úgum</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> hold or keep s.t. inside the mouth. <i>Ayaw ugúma (iúgum) ang kan-un sa ímung bàbà,</i> Don&apos;t keep the food in your mouth. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <tr>enclose</tr> s.t. within it as if contained in the mouth. <i>Nag-úgum ug pútut ang búlak,</i> The flower encloses a fruit <pb n=1082>bud. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>harbor emotions</tr>. <i>Ayaw ugúma (iúgum) ang ímung mga kaguul,</i> Don&apos;t keep your problems to yourself. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> swindle contributions, funds entrusted to one. <i>Ug siyay matisuríru, ugúmun lang níyag átung ámut,</i> If he is made the treasurer, he will just pocket our contributions. <number>5</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> answer or assume responsibility for a crime committed to keep accomplices from getting involved. <i>Ayaw mu kahadluk nga masakpan ta. Tutal ugúmun man nákù ang tanan,</i> Don&apos;t be afraid if we get caught. I&apos;ll take complete responsibility.

<p id=20036><form>úgung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> spin a top. <i>Ugúnga ang kasing arun hibaw-an ta ug karagan ba,</i> Spin the top so we&apos;ll know if it spins well. <number>2</number> <itype>[B23(1); c1]</itype> be <tr>steady</tr> and without a wobble. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> run or drive very fast and at a steady speed. <pos>n</pos> action of spinning a top. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> spinning steadily, without wobbling. <i>Úgung kaáyu ang ákung kasing,</i> My top spins very steadily. <number>2</number> running fast at a steady speed. <i>Úgung siyang midágan kay nahadluk man,</i> He ran fast without stopping because he was afraid.

<p id=20037><form>ugut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b3(1)]</itype> <tr>frown</tr> in distaste, or from not being permitted s.t. <i>Dì ku mag-ugut ug sugúun ku ni Nánay,</i> I won&apos;t frown if Mother sends me on an errand.

<p id=20038><form>ugut-úgut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> roll in suppressed laughter.

<p id=20039><form>uguy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> for growth to be retarded or <tr>stunted</tr>. <i>Miuguy (nauguy) ang mga búlak nga gitanum iláwum sa kasagingan,</i> The flowers planted under the banana trees did not do well. <i>Ang bug-at nga trabáhu makauguy (makapauguy) sa mga bátà,</i> Hard work can <tr>stunt</tr> a child&apos;s growth.

<p id=20040><form>úguy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> rock a child slowly in the arms, sway the body gently as in time to slow music. <i>Siyay miúguy (nag-úguy) pagpakatúlug sa bátà,</i> She rocked the baby in her arms to sleep. <i>Ugúya ang bátà,</i> Rock the child in your arms. <form>uguy-úguy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> dance to slow music (colloquial). <pos>n</pos> slow dance music with the partners close together (colloquial). <form>uguy-úguy blus</form> <xr>= <sc>uguy-úguy</sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr>

<p id=20041><form>ugwad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> turn the earth over with a knife, bar, or s.t. similar. <i>Ugwárun lang nátù ang yútà sa kabatuhan,</i> We&apos;ll dig up the soil near the rocks with a bar. <i>Ugwárun sa bábuy ang tanum ug dì kuralun,</i> The pig will <tr>uproot</tr> the plants if you don&apos;t fence them. <pos>n</pos> bar to dig the soil up with. <form>ugwad-ugwad</form> <xr>= <sc>igwad-igwad</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>igwad</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20042><form>ugyab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for a group to break into laughter. <i>Miugyab sila ug katáwa sa ákung sinínà nga nabali,</i> They broke into laughter <form>upon</form> seeing me with my dress on backwards.

<p id=20043><form>uha</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for a newborn child to cry. <i>Miuha ang bátà sa pagguwà,</i> The child cried when it came out. <pos>n</pos> cry of a newborn baby.

<p id=20044><form>uhag</form> <pos>a</pos> restlessly moving about. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> move restlessly with bouncy actions. <i>Way muuhag kun kantáhun na ang nasudnung áwit,</i> Nobody move when the national anthem is sung. <i>Kun mag-uhag mu matikwang ang búti,</i> If you move around restlessly, the rowboat will capsize.

<p id=20045><form>uhaldris</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>cookie</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make, eat, or serve <ix>uhaldris</ix>.

<p id=20046><form>uhális</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>buttonhole</tr>. <i>Ang dakung butúnis dakug uhális,</i> High rank carries great responsibility. (Lit. Big buttons have big buttonholes.) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make buttonholes.

<p id=20047><form>uhang</form> <pos>n</pos> space between two things which are supposed to be touching or fitting each other. <i>Dì ku makalusut sa uhang sa kural,</i> I can&apos;t pass through the spaces between the fence. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for things that are supposed to be solid to have spaces in between them. <i>Miuhang (nauhang) ang bungbung sa pagkúlù sa mga káhuy,</i> The wallboards developed spaces between them when the boards shrunk. <form>uhang-uhang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> eat snacks casually. <number>2</number> go to other people&apos;s houses to have meals. <i>Ang táwung manguhang-uhang mu rag irung way tag-íya,</i> A person who goes around to have his meals is like a stray dog.

<p id=20048><form>úhas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> cutting or piercing instrument that is part of s.t. bigger: drill bit, saw blade, knife blade, barbs on a hook, et al. <number>2</number> <tr>matchstick</tr>. <i>Mangáyù lang ku ug tulu ka úhas sa puspuru,</i> I&apos;ll just ask for three matchsticks. <number>3</number> lead of a pencil. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> put in a cutting or piercing instrument to its handle.

<p id=20049><form>úhas bulantis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>leaflets</tr>.

<p id=20050><form>uhaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>thirsty</tr>. <i>Maay tag náay túbig kay uhaw kaáyu,</i> It would be nice if there were water because I&apos;m very thirsty. <number>1a</number> having a strong <tr>craving</tr>. <i>Uhaw ku sa lawasnung kalípay,</i> I&apos;m <tr>hungry</tr> for pleasures of the body. <number>2</number> <tr>devoid</tr>. <i>Kinabúhing uhaw sa kalípay,</i> A life devoid of happiness. <pos>n</pos> <tr>thirst</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> <number>1</number> be <tr>thirsty</tr>. <i>Ug akuy uhawun muúgum lang kug kandi,</i> If I feel thirsty, I&apos;ll just put a piece of candy in my mouth. <number>2</number> feel a longing, craving. <i>Giuhaw aku sa pagpanggà sa inahan,</i> I <tr>thirst for</tr> a mother&apos;s love. <form>hi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13N; c6]</itype> quench the thirst. <pos>n</pos> s.t. to quench the thirst. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>thirst</tr>. <number>1a</number> <tr>craving</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>emptiness</tr>.

<p id=20051><form>uháwun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. big <tr>parrot fish</tr> about 2&prime; long <pb n=1083>and 8&Prime; wide, having blue-green scales on the dorsal region and whitish-yellow scales on the ventral region.

<p id=20052><form>uhay</form> <pos>n</pos> seed-bearing <tr>panicle</tr> (e.g. as of rice but not corn). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> harvest s.t. by just taking the whole panicle. <i>Uhayun nátù ang pag-áni sa humay,</i> We&apos;ll harvest the rice by panicles. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b4]</itype> grow panicles. <i>Miuhay (nanguhay, giuhayan) na ang átung humay,</i> Our rice is bearing panicles now.

<p id=20053><form>uhípan</form> <xr>= <sc>ulahípan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20054><form>uhu</form> word representing the sound of coughing.

<p id=20055><form>uhú</form> so, I caught you. <i>Uhú, sayup na pud ka,</i> <tr>Aha</tr>, you made a mistake again. <i>Uhú, dáan pa lagi ku,</i> Aha! Just as I thought. <i>Uhú, pildi diay ka,</i> Aha! So you lost!

<p id=20056><form>uhù</form> <tr>as expected</tr>. <i>Ug uhù da man, miguwang mananáug si Ilurdi,</i> As expected, Elorde came out the winner. <i>Uhù túud, namatay ang masakitun,</i> Just as one would expect, the patient died.

<p id=20057><form>úhù</form> <tr>before</tr> [do]ing. <i>Úhù ka mutubag, panigurúa únag hustu ka,</i> Before you give your answer, make sure you are right. <form>&mdash; pa</form> <number>1</number> <tr>wait a minute</tr>. <i>Úhù pa kay nagkaun pa ku,</i> <tr>Just a minute</tr>. I&apos;m still eating. <number>2</number> <tr>just a second</tr>, to change the subject. <i>Úhù pa diay, nagdá ba tu kug bág?</i> <tr>By the way</tr>, did I have my bag along?

<p id=20058><form>uhún</form> <xr>= <sc>uhú</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20059><form>úhung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. white <tr>mushroom</tr>. <form>mudugù pay &mdash;</form> harder than getting blood out of a mushroom, said of women past child-bearing age who are not likely to menstruate or of people who are cheap. <i>Tihik siya kaáyu. Mudugù pay úhung,</i> He&apos;s terribly cheap. It&apos;s easier to get blood out of a stone (lit. mushroom). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> cook this k.o. mushroom. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> place where mushrooms grow readily.

<p id=20060><form>uhut, úhut</form> <pos>n</pos> straw of rice or other grain-bearing grasses. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b6]</itype> be reduced to straw, become all straw. <i>Miuhut (nauhut, nag-uhut) ang humay kay gikaun sa máya ang mga lugas,</i> The rice plant became all straw because the ricebirds ate the grains.

<p id=20061><form>úk</form> <xr>= <sc>uluk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20062><form>uka</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> split one&apos;s sides with laughter. <i>Giukhan (nauka) giyud kug katáwa sa ímung binaylihan,</i> I just about died laughing at the way you dance.

<p id=20063><form>ukab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>open</tr> with an upward or lifting motion, get opened. <i>Akuy miukab sa kaban,</i> I opened the trunk. <i>Wà siya makaukab sa láta,</i> He could not open the tin. <i>Librung nag-ukab sa lamísa,</i> A book lying open on the table. <i>Ukba (iukab, ukbi) ang ímung bàbà,</i> Open your mouth. <number>2</number> <tr>pry</tr> s.t. up, open. <i>Akuy miukab sa batu,</i> I turned the stone over. <i>Dikabra ray makaukab sa mga salug nga ilisánan,</i> Only a crowbar can pry the floorboards loose. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> for a part of the body, clothing to get a rip or slash. <i>Naukab ang íyang lapalapa kay nakatunub ug bildu,</i> His sole got slashes in it because he stepped on glass. <pos>n</pos> opened upwards, ripped off, slashed open. <form>ukab-úkab</form> <pos>a</pos> s.t. that can be opened and closed. <pos>n</pos> the general name for <tr>bivalves</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be s.t. that could be easily opened and closed. <form>ukban</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tangerine</tr>, a loose-skinned orange that is easy to open. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> plant tangerines.

<p id=20064><form>ukabhang</form> <xr>= <sc>alukabhang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20065><form>ukadyang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> turn things upside down to search. <i>Ukadyánga (iukadyang) ang tanan arun makit-an,</i> Search everything so that it can be found. <number>2</number> put things in utter disarray. <i>Kinsay nag-ukadyang sa ákung aparadur?</i> Who <tr>disarranged</tr> the things in my cabinet? <number>3</number> <itype>[A123P; a3]</itype> be <tr>agog</tr> or put into frenzied action. <i>Naukadyang sila pagkatribukar nga kulángan ang sápì,</i> They were thrown into a <tr>dither</tr> upon finding out that the money was short.

<p id=20066><form>ukal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> <tr>peel off</tr>, <tr>detach</tr> s.t. from a surface to which it is firmly attached, esp. over its entire surface; become so. <i>Wà pa muukal (maukal) ang unud sa lubi,</i> The coconut meat has not detached from its shell. <i>Nag-ukal ang tikud sa sapátus,</i> The heel is <tr>coming off</tr> the shoes. <i>Nagkaukal na ang pintal sa dáang balay,</i> The paint of the old house is peeling off. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; a12]</itype> take out or away from s.t. as if detached. <i>Ukala na nang bátà sa íyang inahan,</i> Take that child away from its mother. <i>Dì na siya maukal sa pagkamaistru,</i> He can&apos;t be removed from his teaching post.

<p id=20067><form>ukang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB2; c1]</itype> remove s.t. attached to a surface. <i>Dílì na siya makaukang sa kwadru nga gilansang sa bungbung,</i> He can no longer remove the frame that he nailed to the wall. <i>Maukang ning gipapilit ug mainitan,</i> These things which are pasted on will come off when the sun gets on them. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB2C; a1]</itype> <tr>cease</tr> to do s.t. <i>Dúgay nà silang muukang (mag-úkang) sa ílang pag-ínum,</i> It will take them a long time to <tr>finish</tr> their drinking spree. <i>Dúgay naukang ang íyang panan-aw sa libru,</i> It took him a long time to take his gaze off the book. <i>Ukánga (uknga) nang nagsinumbagay,</i> Separate those people that are fighting.

<p id=20068><form>ukas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> <number>1</number> catch s.o. in the act. <i>Naukasan sa bána ang íyang asáwa sa makauúlawng kahimtang,</i> The husband caught his <pb n=1084>wife in an embarrassing position. <number>2</number> get a chance to do s.t. <i>Mangáwat siyag makaukas,</i> He steals if he is given the chance.

<p id=20069><form>ukasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>occasion</tr>, a favorable <tr>opportunity</tr>. <i>Ukasiyun nà nímu. Pahimudsi,</i> That&apos;s a chance for you. Take advantage of it. <i>Way ukasiyun nga sarang kagamítan ning sinináa,</i> There&apos;s no occasion for which I can wear this dress. <number>2</number> trip of public transportation. <i>Wà nay ukasiyun rung mga urása,</i> There are no more buses at this hour. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> take advantage of an opportunity. <i>Nangukasiyun siya pagbisíta samtang wà didtu ang ginikánan,</i> He took the opportunity of visiting her while her parents weren&apos;t there. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> <tr>get a chance</tr> to do s.t. <i>Mangáwat siya ug makaukasiyun,</i> He steals if he gets a chance. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> action of taking an opportunity. <i>Kining ákung pagkúyug nímu pangukasiyun kay malibri kus plíti,</i> I&apos;m taking advantage of the chance to go with you to get a free ride.

<p id=20070><form>úkat</form> <xr>= <sc>ugkat</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20071><form>ukay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>stir</tr> or <tr>agitate</tr> s.t. <i>Ukaya nu ang linúgaw,</i> Please stir the porridge. <i>Rík ang iukay sa humay nga gibulad,</i> Use a rake to <tr>mix up</tr> the rice we are drying. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <corr sic=blow>plow</corr> lightly, esp. a second time, across existing furrows. <i>Maáyu giyud nga ukayun ang daruhan úsà tudlínga,</i> It is wise to plow the field lightly a second time before you make the furrows. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a2]</itype> turn things upside down in searching. <i>Náa ra nà dihà ug ímu nang ukayun,</i> If you turn everything upside down, you&apos;ll see it is there. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> find s.t. by turning things upside down. <i>Naukayan ang píkas sinílas sa basúra,</i> He found the other slipper after they <tr>ransacked</tr> the garbage. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> stir s.o. up. <i>Naukay ang mga táwu pagsúnug,</i> The people were all <tr>excited</tr> when there was a fire. <pos>n</pos> s.t. to stir with. <form>ig-l-(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>ukay</sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr>

<p id=20072><form>úkay</form> <tr>O.K.</tr>, I give agreement.

<p id=20073><form>ukba</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> get detached from what it was stuck to. <i>Ákung ukbáhun ang pánit sa inasal,</i> I&apos;ll <tr>peel off</tr> the skin from the roasted pig. <pos>a</pos> having come off.

<p id=20074><form>ukhab</form> <xr>= <sc>abhak</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20075><form>úki</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>O.K.</tr>, <tr>all right</tr>. <i>Úki kaáyu ang ímung trabáhu,</i> Your work is all right. <number>2</number> <tr>in agreement</tr>. <i>Dílì ku úki ánà,</i> I won&apos;t <tr>go along with</tr> that. <pos>n</pos> <tr>approval</tr>. <i>Nagpaábut pa sa íyang úki,</i> Still waiting for his approval. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a3b]</itype> give one&apos;s approval. <i>Siyay miúki (nag-úki) sa ákung ripurt nga gisumitir,</i> He <tr>approved</tr> the report that I submitted. <i>Wà maúki (maukíhi) ang plánu,</i> The plan was not approved.

<p id=20076><form>ukiduk, ukidúki</form> emphatic expression of approval or agreement.

<p id=20077><form>ukikà</form> humorous for <xr><sc>ukiduk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20078><form>úkit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> peel off s.t. with the front teeth or take little things off or apart with the fingers. <i>Ukítun pagkáun ang pakwan,</i> You eat watermelon seeds by peeling them with your front teeth. <i>Mahímù nga kuku ang iúkit,</i> You can peel it off with your fingernails. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> <tr>pry</tr> into s.o.&apos;s secrets. <i>Ngánung mangúkit ka sa ákung kagahápun?</i> Why do you want to pry into my past? <number>3</number> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> study s.t. in detail to find s.t. out. <i>Nangúkit siyag unsay dipirinsiya sa mutur,</i> He&apos;s <tr>examining</tr> the motorcycle to see what is wrong with it. <form>ukit-ukitan, ukit-ukitun, ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>curious</tr> or <tr>nosey</tr>. <i>Ukit-ukitun kaáyu ning táwung libakíra,</i> This gossipmonger sure is nosey.

<p id=20079><form>ukíuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>squeeze</tr>, <tr>penetrate</tr> deep into. <i>Miukíuk sa íyang tanlag ang mga sudiyà sa namatay níyang inahan,</i> The words of reproach from his dying mother penetrated deep into his soul. <i>Dì ka makaukíuk dihà kay bagà kaáyu ang táwu,</i> You can&apos;t elbow your way through because the crowd is so thick. <i>Húmuk ang yútà nga giukiúkan sa wati,</i> The worm wiggled into the soft earth.

<p id=20080><form>ukiut, ukíut</form> <xr>= <sc>kulíkut</sc> (but not <ix>kulikut</ix>).</xr>

<p id=20081><form>uklab</form> <xr>= <sc>ukab</sc>, <ix>v</ix>.</xr>

<p id=20082><form>uklaba</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> fall down forward. <i>Nauklaba ku dihang nasángit ang ákung tiil sa tuud,</i> I fell down forward when my foot got caught on a stump.

<p id=20083><form>ukmil</form> <xr>= <sc>utmil</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20084><form>uknul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P; a3]</itype> be mildly <tr>surprised</tr> or <tr>startled</tr>. <i>Mauknul (mahiuknul) giyud ang táwu nga makakità nímu,</i> People will be surprised to see you. <i>Nauknul ku pagkabalità nákù,</i> I was <tr>taken aback</tr> on hearing the news. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> <tr>hesitate</tr> to do s.t., esp. with the action of starting and then stopping suddenly. <i>Ngánung muuknul ka man sa pagsulud?</i> Why do you <tr>stop suddenly</tr> before coming in? <i>Muuknul kung mugámit ánà kay dilikádu ang tag-íya,</i> I hesitate to use that because the owner is fussy. <form>uknul-uknul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> move in a bouncing, jouncing way. <i>Nag-uknul-uknul ang trák sa libaungung karsáda,</i> The bus <tr>jounced</tr> over the road that was full of holes. <i>Tagabúkid nga mag-uknul-uknul nga maglakaw,</i> A mountaineer that bounces up and down as he walks.

<p id=20085><form>ukpaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> leap while in a squatting position or in a manner like the frog. <i>Miukpaw ang bakì ngadtus túbig,</i> The frog leaped into the water. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> walk with a bounce. <pb n=1085><i>Muukpaw ang linakwan sa táwung naánad ug puyù sa búkid bísan ug mapátag na ang laktan,</i> People who are used to the mountains bounce when they walk, even on level areas. <form>ukpaw-ukpaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> walk with a bounce or <tr>gallop</tr>. <i>Nag-ukpaw-ukpaw ug maáyu ang kabáyù,</i> The horse was galloping wildly.

<p id=20086><form>ukra<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>okra</tr>.

<p id=20087><form>ukra<sub>2</sub></form> (from <ix>rauk</ix>&mdash;slang) <pos>n</pos> <tr>money</tr>.

<p id=20088><form>uksidy&icaron;n, uksihína</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>oxygen</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b5]</itype> use oxygen on s.o.

<p id=20089><form>uksihináda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hydrogen peroxide</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> apply or clean s.t. with hydrogen <tr>peroxide</tr>.

<p id=20090><form>uksihínu</form> <xr>= <sc>uksidy&icaron;n</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20091><form>uksilyu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>borrow</tr> s.t., esp. for immediate and temporary use. <i>Kun masakit ang mga bátà muuksilyu mig binatunan sa ka Máma,</i> When the children get sick we temporarily use Mother&apos;s maid. <i>Uksilyúha ang íyang awtu sa Duminggu,</i> Borrow his car on Sunday. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> request or <tr>hire</tr> s.o. to help or assist in work. <i>Nag-uksilyu kug kusiníru pára sa pyista,</i> I&apos;m hiring a cook for the fiesta. <number>2a</number> be an assistant. <i>Ang ákung mga anak ang muuksilyu nákù sa nigusyu,</i> My children are the ones who assist me in my business. <pos>n</pos> <tr>helper</tr>, <tr>assistant</tr>.

<p id=20092><form>uksináda</form> <xr>= <sc>uksihináda</sc>.</xr> <form>agwa &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>uksihináda</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20093><form>uksirb&acaron;r</form> <xr>= <sc>ubsirb&acaron;r</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20094><form>uksu</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for OXO, a gang of Visayan hoodlums in Manila.

<p id=20095><form>Ukt.</form> abbreviation for <ix>Uktubri</ix> &lsquo;October&rsquo;.

<p id=20096><form>uktába<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; c16]</itype> <tr>postpone</tr>, <tr>put off</tr> to a later date. <i>Wà nay lugar nga uktabáhun (iuktába) pa ang inyung kasal,</i> There&apos;s no more time for your wedding to be postponed. <i>Mauktába ang sibil sirbis ug náay líkids,</i> They will postpone the civil service test if there is a leakage. <pos>n</pos> <tr>postponement</tr>. <i>Pila ka adlaw ang uktába sa didláyin?</i> How many days is the postponement of the deadline<corr sic=.>?</corr>

<p id=20097><form>uktába<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>octave</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> raise the pitch an octave higher. <i>Átung iuktába ang paníngug kay ubus ra kaáyu,</i> We shall raise the pitch an octave higher because it is too low now.

<p id=20098><form>Uktubri</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>October</tr>. <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>abril</sc></xr> <ix>for verb forms</ix>.

<p id=20099><form>uku, ukù</form> expression uttered to babies three or four months old, the interpretation of the baby&apos;s cooing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> for a three- or four-month-old baby to coo in response when talked to, tickled, blown. <i>Makalingaw ang bátà basta makamau nang muukù,</i> A baby is a lot of fun when it starts to coo back at you when you talk to it.

<p id=20100><form>úkù</form> <xr>= <sc>úkuy<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=20101><form>úkub</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> cling or hold on firmly to. <i>Miúkub ang bátà sa íyang yáya dihang ákù untà siyang kuháun,</i> The child held on firmly to her nursemaid when I was about to take her. <i>Miúkub na ang kula,</i> The glue has <tr>set</tr>. <i>Hiukuban giyud ka dihà ug lintà ug muúbug ka,</i> If you go wading over there you will get leeches on you. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; a]</itype> for two convex things to fit together at their brims. <i>Muúkub ning duha ka kartun,</i> These two boxes are the same size because the edges match perfectly. <i>Nag-úkub ang duha ka ngábil,</i> Their two lips met and held to each other. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>bite</tr>, letting the teeth sink in, or for an insect to bite. <i>Miúkub lang dáyun ang irù sa ákung bitíis nga wà muúsig,</i> The dog sank its teeth in my legs without barking at me. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> apply dry cupping on s.t. to suck out undesirable matter. <i>Nawálà ang sakit sa ákung likud nga gipaukúban,</i> My backache disappeared after dry cupping was applied. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>penetrating</tr>, <tr>piercing</tr> (literary). <i>Maukúbung pagsud-ung,</i> A penetrating look.

<p id=20102><form>uk-uk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23P; c1]</itype> <tr>draw back</tr>, <tr>shrink back</tr> into.<i> Miuk-uk ang úlu sa bau pag-ági nákù,</i> The turtle drew its head back when I passed by. <i>Gustu na lang kung muuk-uk sa kaúlaw,</i> I wanted to <tr>shrink into</tr> the floorboards with shame. <form>&mdash; ang butbut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; b4]</itype> <tr>back out</tr>, decide not to do s.t. that one earlier showed interest in doing. <i>Miuk-uk ang butbut ni Pidru. Karun nga pakantáhun na untà, midumílì na hinúun,</i> Pedro <tr>chickened out</tr>. Now that we want to have him sing, he refuses. <form>&mdash; ang dílà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2456]</itype> be <tr>tongue-tied</tr>. <i>Walà dáyun siya makatíngug kay miuk-uk ang íyang dílà sa túmang katingála,</i> He couldn&apos;t say a word because he was tongue-tied with amazement. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26; b6]</itype> <tr>shrink</tr>, esp. of cloth. <i>Miuk-uk (nauk-uk) ang ákung panaptun human ihúmul,</i> My cloth shrunk after it was soaked. <number>3</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> go down in value or worth. <i>Miuk-uk ang prisyu sa palalítun,</i> The price of goods has gone down. <number>4</number> <itype>[A123P; a4b4]</itype> be infested with cockroaches. <pos>n</pos> <tr>cockroach</tr>. <i>Pubripubri sa suuk náa giyuy uk-uk,</i> No matter how homely a girl may be, s.o. will court her. (Lit. No matter how poor the corner, there is bound to be a cockroach.) <i>Ngánung nagminátay ka, mu ra ka mag namatyag uk-uk,</i> Why are you wailing? You&apos;re acting as if you lost a beloved cockroach (i.e. it&apos;s not worth crying about).

<p id=20103><form>úkul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> lump which is small enough to be held in the hand. <number>2</number> lump of leftover rice. <pb n=1086><i>Nagbitbit ang bátà ug úkul nga gisulaan níyag bulad,</i> The child is carrying a lump of leftover rice which he ate with his dried fish. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> <tr>form lumps</tr>, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Muúkul ang pawdird milk ug dílì kutáwun pag-áyu,</i> Powdered milk will form lumps if you don&apos;t stir it well.

<p id=20104><form>ukun-úkun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> <tr>hesitate</tr> to do s.t. <i>Dì ku muukun-úkun arun ingnun nga ísug ku,</i> I won&apos;t hesitate so that they&apos;ll say that I have guts. <i>Ayaw ukun-ukúna (iukun-úkun) ang ímung pagdáwat, ábi pa lang wà ka kaayun,</i> Don&apos;t hesitate to accept it or else they will think you don&apos;t appreciate it.

<p id=20105><form>ukupar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>occupy</tr> or <tr>take possession</tr> of by settlement or seizure. <i>Wà pay nakaukupar ánang isláha,</i> No one has ever <tr>settled</tr> on that island. <i>Ang lugar nga giukupahan sa armi,</i> The place occupied by the army. <number>2</number> take up most of a space. <i>Ang lamísa miukupar sa gamayng lawak,</i> The table took up most of the space in the small room. <number>2a</number> <tr>take up time</tr>. <i>Naukupar ang tanan kung panahun sa mga pitsipitsi,</i> My time was taken up with trivialities. <form>ukupádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for a space to be <tr>occupied</tr>. <i>Ukupádu ning lingkuranána,</i> This seat is occupied. <i>Ukupádu na kaáyu ang átung sakyanan,</i> Our bus is already <tr>full</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>busy</tr>. <i>Ukupádu kaáyu mi kay nagpriparar sa pista,</i> We are busy preparing for the feast. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> get occupied. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be <tr>busy</tr> with much work.

<p id=20106><form>ukupasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>occupation</tr>. <i>Wà ka bay láing ukupasiyun gawas sa pagyampungad sa tubaan?</i> Have you nothing else to occupy your time than hanging around the toddy stand? <number>2</number> the Japanese occupation in World War Two.

<p id=20107><form>ukut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B456; b6]</itype> get stuck into s.t. deep such that it is hard to disengage. <i>Miukut ang dyip sa lápuk,</i> The jeep got stuck in the mud. <i>Mga libun nga nag-ukut sa dunggan sa irù,</i> Ticks sticking to the dog&apos;s ears. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>penetrating</tr> (literary).

<p id=20108><form>ukuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> <tr>snoop</tr>, look about in a sneaking prying way. <i>Muukuy nang bayhána sa íyang bána,</i> That woman <tr>spies</tr> on her husband. <i>Akung ukuyun (ukyun) ang mga bátà ug wà ba manglákaw,</i> I&apos;ll <tr>spy on</tr> the children and see if they didn&apos;t go out.

<p id=20109><form>úkuy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> dish of meat, shrimp, and bean sprouts fried in dough. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> have, make <ix>úkuy</ix>.

<p id=20110><form>úkuy<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a supernatural being in the shape of a small man, residing in the sea, said to drown people. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be drowned by an <ix>úkuy</ix>.

<p id=20111><form>ukyab</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23P]</itype> be suddenly excited or <tr>startled</tr>. <i>Miukyab ang ákung ginhawaan sa pagkahibalu nga may dakung h&amacracu;s nga nakasulud,</i> I was startled to know that a big snake had entered the house. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> make an uproar due to excitement and thrill. <i>Miukyab ang mga táwu pagpangatáwa pagkakità nílang Dulpi nga nagbinabayi,</i> The people laughed uproariously when they saw Dolphy dressed as a woman. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26; b3]</itype> leave hurriedly in fright. <i>Miukyab (naukyab) ang mga langgam pagkakità námù,</i> The flock of birds flew away upon seeing us. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> talking in an upsetting, overly-frightened way. <i>Hápit na kunu matápus ang kalibútan, p&umacracu;ng pa sa mga táwung ukyab kaáyung manulti,</i> The people who are nervously apprehensive say the world is going to end. <number>2</number> easily stirred into doing s.t. <i>Ukyab kaáyu nang mga tawhána kay dalì ra kaáyung patuúhun,</i> Those people are easily stirred up because it&apos;s easy to lead them to believe. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> cause excitement or <tr>thrill</tr>. <i>Ang íyang pagsulti nga ubsirbahan ang tanang klási nakapaukyab sa mga maistru,</i> He got the teachers nervous by telling them that their classes would be observed. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> flush a bird from hiding. <i>Akuy mupaukyab sa buntug. Listus pagtíru,</i> I will <tr>flush out</tr> the quail. Be ready to shoot. <pos>n</pos> thrill, s.t. causing excitement. <i>Punù sa mga paukyab ang isturyang ditiktib,</i> A detective story is full of <tr>suspenseful</tr> episodes. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>suspenseful</tr>.

<p id=20112><form>ukyù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2P; b(1)]</itype> shrink back into a hole or a place of hiding. <i>Miukyù ang kágang dihang íyang gikúhit,</i> The land crab shrunk back to the hole when he poked it with a stick.

<p id=20113><form>ukyut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tapered</tr>, <tr>tapering</tr>. <i>Ukyut ang tumuy sa lápis,</i> The tip of the pencil is tapered. <number>2</number> body or form having irregularly shaped surfaces or sides. <i>Ukyut ang pabúrut níya,</i> His balloon has an <tr>irregular</tr> form. <pos>n</pos> the part of a body or form that has sunk or depressed. <i>Anhà putla sa ukyut ang lubi,</i> Cut the coconut tree on the part of the trunk that is <tr>narrow</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> for part of a body or form to become depressed or irregularly shaped due to depressions, become tapered. <pos>n</pos> <tr>sweepstakes</tr> (humorous).

<p id=20114><form>úlà</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> shed blood as a sacrifice (literary). <i>Muúlà ku sa ákung dugù álang sa yútang natawhan,</i> I&apos;ll shed my blood for my native land.

<p id=20115><form>úlag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN2; b(1)]</itype> for animals to copulate. <i>Giulágan na ang bigal sa butakal,</i> The boar <tr>served</tr> the sow. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2SN]</itype> be in <tr>heat</tr>, crave intercourse. <i>Nag-ulag na ning irúa kay hingári <pb n=1087>lang ug kúyug sa laki,</i> This dog is in heat because it is going around with the male. <number>2a</number> behave flirtatiously to evoke masculine attention (as if in heat&mdash;somewhat coarse). <i>Kanang íyang kinataw-an ug linihukan way láin kun dílì nag-úlag,</i> She is laughing and acting no different from a bitch in heat. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>kaúlag</sc>.</xr> <form>ulag-ulag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> act immodestly by being <tr>forward</tr> to men. <i>Ang babáying mag-ulag-ulag dì tahúrun sa mga laláki,</i> An <tr>immodest</tr> woman is not respected by men. <pos>a</pos> <xr>= <sc>ulágun</sc>.</xr> <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>uwagúwag</sc>.</xr> <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>-un</sc>.</xr> <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sex urge</tr>. <form>ma-un, -un</form> <pos>a</pos> sexually <tr>lustful</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become <tr>over-sexed</tr>.

<p id=20116><form>ulahi</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> last in a group to do s.t. <i>Ulahi siya kaáyu nga nakahuman,</i> He was the last to finish. <number>2</number> <tr>late</tr>. <i>Ulahi ka na kaáyu sa paniudtu,</i> You are very late for dinner. <number>3</number> <tr>recent</tr>, <tr>latest</tr>. <i>Mau niy ulahi nga gulà,</i> This is the most recent issue. <form>karung &mdash;</form> <tr>recently</tr>. <i>Naáyu na siya apan karung ulahi nabughat,</i> She had already recovered but recently she had a relapse. <number>4</number> <tr>later</tr>, not the early days of one&apos;s life. <i>Sa ulahing mga panahun sa íyang kinabúhì nabúang siya,</i> In the later days of his life he became crazy. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be the last in doing s.t. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be late for s.t. <i>Maulahi ka giyud ug maglangaylángay ka dihà,</i> You&apos;ll surely be late if you tarry over there. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>leave</tr> s.t. for later. <i>Ulahia (iulahi) na lang ang uban nga dì na madala,</i> Just leave those things you cannot take along behind. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> be the last, do s.t. as the last thing. <i>Aku lay mupaulahi,</i> I&apos;ll just be the last one to go. <i>Ipaulahi ang pagplansa,</i> Do the ironing as the last thing. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> allow oneself to be left behind. <i>Dì giyud si Maríya magpaulahi sa urug,</i> Maria won&apos;t allow herself to be left behind by the styles. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> <number>1</number> be way too late, be <tr>behind the times</tr>. <i>Karun ka pa kadungug? Nangulahi ka diay,</i> You just heard about it? You are behind the times. <number>2</number> be at the rear of s.t. <i>Nangulahi sila sa prusisiyun,</i> They were at the rear of the procession. <pos>n</pos> the one at the rear. <i>Pangulahing ligid,</i> <tr>Rear wheel</tr>. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>delay</tr>, <tr>lateness</tr>. <form>kaulahían</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>last</tr>. <form>sa &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>sa kaulahíay</sc>.</xr> <form>pangulahían</form> <xr>= <sc>pangulahi</sc>, <i>n, v2.</i></xr> <form>kaulahíay sa &mdash;</form> <tr>in the long run</tr>. <i>Tingáli ug magbásul ka sa kaulahíay,</i> You might regret it in the long run (in the days to come). <form>kinaulahian</form> <pos>n</pos> the last one in the group.

<p id=20117><form>ulahípan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>centipede</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa baybáyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sandworm</tr>, any of numerous annelids which burrow in the sand. They are used as bait.

<p id=20118><form>ulalag</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> pus concentrated in an infection coming to a head. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b4]</itype> have pus coming to a head. <i>Mangulngul ang hubag nga mag-ulalag,</i> A boil that is coming to a head throbs. <form>hi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23N; b]</itype> remove pus.

<p id=20119><form>ulan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>rain</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>rainwater</tr>. <i>Lad-ang ang lamì sa ulan,</i> Rainwater tastes flat. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a4b4]</itype> <tr>rain</tr>. <i>Giulan ang bayli,</i> The dance was rained out. <i>Kalígù na lang kun hiulanan (maulanan) ka,</i> Take a bath if you get caught in the rain. <number>1a</number> <itype>[b4(1)]</itype> be <tr>crazy</tr> (as if having been caught in the rain&mdash;from the belief that being caught in the rain after too much fun or lack of food causes one to become crazy). <i>Naulanan tingáli nà siya kay láig linihukan,</i> He must be crazy because he is acting strange. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> rain or <tr>pour</tr> as if rain. <i>Miulan ang mga bulantis sa syudad,</i> The leaflets <tr>rained</tr> on the city. <form>(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>ting-</sc>.</xr> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> stay out in the rain. <i>Dì ka magpaulan kay mahumud ka,</i> Do not stay out in the rain because you&apos;ll get wet. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> rain in large quantities. <i>Mipaulan ug suntuk ang buksidur,</i> The boxer rained blows on his opponent. <form>ulan-úlan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>drizzle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B456]</itype> <tr>drizzle</tr>. <i>Dì ku mulakaw ug mag-ulan-úlan,</i> I won&apos;t go out if it drizzles. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> give s.o. a <tr>treat</tr> or give cash in return for a favor. <i>Makauwan-úwan ku ninyug tabángan ku ninyu sa ákung ripurt,</i> I&apos;ll give you a treat if you help me with my report. <form>paulan-úlan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> give s.o. a treat or cash in return for a favor. <i>Gipauwan-uwánan mi sa kandidátu ug usa ka kahun nga sirbísa,</i> The candidate treated us to a case of beer. <pos>n</pos> treat or money showered on one in exchange for a favor. <form>pasi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b4]</itype> go out in the rain. <i>Mipasingulan siyag hatud,</i> He braved the rain to deliver it. <form>ting-, ting-(&larr;), tali-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rainy season</tr>.&dagger;

<p id=20120><form>ulandis</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> white-skinned pig. <number>2</number> <tr>Hollander</tr>, <tr>Dutchman</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> become bald and white; shave bald and white. <i>Akuy muulandis ánang ímung úlu ug dì nímu paputlan nang ímung lambúngay,</i> I&apos;ll shave you bald if you don&apos;t cut that mane of yours. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>uwandis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20121><form>ulang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> for dogs to howl. <i>Miuwang ang irù gabíi,</i> The dogs were howling last night. <pos>n</pos> the action of <tr>howling</tr>.

<p id=20122><form>ulang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>separate</tr>, <tr>keep apart</tr>. <i>Kurtína ra ang miulang sa duha,</i> Only a curtain separated them. <number>1a</number> separate s.o. or s.t. fighting. <i>Ulanga ang irù nga nagbugnù,</i> Break up the dogs that are fighting. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> stop a wedding ceremony on account of an objection. <i>Giulang ang kasal kay miabut ang asáwa sa pamanhunun,</i> The wedding <pb n=1088>was stopped because the real wife of the groom came on the scene. <number>3</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> <tr>bar</tr>, constitute a detriment to one&apos;s success. <i>Kapubri nga nag-ulang níya sa kalampúsan,</i> Poverty that was a bar to his success. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. used to block the way. <i>Ang ulang itrangka sa pultahan,</i> Bolt the door with the piece of wood. <number>2</number> age that separates people. <form>&mdash; ug pitu ka lawud</form> Heaven forbid! (lit. may it be separated by seven seas!) <i>Ulang ug pitu ka lawud dílì tà mudagsang nang sakítas átù,</i> Heaven forbid that the sickness strike us here. <form>ulang-úlang</form> <pos>n</pos> the space between the anus and the vagina. <form>ulang-úlang sa ilung</form> <pos>n</pos> cartilage dividing the nostrils. <form>ka-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>impediment</tr>, <tr>barrier</tr>. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> a concoction of oil and plants to protect one from natural or supernatural evils.

<p id=20123><form>ulang<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fresh-water shrimp</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> have, cook fresh-water shrimps. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b6(1)]</itype> catch fresh-water shrimps. <pos>n</pos> trap used for catching fresh-water shrimps. <form>ulang-úlang</form> <pos>n</pos> fishing lure in the shape of a shrimp.

<p id=20124><form>ulan-úlan</form> <xr>= <sc>hukihuk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20125><form>ul-ap</form> <pos>n</pos> the situation in mahjong where one is ready to make mahjong without having opened any pieces. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a2]</itype> win with an <ix>ul-ap</ix> hand.

<p id=20126><form>ulápì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a4]</itype> <tr>shiver</tr> with cold or have <tr>chills</tr>. <i>Giulápì ang bátà kay gitas-an sa hilánat,</i> The child has the chills because he&apos;s running a high fever.

<p id=20127><form>ulasíman</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>purslane</tr>: <bio>Portulaca oleracea</bio>.

<p id=20128><form>ulat<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>ignorant</tr> of ways or facts. <i>Uwat ku dinhi sa Sugbu,</i> I don&apos;t know my way around Cebu. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be ignorant of s.t. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> <tr>fool</tr> s.o. <i>Giuwat ku sa tindíra kay báhaw ang ákung napalit,</i> The salesgirl pulled one over on me because it was leftovers I bought. <form>(&larr;)</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>ulat</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> disappointed and embarrassed when s.t. is different from what one supposed and the whole world knows about one&apos;s error. <i>Wà ku mahibalu nga giuswag diay ang adlaw sa ílang kasal. Naúlat lang ku pag-adtu ku sa simbahan,</i> I didn&apos;t know that their marriage had been postponed. I was embarrassed when I went to the church.

<p id=20129><form>ulat<sub>2</sub>, úlat</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>scar</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B36; b4]</itype> form a <tr>scar</tr>. <i>Miúlat (naulat) na ang ákung samad,</i> My wound has formed a scar. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> covered with scars. <i>Ulátun ug páa nang bayhána,</i> That girl has scars on her thigh.

<p id=20130><form>ulátiw</form> <xr>= <sc>bálù<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=20131><form>úlaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>ashamed</tr> of what people think, <tr>embarrassed</tr>. <i>Hastang uláwa nákù dihang nadiskubrihan ku,</i> How ashamed I was when they caught me! <i>Hastang uláwa nákù sa pagkadalispang nákù,</i> How embarrassed I was when I fell. <form>walay &mdash;</form> <tr>shameless</tr>. <i>Wà ka bay úlaw pagbúhat sa ingun?</i> Doesn&apos;t it shame you to do that? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b4(1)c5]</itype> be <tr>ashamed</tr>. <i>Naúlaw kung pakítà níya kay sad-an ku,</i> I&apos;m ashamed to show myself to him because I am guilty. <i>Kagahápun nga makaúlaw (makapaúlaw) sa táwu,</i> A past that can cause one to be ashamed. <i>Nauláwan ku niadtung pangutanáha,</i> I was <tr>put to shame</tr> by that question. <i>Ikaúlaw ku ang pagpangáyù ug pagkáun,</i> I&apos;d be ashamed to have to ask for food. <form>ulaw-ulaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> tease by saying embarrassing things. <form>paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> make s.o. feel ashamed. <i>Kanang maistráha kusug kaáyung mupakaúlaw sa mga bátà,</i> That teacher is good at making the children feel embarrassed. <number>2</number> bring shame on s.o. <i>Ang ímung pagpangáwat nakapakaúlaw sa ímung ginikánan,</i> You put your parents to shame when you stole. <i>Ngánung gipakauláwan mu man aku,</i> Why did you put me to shame? <form>paka-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> do s.t. to put oneself to shame. <form>-an(&rarr;), manggi-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bashful</tr>, <tr>shy</tr>. <i>Uwawan siya. Wà makasulti,</i> He&apos;s terribly bashful. He didn&apos;t say a word. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125]</itype> be, become <tr>shy</tr>, <tr>bashful</tr>. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shame</tr>, <tr>embarrassment</tr>. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> cause for shame. <i>Gihatágan níyag kauláwan ang babáyi kay wà pangasaw-a,</i> He caused the girl great shame because he did not marry her. <form>ka-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> shame as an end effect. <i>Kay ímu nang búhat, ímu nang kaulawun,</i> Because it is your doing it will be your shame. <form>maka-r-</form> <pos>a</pos> causing shame. <i>Kanang ímung batásan makauúlaw kaáyu,</i> You have <tr>shameful</tr> manners. <form>manggi-un</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>-an(&rarr;)</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>kipìkipì</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>kípì</sc>.</xr> <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> characterized by bashfulness. <number>2</number> be full of embarrassment. <i>Nangatarúngan siya nga mauláwun,</i> He offered reasons <tr>shamefacedly</tr>.

<p id=20132><form>úlay</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>virgin</tr>, <tr>chaste</tr>. <i>Úlay nga pagkababáyi,</i> A chaste woman. <i>Úlay untà apan putling anay diay,</i> She&apos;s about as much a virgin as a sow is chaste. <i>Úlay nga lasang,</i> Virgin forest. <number>2</number> <tr>pure</tr>, <tr>free from sin</tr>. <i>Úlay kaáyu ang ákung gugma kanímu,</i> My love for you is very pure. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B16; b6]</itype> remain chaste. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for a woman to be so pure her body fails to decay. <i>Nag-úlay si Inday Putinsiyána kay ang íyang láwas walà man malatà bísag napúlù ka túig siyang gilubung,</i> Inday Potenciana was so pure that her body hadn&apos;t decayed ten years after she was buried. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chastity</tr>.

<p id=20133><form>ulbu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b28]</itype> <tr>flare up</tr>, <tr>burst forth</tr> or out as in a fire or explosion. <i>Miulbu dáyun ang táru sa gasulína,</i> The can of gasoline <pb n=1089>burst at once into flames. <number>1a</number> <tr>erupt</tr>. <i>Ug muulbu ang bulkan, mulínug usab,</i> If the volcano erupts there will also be an earthquake. <number>2</number> <itype>[B46; b4]</itype> for an emotion to <tr>flare up</tr>. <i>Ngánung miulbu ka man lang dáyun nga wà ka man masáyud sa hinungdan?</i> Why did you flare up when you didn&apos;t know the cause? <number>3</number> <itype>[B246]</itype> for war to <tr>break out</tr>. <number>4</number> <itype>[AP; c1]</itype> <tr>puff up</tr> the hair by teasing. <i>Ákung ulbúhun (iulbu) ug diyútay ning ímung buhuk arun mutáas ang ímung náwung,</i> I&apos;ll tease your hair a little to give length to the face. <pos>n</pos> the height of s.t. that rose up. <i>Ang ulbu sa asu lápaws pangánud,</i> The pillar of smoke went beyond the clouds. <form>pina-</form> <pos>n</pos> puffed-up hairdo. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B136; c6]</itype> do one&apos;s hair in a teased style.

<p id=20134><form>uldáwun</form> <pos>n</pos> a hand in mahjong where all the pieces are open on the table except the one or two pieces which one is holding waiting to get mahjong.

<p id=20135><form>uldug</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>puffed-up</tr>, <tr>heaped-up</tr>. <i>Uldug kaáyu ang ímung hirdu,</i> You have a puffed-up hairdo. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); c1]</itype> be, become puffed-up or <tr>piled up</tr> in a mound. <i>Uldúgun (iuldug) ku ang sagbut úsà daúban,</i> I pile the trash into a heap before I burn it.

<p id=20136><form>ulhi</form> <xr>= <sc>ulahi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20137><form>ulhus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c1]</itype> take turns doing s.t.; do s.t. by turns or alternately. <i>Mag-ulhus ta ug káun kay gamay ra ang lamísa,</i> Let&apos;s eat in turns because the table is small. <i>Nagkaulhus mig anhi kay way mabilin sa báy,</i> We are coming here one at a time so s.o. can be left home to watch the house.

<p id=20138><form>úli</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>oil cloth</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> cover with, use oil cloth.

<p id=20139><form>úlì</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>return</tr> s.t. to s.o. <i>Nag-úlì ku áring libru nga hinulaman,</i> I am returning this book I borrowed. <i>Kinsay giulían mu sa tigib,</i> Whom did you return the chisel to? <i>Iúlì ni ngadtung Túni,</i> Return this to Tony. <number>1a</number> <formx>&mdash; ang lisinsiya</formx> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> for a couple to stop having babies because the wife is no longer able to or because they choose to. <i>Dì sà mi muúlì sa ámung lisinsiya kay wà pa miy babáyi,</i> We won&apos;t stop having babies until we have a girl. <i>2</i> <itype>[A; a1c]</itype> return s.t. to its place, <tr>reassemble</tr>. <i>Antígu kang muúlì áning karburadur,</i> Do you know how to put this carburator back together? <number>2a</number> <xr>= <sc>ulì balay</sc>.</xr> <number>3</number> <itype>[C; a12]</itype> be reconciled after having quarreled. <i>Nag-úlì na mi human sa ámung panagbángì,</i> We are on good terms again after our quarrel. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> buy s.t. from s.o. which he had originally not bought for resale. <i>Ulían ta ning ímung sapátus,</i> I&apos;d like to buy from you that pair of shoes that you bought for yourself. <number>5</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>reimburse</tr> s.o. for what he had spent. <i>Muúlì ka nákù sa gastu sa ákung byáhi,</i> Will you reimburse me for my expenses on my trip? <pos>n</pos> amount paid for s.t. which was not originally for sale. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> come, <tr>go home</tr>. <i>Dì ta makaulì kay way trák,</i> We can not go home because there&apos;s no bus. <number>2</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> regain consciousness. <i>Naulian na ba ang táwu nga gikuyapan?</i> Has the man that fainted regained consciousness? <number>3</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> be relieved of anxiety or emotional distress. <i>Naulian ku human makadungug sa maáyung nutisya,</i> I was relieved after I heard the good news. <number>4</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> for dried corn or rice grains which have been stored to become damp again. <form>(&rarr;) bálay</form> <pos>n</pos> in circumcision, the condition where the slit skin reverts to its former condition. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B25; b4]</itype> for a circumcision to revert. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be home from time to time. <i>Tagsa ra ku mag-ulian sa ámù,</i> I seldom go home. <form>hi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN2; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>replant</tr> in spaces where seeds failed to sprout. <i>Hingulíi ang ímung bitsuylasan pára dakug abut,</i> Replant the vacant spaces in your bean patch to obtain a good yield. <number>2</number> weed the second time around. <i>Ug dì ka muhingúlì sa maisan, masálut ang túbù sa mais,</i> If you do not weed the cornfield a second time around, the corn will grow stunted. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>úlì</sc>, <i>4.</i></xr> <form>hi&N;-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b4]</itype> be in one&apos;s second childhood. <i>Lisud atimanun ning tigúlang nga maghingulì (gihingulian) na,</i> It&apos;s difficult to look after an old man who is in his second childhood. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <xr>= <sc>ulì</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr> <number>1a</number> <itype>[c]</itype> bring s.o. back home. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> go back to the place one started. <i>Mupaúlì ang prusisiyun sa simbahan,</i> The procession will return to the church. <number>2a</number> <i>bísag unsa kataas sa prusisiyun mupaúlì giyud sa simbahan<corr>,</corr></i> no matter how wayward a husband is he will eventually go home to his wife. <number>2b</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> be on the receiving end of s.t. bad. <i>Ang ímung paghubug mupaúlì sa ímung láwas,</i> Your drunkenness will affect your health. <i>Akuy paulían sa íyang kapungut,</i> I will be on the receiving end of his anger. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>úlì</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr> <form>pa-(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>pahi-(&rarr;)</sc>.</xr> <form>pahi-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> play a prank on s.o. and set him straight afterwards. <i>Pait siya nga mukumidiya, dílì siya mupahiulì,</i> He plays mean pranks and does not set you straight afterwards. <number>2</number> regain one&apos;s health. <i>Mubakasiyun ku kay magpahiulì ku sa ákung láwas,</i> I&apos;ll take a vacation to regain my health. <i>Pahiulii úsà ang ímung láwas úsà mubálik sa trabáhu,</i> Regain your health first before going back to work. <form>paha-ay</form> <xr>= <sc>úlì</sc>, <i>v3.</i></xr> <form>sa-(&rarr;)</form> <pb n=1090><pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> <corr sic=contact>contract</corr> s.o. else&apos;s disease by treating him. <i>Muhílut gánì kug hilantan saulian giyud ku,</i> Whenever I massage s.o. with fever, I will always get the fever from him. <form>hini&N;-an, -in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. one bought from s.o. who had bought it previously not intending to resell it again. <form>ulìúlì kalag</form> <pos>n</pos> a magic formula uttered three times while shaking a child that has been intensely frightened, to prevent him from getting boils. <form>ka-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> feel like going home. <form>pa-anan, pa-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>home</tr>, a place one goes home to. <form>pumapa-(&rarr;), tali-(&rarr;), talipa-(&rarr;), -um-r-(&rarr;), pumapa-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> on the way home. <form>-unun, -únun(&rarr;), ig-r-ay, ig-r-ay(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. that is to be returned. <i>Mga hinuwamang uliúnun (ig-uulíay),</i> Borrowed things which are to be returned. <form>pa-unun, pa-unun(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. one has to go home to get. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>tambaúlì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20140><form>ulianun</form> <xr>= <sc>kulianun</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>kulì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20141><form>úlib</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>olive</tr>. <form>&mdash; drab</form> <pos>n</pos> olive drab cloth. <form>&mdash; úwil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>olive oil</tr>.

<p id=20142><form>ulíba</form> <xr>= <sc>palma ulíba</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20143><form>*ulíba, *ulíbu</form> <form>asayti di-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>olive oil</tr>.

<p id=20144><form>uligark</form> <pos>n</pos> the wealthy families and their members that run the Philippines.

<p id=20145><form>ulíhad</form> <xr>= <sc>kulíhad</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20146><form>ulihi</form> <xr>= <sc>ulahi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20147><form>ulílang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> off-season planting of rice and corn. <number>2</number> crop planted off season. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b]</itype> plant an off-season crop. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <number>1</number> plant an off-season crop. <number>2</number> do s.t. later than the usual or normal time for doing it. <i>Nangulílang ka na sa paniudtu,</i> You are <tr>late</tr> for dinner. <i>Nangulílang ka sa nutisya,</i> You got the news late. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>ulílang</sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr>

<p id=20148><form>ulimpíkir</form> <pos>n</pos> a champion athlete who has been to the Olympics.

<p id=20149><form>ulimpiyan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tennis shoes</tr> (from the brand name Olympian). <pos>a</pos> a simple wedding without much fuss (so called because it should be kept silent, like walking in tennis shoes). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1</number> wear tennis shoes. <number>2</number> hold a simple wedding. <i>Ulimpiyánun (iulimpiyan) ku untà ang ákung kasal, nabakyà man hinúun,</i> I want to keep my wedding quiet and simple, but the news has spread everywhere.

<p id=20150><form>ulin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stern</tr>, the rear end of a ship. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> steer a boat from the stern.

<p id=20151><form>úling</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>charcoal</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB26; c1]</itype> make charcoal; become charcoal. <i>Pag-úling para iutaw,</i> Make charcoal to iron with. <i>Ang usa ka sákung bagul muúling ug duha ka taru,</i> A sack of coconut shells will make two cans of charcoal. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b(1)]</itype> put, add charcoal into. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> use charcoal. <form>-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> things suitable to be made into charcoal. <number>2</number> k.o. <tr>tree</tr> of the secondary forest.

<p id=20152><form>ulingì, ulingig</form> <xr>= <sc>tulíngì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20153><form>ulipad</form> (from <ix>lipad</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>walking sideways</tr>. <i>Ulipad ang linaktan sa lambay,</i> A crab walks sideways. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; ang tinan-awan</formx> <tr>cross-eyed</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> walk sideways. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> be, become cross-eyed.

<p id=20154><form>*uliping</form> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> hide standing behind s.t. with the head partially exposed for observation. <i>Mupauliping ku sa sira arun makítà kug unsay ílang gibúhat,</i> I&apos;ll hide behind the door so I&apos;ll see what they&apos;re doing.

<p id=20155><form>ulípun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>slave</tr>. <number>2</number> slave to some power. <i>Ulípun sa salapì,</i> Slave to money. <form>&mdash; sa tamalà</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. univalve <tr>seashell</tr> having its mouth covered wholly with some of its flesh, about 1&frac14;&Prime; in length. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; c1]</itype> <tr>enslave</tr>, become a slave to. <i>Nagkaulipun ka sa ímung bisyu,</i> You are becoming a slave to your vices. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> let oneself become a slave. <form>kaulipnan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bondage</tr>, <tr>slavery</tr>. <i>Ang kaulipnan sa Pilipínas ubus sa mga Katsílà,</i> The Philippines&apos; <tr>enslavement</tr> to the Spaniards.&dagger;

<p id=20156><form>ulísi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>walking cane</tr>, <tr>staff</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> carry, use a cane. <i>Muulísi ku iniglakaw kay daghang buguy,</i> I&apos;ll carry a cane when I go out because there are lots of thugs. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a cane, staff. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a1b8]</itype> beat with a cane or rod.

<p id=20157><form>ulit</form> <pos>a</pos> desiring s.t. greatly in an indiscriminate way. <i>Mukáun ug ransiyu kay ulit,</i> He&apos;ll even eat spoiled food, he is such a glutton. <i>Ulit sa babáyi,</i> Hungry for women. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become <tr>greedy</tr>. <form>(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>ulit</sc>, <ix>v</ix>.</xr> <form>ka-, ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gluttony</tr>, <tr>great desire</tr>.

<p id=20158><form>úlit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P; b3c1]</itype> <tr>provoke</tr> s.o.&apos;s anger. <i>Maúlit na siya ug kataw-an,</i> She&apos;ll become angry if they laugh at her. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; a1]</itype> be <tr>frustrated</tr> or <tr>disappointed</tr> in one&apos;s expectations. <i>Naúlit kug huwat níya ug wà giyud mutunga,</i> I waited for her but she didn&apos;t show up.

<p id=20159><form>ulitáwu</form> (from <ix>táwu</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bachelor</tr>, <tr>unmarried man</tr>. <i>Ulitáwung gúlang,</i> An old bachelor. <number>2</number> young man old enough to be married. <i>Tapulan ámung ulitáwu. Magpúnay lag panista,</i> Our son is lazy. All he does is sit around playing the guitar. <i>Ayawg binátà kay ulitáwu ka na,</i> Don&apos;t be childish. You&apos;re grown-up now. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> <tr>court</tr> a girl. <i>Kinsa may ímung giulitawhan run,</i> Whom are you courting now? <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>court</tr> a girl. <i>Nangulitáwu si Pidru ni Istir,</i> Pedro is courting Esther. <pos>n</pos> <tr>courting</tr>, <tr>wooing</tr>. <form>ulitawhay</form> <pos>n</pos> boy about to embark onto adolescence. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> be an adolescent boy. <form>kaulitawhan</form> <pos>n</pos> group of young men.

<p id=20160><form>ulíut</form> (from <ix>líut</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> squeeze, <tr>wriggle <pb n=1091>through</tr> or deep into. <i>Wà siya makaulíut ngadtu sa unáhan kay punù kaáyu ang lugar,</i> He couldn&apos;t elbow his way to the front because the place was full.

<p id=20161><form>ulput</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> pop or <tr>bounce up</tr>. <i>Miulput (naulput) ang tabun sa tirmus pagbutang nákù,</i> The thermos cork <tr>popped up</tr> when I put it on. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; b28]</itype> <tr>bounce</tr> the ball against s.t. else. <i>Dì makaulput ang búla sa lápuk,</i> The ball cannot bounce on mud. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> <tr>start back</tr> with a jerk upon being surprised. <i>Naulput ku pagkadungug ku sa kusug kaáyung hagsà,</i> I <tr>started</tr> when I heard the loud crashing sound. <number>2a</number> <itype>[B46]</itype> for the heart to thump. <i>Nag-ulput ang ákung kasingkásing sa kahínam,</i> My heart is thumping with expectation. <form>&mdash; ang kabúhì</form> <xr>= <sc>ulput</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr>

<p id=20162><form>ulsir, ulsira, ulsíra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stomach ulcers</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> get an <tr>ulcer</tr>. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> having stomach ulcers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> having stomach ulcers.

<p id=20163><form>ultima</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>last</tr>, <tr>final</tr> after all the others. <i>Ultima na lang ning ákung pag-anhi dinhi,</i> This will be my last visit here. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>ultimu</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr> <form>&mdash; úra</form> at the <tr>last minute</tr>. <i>Ultima úra giyud nang idisidir ug lakaw,</i> She always decides to go at the <tr>eleventh hour</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> ask s.o. to give his final decision. <i>Giultimahan siya nákù ug magpakasal ba siya u dílì,</i> I asked him once and for all if he was going to marry me.

<p id=20164><form>ultimatúm</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ultimatum</tr>, <tr>final offer</tr> or proposal. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6(1)]</itype> give an ultimatum. <i>Giultimatúman siya nákù sa pagpabalhin ug layù dinhi,</i> I gave him an ultimatum to move far from here.

<p id=20165><form>ultimu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> last, <tr>lowest price</tr>. <form>&mdash; prisyu</form> <xr>= <sc>ultimu</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; <r>[<ix>noun</ix>]</r></formx> even [so-and-so], when it is the most unexpected thing. <i>Daginutan kaáyu ning bayhána kay ang ultimung mumhu hipúsun pa,</i> This woman is very thrifty. She even saves the crumbs from the table. <i>Grábing sugarúla nímu, ultimung sapátus gibaligyà pára pamuhúnan,</i> You are an incorrigible gambler! You even sold your shoes in order to secure money for betting.

<p id=20166><form>ultimu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>private</tr>, the lowest rank of an enlisted man in the Army. <number>2</number> an <tr>ordinary person</tr> or <tr>small fry</tr> as opposed to one who is at the top. <i>Padáyun lang mu sa inyung pagtugbaw sa táas, aku magpabílin nga ultimu,</i> Proceed with your rise to stardom while I remain here a mere nothing. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> be a private. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be a small fry.

<p id=20167><form>úlu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>head</tr>. <number>1a</number> head as the source of thinking power. <i>Gamíta ímung úlu,</i> Use your head. <number>2</number> <tr>each person</tr>. <i>Dus písus da ang báyad sa káda úlu,</i> The cost is only two pesos <tr>per head</tr>. <number>3</number> head, <tr>forefront</tr>. <i>Banda sa pulis ang úlu sa paráda,</i> The head of the parade was the police band. <form>&mdash; ug amù</form> <xr>= <sc>inúlug amù</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; sa bagyu</form> <tr>eye of the typhoon</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa bahà</form> the first onrush of floodwaters. <form>&mdash; nga buhatan</form> main (lit. head) office. <form>&mdash; sa hilánat</form> in folk medicine, a lump in the muscle which bulges and when massaged, alleviates one&apos;s fever and pains. <form>&mdash; sa sakit</form> source of an ailment. <form>&mdash; sa sibúyas</form> the bulb of an onion. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; b(1)]</itype> <tr>lead</tr>, be at the <tr>head</tr>. <number>1a</number> lead s.o. to do s.t., usually bad. <i>Ikay nangúlu sa tanang mga tinuntu,</i> You led them into doing all their mischief. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> shape, make a head. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126; c]</itype> be, become a <tr>leader</tr>, <tr>chief</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[c]</itype> have as its title. <i>Ang sugilánun gipangulúhan ug &lsquo;Líwas Sa Ugmà&rsquo;,</i> The story is entitled &lsquo;Beyond Tomorrow&rsquo;. <pos>n</pos> <tr>leader</tr>, <tr>chief</tr>. <form>sag-(&rarr;), sag-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>memorize</tr>, learn s.t. by heart. <number>2</number> skip a meal. <i>Sag-ulúhun ku na lang ang paniudtu,</i> I&apos;ll just skip lunch. <form>si&N;-(&rarr;)</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>singulu</sc>.</xr> <form>uluhan, ulúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. at the top at the head: head of a bed, <tr>title</tr> of a song, et al. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; c]</itype> give s.t. a title. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> have s.t. as a title. <i>Bálak nga nag-uluhan ug &lsquo;Lúhà&rsquo;,</i> A poem that is entitled &lsquo;Tears&rsquo;. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> shaped like a head. <i>-in- ug amù</i> waxing gibbous moon. <form>inulúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> having a head, e.g. a pin. <form>kaulúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>capital city</tr>. <form>kapangulúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>editorial board</tr> or staff.

<p id=20168><form>úlub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> cut even around the edges. <i>Ulúbun nákù pagputul ang bàbà sa baril,</i> I will <tr>trim</tr> off around the mouth of the barrel. <i>Ang íyang buhuk maáyung pagkaúlub,</i> His hair was nicely <tr>trimmed</tr> all around.

<p id=20169><form>úlud</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>worm</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4b4]</itype> be infested with worms. <i>Ginamus nga giúlud,</i> Salted fish that was full of worms. <form>hi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> pick out the worms from. <i>Akuy muhingúlud (manghingúlud) sa tabákù,</i> I&apos;ll pick out the worms from the tobacco plants. <form>ighihingulud, ighilingulud</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to pick worms out from inaccessible parts. <form>ulud-úlud</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>decayed teeth</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> be <tr>decayed</tr>. <i>Misakit ang ákung ngípun nga giulud-úlud,</i> My tooth was decayed and caused me great pain.

<p id=20170><form>úlug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put a burden on s.o.&apos;s head for him to carry it. <i>Iúlug na nang bukag kay adtu na ta,</i> Please put the basket on my head because we&apos;re going now.

<p id=20171><form>ul-ug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>feed nestlings</tr>.

<p id=20172><form>ulugnan</form> <xr>= <sc>unlan</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ulun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20173><form>ulug-úlug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>flatter</tr> s.o. to make him feel good or to get s.t. out of him. <i>Akuy muulug-úlug níya arun ta kab-an ug túbig,</i> I&apos;ll flatter him so that he&apos;ll fetch water for us. <pos>n</pos> <tr>flattery</tr>. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> readily falling <pb n=1092>for sweet talk.

<p id=20174><form>uluk, úluk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>glans penis</tr>. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; sa kasing</formx> bottom of a top that resembles the glans. <form>uluk-uluk</form> <pos>n</pos> a rounded or knoblike extremity of s.t. <form>kasing nga inulúkan</form> <pos>n</pos> top with no nail but with glans-shaped bottom.

<p id=20175><form>ul-ul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2b3]</itype> <tr>bark</tr>. <i>Ul-úlun ka sa irù ug mudúul ka,</i> The dog will bark at you if you go near. <pos>n</pos> <tr>bark</tr>.

<p id=20176><form>ul-ul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> throbbing <tr>pain</tr>. <i>Ul-ul kaáyu ang ákung samad,</i> My wound <tr>hurts</tr> very much. <number>2</number> heavy, uneasy feeling due to muscular fatigue. <i>Ul-ul kaáyu ang ákung láwas tungud sa kadaghan sa trabáhu,</i> My body is heavy from so much work. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become <tr>painful</tr>, heavy in feeling. <number>2</number> <itype>[b]</itype> have <tr>labor pains</tr>. <i>Dad-un na si Pína sa matirniti kay giul-ulan na,</i> Bring Pina to the hospital because she has labor pains. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> degree or intenseness of pulsating pain.

<p id=20177><form>ul-ul<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>masturbate</tr>, word play on <i>lùlù.</i>

<p id=20178><form>ulun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> lay one&apos;s head on s.t. <i>Dílì ku muulun ánang bukugun mung buktun,</i> I will not lay my head on <corr sic=that>those</corr> bony arms of yours. <form>unlan, ulunlan, ulúnan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pillow</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa hálas</form> k.o. <tr>vine</tr> of waste areas bearing red, shiny, rounded fruit, the size of a tennis ball, poisonous, smelly, and full of seeds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> use for, make into a <tr>pillow</tr>. <form>inunlan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>placenta</tr>.

<p id=20179><form>úlung</form> <pos>a</pos> for a measure to be <tr>very full</tr> or <tr>heaping</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; c1]</itype> measure s.t. out with a <tr>full</tr> or heaping measure. <form>-in-</form> <xr>= <sc>úlung</sc>, <ix>a</ix>.</xr>

<p id=20180><form>ulunglan</form> <xr>= <sc>unlan</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ulun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20181><form>ulungnan</form> <xr>= <sc>unlan</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ulun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20182><form>ulun-úlun</form> <pos>n</pos> not fully developed rice grains.

<p id=20183><form>úlup</form> <pos>a</pos> early morning at around <tr>sunrise</tr>. <i>Ulup silang muadtu sa simbahan,</i> They will go to church at sunrise. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> do early in the morning. <i>Muúlup ta sa lungsud ugmà,</i> We will go to town early tomorrow morning.

<p id=20184><form>ulus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>borrow</tr> s.t. <i>Aku ang nag-ulus sa ímung lápis,</i> I borrowed your pencil. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>lend</tr>. <i>Ayaw nag pausli,</i> Don&apos;t let anyone borrow that. <form>inuslan</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>borrowed</tr>. <form>inuslan nga batásan</form> <tr>put-on behavior</tr>. <i>Dílì malílung ang inuslan níyang batásan kay daghang nasáyud nga siya aryat,</i> Nobody is fooled by the way she puts on. Everybody knows she is a plain snob. <form>pinauslan</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>lent</tr>.

<p id=20185><form>Úlus</form> <xr>= <sc>ulhus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20186><form>ulusíman</form> <xr>= <sc>ulasíman</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20187><form>ulut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> have a boundary in between. <i>Giutlan ang duha námù ka balay sa usa ka mutu,</i> Our houses are <tr>separated</tr> by a hill. <form>(&larr;)<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>outside edges</tr> or <tr>boundaries</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c]</itype> for pieces of land to be <tr>contiguous</tr>. <i>Mag-úlut tag yútà ug palitun nímu nang lutíha,</i> Our land will be contiguous if you buy that lot. <form>ulut-úlut</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>úlut</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <tr>place between</tr> two things. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>úlut</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[b1256]</itype> for a space to develop between two things. <form>utlánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>boundary</tr>. <i>Ákung gikural ang utlánan sa ámung yútà,</i> I fenced the boundary of our land. <i>Butangan nátug utlánan ang átung panag-amígu,</i> Let&apos;s set a <tr>limit</tr> to our friendship. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> be made into a boundary, limit. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> person whose land is contiguous to one&apos;s own.

<p id=20188><form>ulut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> stalk or stem of grasses, dry or fresh.

<p id=20189><form>úlut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac2]</itype> <tr>run after</tr>. <i>Muúlut sa mangági ang ílang irù,</i> Their dog runs after passers-by. <i>Ulúta ang trák,</i> Run after the truck. <i>Iúlut ning páyung sa nánay mu,</i> Run after your mother and give this umbrella to her.

<p id=20190><form>uluúlu</form> <xr>= <sc>ulug-úlug</sc>.</xr> <form>uluuluhan</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> susceptible to sweet talk. <number>2</number> tending to give sweet talk.

<p id=20191><form>uluy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>start</tr> doing an action or going into a state. <i>Miuluy nag kabugtù ang písì,</i> The rope started to snap. <i>Giuylan (giuluyan) ku siyag ulísi,</i> I raised my cane to whack him.

<p id=20192><form>ulyahut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> complain loudly. <i>Unsa pa may ímung giulyahutan ug nabayran ka na?</i> What are you <tr>griping</tr> about if you have already been paid? <pos>n</pos> loud complaints.

<p id=20193><form>ulyap</form> <xr>= <sc>uylap</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20194><form>u&mgrave;</form> <ix>pronounced</ix> [mm&glots;] or [&schwa;&schwa;&glots;]. particle expressing dissatisfaction or contempt. <i>U&mgrave;, mu rag mupalit nga nagtan-awtan-aw sa mga baligyà,</i> <tr>Humph</tr>, the way he is inspecting the things you&apos;d think he was going to buy s.t. <i>U&mgrave;, ábi níya ug mahadluk ku,</i> Humph, he thinks I&apos;m scared. <i>U&mgrave;, kusiun ta giyud ka sa ímung minalditu,</i> Humph, I have to pinch you, you are so mischievous.

<p id=20195><form>uma</form> <pos>n</pos> a piece of land on which crops or animals are raised. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>cultivate</tr> or <tr>till</tr> a piece of land. <i>Umahun ku ning yutáa,</i> I&apos;ll cultivate this piece of land. <i>Sa giumahan nátù kanhi,</i> On the land we cultivated in former times. <form>umhan, umahan, kaumahan, kaumhan</form> <pos>n</pos> cultivated piece of land. <form>mag-r-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>farmer</tr>. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> occupation of <tr>farming</tr>.

<p id=20196><form>umag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> for colors to run. <i>Giumagan ang putì níyang sinínà nga naípun sa dikulur,</i> His white shirt got stained because it was put together with the colored ones. <pos>a</pos> color that has run. <i>Kining mantsa umag sa ákung midiyas,</i> This stain is where my socks ran.

<pb n=1093>

<p id=20197><form>umágad</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>ágad<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p id=20198><form>umagak, umágak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mother hen</tr>.

<p id=20199><form>úmang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>hermit crab</tr>. <formx>&mdash; sus-an</formx> hermit crab in a shell having a barnacle, used as a medicine for mothers with a swelling breast. <number>2</number> <formx>kámang daw &mdash;</formx> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>kámang</sc>, <i>v1a.</i></xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2N; b6]</itype> gather hermit crabs for bait. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> use, wear s.t. belonging to s.o. else.

<p id=20200><form>umapún</form> <xr>= <sc>amapúlun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20201><form>umari ka</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>ari<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p id=20202><form>úmat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> go over a series of events or <corr sic=geneologies>genealogies</corr> to recall them. <i>Miúmat siya sa íyang kaági sa gúbat,</i> He <tr>related</tr> his experiences during the war. <i>Manag-ágaw diay kami kay nagkaúmat man mi sa ámung mga kagíkan,</i> We are cousins, as it turned out, when we <tr>traced</tr> our ancestral tree.

<p id=20203><form>umaw</form> <pos>a</pos> having lost its fertility. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> for soil to lose fertility. <i>Magkaumaw ang uma nga pirming tamnan unyà way uabúnu,</i> Lands that are always planted without getting fertilized become barren.

<p id=20204><form>umay-úmay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> make funny imitations of how s.o. does s.t. <i>Nasukù si Tsiding kay giumay-úmay (giumay-umáyan) ni Kuring ang íyang sinultihan,</i> Cheding got sore because Coring <tr>mimicked</tr> her manner of talking. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of teasing by imitating.

<p id=20205><form>umbangul, umbángul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b3]</itype> <tr>howl</tr>, <tr>bellow</tr> loudly. <i>Nag-umbangul siya sa kasakit,</i> She bellowed with pain.

<p id=20206><form>umbaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> <tr>overlook</tr>, <tr>tower over</tr>. <i>Ang ílang balay nag-umbaw sa kasilingánan,</i> Their house towers over the neighborhood. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> look down from a height over the edge of s.t. <i>Nag-umbaw siya sa pangpang,</i> He was looking down over the edge of the cliff. <i>Umbáwa ang mga bátà sa búngun,</i> Look out of the window and see what the children are doing.

<p id=20207><form>umbihas, umbíhas</form> <xr>= <sc>ambihas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20208><form>úmid</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> wallow, roll in s.t. that sticks. <i>Iúmid (umíra) ang ságing sa asúkar,</i> Roll the bananas in sugar. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be needlessly implicated in s.t. bad. <i>Naúmid ku sa kasábà bisan ug wà kuy salà,</i> I was included in the scolding even though I hadn&apos;t done anything.

<p id=20209><form>umidu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for s.t. designed to burn to be slightly moist. <i>Ang libintadur nga muumidu (maumidu) dì na mubutu,</i> A firecracker that gets moist won&apos;t explode. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1456]</itype> for a wound or sore that appears healed on the surface to fester or generate pus underneath. <i>Giabríhan pag-usab ang íyang upirasiyun kay nag-umidu sa ilawum,</i> Her operation was reopened because it was festering inside. <number>2a</number> for an emotion to fester in one&apos;s heart (literary). <i>Pagdumut nga nag-umidu sa dughan,</i> Hatred that <tr>rankles</tr> in the breast. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> moist and not burning well. <number>2</number> <tr>festering</tr>.

<p id=20210><form>umígas</form> <xr>= <sc>hulmígas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20211><form>umil</form> <pos>a</pos> soft, having lost its crispness. <i>Umil na kaáyu ning pinipíga,</i> The rice crunch has gotten all soggy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become soft, no longer crunchy. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> for flat things to stick together from being moist. <i>Muúmil ang mga playwud kun basà,</i> The plywood sheets will stick together if they get wet.

<p id=20212><form>umintádu</form> <pos>a</pos> having <tr>risen</tr> in amount. <i>Umintádu ang mga palalítun run,</i> Prices of goods are high these days. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> <tr>rise</tr> in degree. <i>Maumintádu ang hilánat mahápun,</i> The fever <tr>goes up</tr> in the afternoon.

<p id=20213><form>umintu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; bc]</itype> <number>1</number> become <tr>greater</tr> in degree or number, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Ang mga kumirsiyanti miumintu sa mga prisyu sa mga palítun,</i> The merchants <tr>raised</tr> the prices of goods. <i>Nagkaumintu ang gidaghanun sa mga sakyanan sa syudad,</i> There are getting to be <tr>more</tr> and more cars in the city. <number>2</number> <tr>improve</tr>, <tr>progress</tr>. <i>Muumintu (maumintu) ang inyung pagkabutang ug mutrabáhu mu,</i> Your situation will improve if you work. <form>&mdash; sa kunhud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become <tr>worse</tr>, <tr>go down</tr>. <i>Nag-umintu mi sa kunhud tungud sa kagastadur,</i> We are getting to be worse and worse off because we keep spending money. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> amount s.t. has increased. <i>Gitagáan ug umintu sa swildu si Pidru,</i> Pedro was given a <tr>raise</tr>. <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s children added to a growing brood. <i>Pila na ruy átung umintu?</i> How many children do you have now? <number>2</number> <tr>progress</tr>, <tr>improvement</tr> of s.t. <i>Walà giyuy umintu ang syudad,</i> The city hasn&apos;t shown any improvement.

<p id=20214><form>umnis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> <tr>skip</tr>, <tr>miss</tr> s.t. <i>Sa kaapíki sa mga buluhatun sa panimalay naumnis na lang ang ákung paniudtu,</i> I was so busy with the housework that I missed my dinner.

<p id=20215><form>umpas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; b28]</itype> <tr>fall away</tr>, <tr>crumble</tr> down. <i>Kusug nga ulan nga nakaumpas (nakapaumpas) sa kimba,</i> A strong rain that <tr>crumbled away</tr> the embankment.

<p id=20216><form>umpaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> be <tr>outclassed</tr> or <tr>outstripped</tr> in comparison. <i>Walay makaumpaw sa ímung binúang,</i> No one can match your foolishness. <i>Awtu nga bísan kanus-a walà hiumpawi,</i> A car that has never been outclassed.

<p id=20217><form>umpaw<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A123P; b4(1)]</itype> <tr>come to</tr> after having fainted. <i>Didtu na sa uspital maumpawi ang nakuyapan,</i> The man who fainted came to in the hospital. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; b4(1)]</itype> for <pb n=1094>one&apos;s anger to wear off. <i>Maumpaw ang íyang kasukù ug ímung amuy-amúyun,</i> His anger will vanish if you play up to him.

<p id=20218><form>umpù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>grandparent</tr> or a grandparent&apos;s sibling or cousin of the same generation. <number>2</number> term of address for a relation of the grandparents&apos; generation.

<p id=20219><form>umpul</form> <pos>a</pos> cut <tr>short</tr>. <i>Umpul kaáyu ang mga sinínà sa mga batan-un karun,</i> Young people wear very short dresses nowadays. <form>sáyang &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. shirred <tr>skirt</tr> with no tail, worn now only by old women. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> be, become short. <i>Ayaw kaáyug umpúla (iumpul) pagputul ang ímung buhuk,</i> Don&apos;t cut your hair too short.

<p id=20220><form>-um-r-</form> <number>1</number> prefix added to most verb roots which refer to an action to form nouns which mean &lsquo;one who is <tr>about to</tr> [do]&rsquo;. <i>Umuulì na ku,</i> I am about to go home. <i>Pumipirma na untà siya sa kuntrátu,</i> He was just about to sign the contract. <number>1a</number> added to words referring to weather conditions. <i>Umuulan tingáli run dà,</i> It looks like it is going to rain. <number>2</number> prefixes added to a few verbal roots to form nouns referring to the agent who does [so-and-so]. <i>Sumasákay,</i> Passengers. <i>Pumupúyù,</i> Inhabitants.

<p id=20221><form>úmud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A6; c]</itype> push the face or s.t. analogous down, bury the face or fall with the face into s.t. <i>Naúmud siya sa lápuk,</i> She fell face first into the mud. <i>Unlan nga íyang giumúran sa paghílak,</i> The pillow she buried her face into when she cried. <i>Ákù lang iúmud ang agipu sa abu arun mapáwung,</i> I&apos;ll sniffle the firebrand out by burying it in the ashes. <form>&mdash; ang náwung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> bury one&apos;s face in work, preoccupation, hobby, and the like. <i>Ug dì ku iúmud (umúrun) ang ákung nawung sa trabáhu wà miy makáun,</i> If I don&apos;t bury my face in work we won&apos;t have anything to eat. <form>hipa-, hapa-, pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> fall face first. <i>Napaúmud (nahipaúmud) siyas kanal pagkadalispang níya,</i> He fell face first into the ditch when he slipped.

<p id=20222><form>umug</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>damp</tr>, <tr>moist</tr>. <i>Umug kaáyu ang ímung sinínà sa singut,</i> Your dress is <tr>wet</tr> with perspiration. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b2c1]</itype> become moist. <i>Nadáut ang kapi kay naumgan,</i> The coffee spoiled because it got moisture into it.

<p id=20223><form>úmuk pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>sleep late</tr> or lounge around in bed past waking hours. <i>Paumúka lang siyag kat&umacracu;g kay Duminggu man run,</i> Allow her to <tr>sleep in</tr> because it&apos;s Sunday.

<p id=20224><form>úmul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> roll s.t. into a ball. <i>Umúla ang karni pára sa bulabúla,</i> Roll the meat into balls to make meat balls. <number>1a</number> <tr>mold</tr> into other shapes. <number>2</number> mold the personality and mind. <i>Mga iskuylahan nga nag-úmul sa mga batan-un,</i> Schools that mold the youth. <pos>n</pos> s.t. formed into balls or molds. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> school as the molder of the youth. <form>-in-</form> <xr>= <sc>úmul</sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr>

<p id=20225><form>um-um</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> put s.t. partly or wholly into the mouth or between the lips. <i>Muum-um nà siya dáyun sa íyang kwáku inigmata,</i> He immediately puts his pipe into his mouth when he wakes up. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; ug kalibútan</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> for a woman to have a prolapsed uterus. <i>Nagbakaang ang babáyi kay nag-umum man ug kalibútan,</i> The woman is walking with her legs far apart because she has a prolapsed uterus.

<p id=20226><form>umung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> pile up harvested rice together with the stalks.

<p id=20227><form>umu-um</form> <xr>= <sc>alum-um</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20228><form>umuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bodily strength</tr>. <i>Nawad-an si Samsun sa umuy dihang giputul ni Dilayla ang íyang buhuk,</i> Samson lost his <tr>strength</tr> when Delilah cut his hair. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> have the strength to do s.t. <i>Dì na giyud ku makaumuy paglakaw,</i> I have no more strength to go out. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> get strength. <i>Giumuyan na ang ákung buktun,</i> My arm has gathered strength again. <form>paumuy-umuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> keep the body still without motion. <i>Paumuy-umuy lang, makat&umacracu;g ka lagi,</i> Just <tr>lie still</tr> and relax and you&apos;ll fall asleep.

<p id=20229><form>*un</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>marts</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20230><form>-un<sub>1</sub></form> direct passive verb affix, future. (<ix>past:</ix> <bx>gi-</bx> <ix>subjunctive:</ix> <bx>-a</bx>. <ix>Potential forms: past:</ix> <bx>na-</bx>; <ix>future and subjunctive:</ix> <bx>ma-</bx>.) <i>Palitun ku ang bábuy,</i> I will buy the pig. <i>Gipalit ku ang bábuy,</i> I bought the pig. <i>Walà ku palita ang bábuy,</i> I didn&apos;t buy the pig. <i>Dì ku mapalit ang bábuy,</i> I cannot buy the pig. <i>Napalit ku ang bábuy,</i> I managed to buy the pig. <i>Wà ku mapalit ang bábuy,</i> I didn&apos;t get to buy the pig. <number>1</number> do directly to. <i>Lutúun ku ang kík,</i> I will bake the cake. <i>Kuháun ku kanà,</i> I will go get it. <i>Patyun níla,</i> They will kill it. <number>1a</number> <ix>with verbs of motion:</ix> go to get. <i>Sak-un ku ang butung,</i> I will climb up to get some coconuts. <i>Balíkun ka námù,</i> We will come back to get you. <number>1b</number> <ix>with adjectives, nouns, or roots referring to a state:</ix> make s.t. [adj.], [noun]; or bring into [state]. <i>Pulahun ku ang ákung ngábil,</i> I will make my lips red. <i>Hubgun ku siya sa mga sáad,</i> I will make her drunk with promises. <i>Ulipúnun ang Pilipínas sa Ispanya,</i> Spain will enslave the Philippines. <i>Karsunísun ku ning panaptun,</i> I will make pants out of the cloth. <i>Hutdun ku ang kwarta,</i> I will use up the money. <i>Upatun ang kík,</i> The cake will be cut into four pieces. <number>1c</number> <ix>with adjectives referring to manner:</ix> do it in [such-and-such] a manner. <i>Ayúhun ku pagsilhig ang sawug,</i> I will sweep <pb n=1095>the floor carefully. <i>Kalitun ku paglabni ang íyang kutsilyu,</i> I will grab his knife away suddenly. <number>1c1</number> <ix>with words referring to time:</ix> [do] at [such-and-such a time]. <i>Ugmáun na lang nà nákù,</i> I will just do that tomorrow. <i>Binulanun ku sílag swildu,</i> I will pay them by the month. <number>1d</number> with verbs referring to an action two things can do with each other (usually with a long penult), have the two [do] to each other. <i>Sagúlun ku ang itlug ug harína,</i> I will mix the eggs and the flour. <i>Abútun ku ang duha ka tumuy,</i> I will make the two ends meet. <number>1d1</number> have s.o. do [so-and-so] with one. <i>Sabútun ku ang draybir,</i> I will come to an agreement with the driver. <i>Awáyun ku si Pidru,</i> I will fight Pedro. <number>1e</number> <ix>with nouns referring to names or titles:</ix> call s.o. by [such-and-such] a name. <i>Lulúhun ku ang tigúwang,</i> I will call the old man Grandfather. <number>1e1</number> say [so-and-so] to. <i>Litsíhun ku giyud siya,</i> I&apos;ll cuss at him and say <ix>litsi</ix>. <number>1f</number> <ix>with nouns referring to things that can be used as an instrument:</ix> strike with [so-and-so]. <i>Bakyáun ku siya,</i> I will hit him with a wooden slipper. <number>1g</number> <ix>with verbs referring to fighting, competing, and the like:</ix> accomplish s.t. by doing. <i>Kun dílì mahímung sultíhun ang átung gikasungían, átù na lang awáyun,</i> If we can&apos;t settle our differences by talking, we&apos;ll fight it out. <number>2</number> <ix>with words referring to a sickness or feeling:</ix> get [such-and-such] a sickness, feel [so-and-so]. <i>Gitulug siyag maáyu,</i> He is very sleepy. <i>Giátay ang manuk,</i> The chickens got chicken cholera. <number>3</number> <formx>háiy, unsay <r>[noun]</r>-un</formx>, there is no [noun]! (Lit. What is there to make or call a [noun].) <i>&lsquo;Tagái kug singku.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Unsay kwartáhun!&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Let me have a nickel.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Where am I supposed to get money?&rsquo; <i>Gipangítà ku si Tinyung sa dapit nga íyang gibarugan ganíha. Háin pay Tinyúngun,</i> I looked for Tenyong in the place he had been standing. Tenyong was nowhere. (Lit. Where could there be s.t. to be called Tenyong?).

<p id=20231><form>-un<sub>2</sub></form> <number>1</number> suffix added to adjectives and nouns to form adjectives which mean &lsquo;of [such-and-such] a kind&rsquo;. Usually, forms with this suffix have final stress. <i>Yagpisun siyag láwas,</i> He has a thinnish body. <i>Dugúun (duguun) nga hitabù,</i> A bloody event. <i>Baratuhung panaptun,</i> Cheap sort of cloth. <number>2</number> added to numbers to form nouns meaning &lsquo;ones worth [so-and-so] much&rsquo;. <i>Pisusun (pisúsun) nga bayhána,</i> A cheap woman (costing only a peso). <i>Bayintihun,</i> Costing twenty.

<p id=20232><form>-un(&rarr;)</form> alternant of <ix>-unun</ix>, used with some of the bases which occur with <ix>-unun</ix>, but not all of them. <i>Dúna pa kuy hatagun nímu,</i> I still have s.t. to give you.

<p id=20233><form>úna</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ahead</tr>, <tr>earlier</tr>. <i>Ákung turnu kay úna kaáyu ku nímu,</i> It&apos;s my turn because I was here well <tr>before</tr> you. <number>2</number> the one that is <tr>first</tr> in position. <i>Ang Únang Gínang,</i> The First Lady. <number>2a</number> <formx>sa &mdash;</formx> <tr>in former times</tr>. <i>Sa úna way sugà,</i> In former times there was no electricity. <form>mga -ng táwu</form> the people of former times. <number>2b</number> <tr>first</tr>, not second. <form>&mdash; sa tanan</form> <tr>above all</tr>. <form>sa &mdash; nga lugar</form> <tr>in the first place</tr>. <i>Dì ka katagáan. Sa únang lugar pilyu ka,</i> You can&apos;t get any. In the first place, you&apos;re naughty. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> do s.t. the <tr>first</tr> thing, or ahead of s.o. else. <i>Muúna ku ug tindug. Sunud lang,</i> I will stand up first. Just follow suit. <i>Unáhun ku ni ug lútù,</i> I will cook this first. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A123S; b8]</itype> beat s.o. to s.t. <i>Ákù ning syáha. Akuy nakauna áni,</i> This is my chair. I got it first. <i>Hiunhan siyag mata sa adlaw. Alas syíti nang mimata,</i> He woke up late (lit. the sun got up before him). It was already seven o&apos;clock. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> pay an amount in advance. <i>Muúna ku nímug diyis,</i> I will <tr>advance</tr> you ten. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2S; b(1)]</itype> be at the head, go ahead of others. <i>Muúna ku nímu kay nagdalì ku,</i> I will go home before you because I am in a hurry. <i>Nag-una sila sa parid,</i> They were at the head of the parade. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13N; b(1)]</itype> do s.t. to s.o. first. <i>Kinsa may nag-úna ninyung duha?</i> Which of you started it? <number>4</number> <itype>[A23N; b(1)]</itype> flirt with a boy aggressively. <i>Gipaangkan hinúun si Mirli kay mau may miúna (nangúna) sa laláki,</i> Merle got pregnant because she flirted too much with the boy. <form>&mdash; sin utra</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>alternate</tr>, occurring one after the other. <i>Úna sin utra ang lalákig babáyi,</i> The boys and the girls are put in alternate position (boy, girl, boy, girl). <form>(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>úna</sc>, <i>n1; v1, 1a, 1b, 2.</i></xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; b]</itype> give unwanted advice. <i>Muuna mu nákù? Ulahi ra mu kaáyu sa dúyan,</i> What are you giving me advice for when you are way younger than me? <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1c]</itype> for a woman to have premarital relations. <i>Dì maáyu nga mupaúna sa láki,</i> It&apos;s not good for a woman to have relations with a man before marriage. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> let s.o. do s.t. to one first. <i>Sa sumbagay dì giyud siya paúna,</i> He won&apos;t let his opponent get the first blow in a fight. <form>pa-(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>paúna</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr> <form>unauna</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> do s.t. ahead of others when it is not proper or usual. <i>Dì ka makaunaunag lingkud kay wà pa mulingkud ang pinasidunggan,</i> You cannot sit down first because the honoree has not taken his seat yet. <i>Unaunaha nig lung-ag,</i> Cook this ahead in a hurry. <form>pasi-, pasi-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> say s.t. by way <pb n=1096>of introduction, before s.o. else. <number>2</number> say or convey s.t. <tr>in advance</tr>. <i>Mupasiuna lang ku nímu nga dì ku makaanhi ugmà,</i> I&apos;ll tell you in advance that I can&apos;t come here tomorrow. <i>Ipasiuna ku lang ni nímung kwartáha,</i> I&apos;m just giving you this money in advance. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. <tr>preliminary</tr> or a <tr>preface</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>advance notice</tr>. <form>unáhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> place up ahead. <number>2</number> <tr>further</tr>. <i>Ang íla unáhan ra kaáyus taytáyan,</i> Their place is a considerable distance up beyond the bridge. <form>pangunáhan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> be the leader in a novena. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. placed in front of s.t. else. <i>Pangunáhang ligid,</i> Front tires. <number>2</number> one who is in the limelight. <i>Pangunáhang papil,</i> Starring role. <form>kinaunahan, kinaunáhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>the very first</tr>. <form>maunaunahun, unaunahun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> one who provokes trouble. <i>Kanúnay siyang makakitag áway kay unaunahun man,</i> He always finds himself in a fight because he is a trouble-maker. <number>2</number> forward with women.

<p id=20234><form>unà</form> <pos>n</pos> juice of the salted fish.<i> Pakapini kug unà nga isúbak sa útan,</i> Give me additional salted-fish juice for my vegetable stew. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B3(1); b6(1)]</itype> for salted-fish preserves to give out juice. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> have juice to eat with the staple. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> put salted-fish juice on. <i>Giunaan níyag daghan ang útan,</i> She put lots of salted-fish juice on the vegetable stew.&dagger;

<p id=20235><form>únà</form> <xr>= <sc>úsà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20236><form>unanut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P]</itype> do s.t. with <tr>difficulty</tr> or with <tr>great effort</tr>. <i>Nag-unanut ku sa ákung mga sabdyiks rung tuíga,</i> I am having difficulty with my subjects this year. <i>Nag-unanut ku pagbira sa pyánu,</i> It was a great <tr>effort</tr> to move the piano.

<p id=20237><form>unap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> peel off the thin outer layer of a dried, young nipa leaf for smoking.

<p id=20238><form>unas</form> <pos>n</pos> dry banana leaf. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> remove the dried banana leaves. <form>hi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> <xr>= <sc>únas</sc>, <ix>v</ix>.</xr>

<p id=20239><form>unásis</form> <pos>a</pos> very rich old man. <i>Unásis kaáyu ang íyang nabána,</i> She married an <tr>Onassis</tr>.

<p id=20240><form>unat</form> <xr>= <sc>ínat</sc>.</xr>&dagger;

<p id=20241><form>unaw</form> <pos>n</pos> cassava or <tr>buri flour</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> extract cassava or buri flour.

<p id=20242><form>unawup</form> (from <ix>alup</ix>) <pos>a</pos> for light or vision to be <tr>dim</tr>. <i>Unawup kaáyu ang síga sa sugà,</i> The light of the lamp is very dim. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> get dim. <i>Muunáwup (maunáwup) ang ákung panan-aw,</i> My eyesight becomes <tr>blurred</tr> sometimes.

<p id=20243><form>unay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>mainland</tr>. <i>Ang tagaisla adtu magkabù sa unay,</i> The islanders fetch water from the mainland. <number>2</number> a deeply embedded <tr>sliver</tr> or foreign body. <number>3</number> s.t. solidly attached to or forming a solid or contiguous part of s.t. <i>Dílì matangtang ning putháwa kay unay sa íhi,</i> This piece of iron can not be removed because it forms a solid part of the axle. <form>&mdash; sa láwas</form> <xr>= <sc>taput láwas</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>láwas</sc>.</xr> <number>4</number> instantly accessible. <i>Sa nagtrabáhu pa ku sa panadiríya unay ra ku sa pán,</i> When I was working in the bakery, I always had bread instantly accessible. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> go stay with a member of the family that is s.w. else. <i>Muunay ku sa mga bátà sa syudad sa ílang pag-iskuyla,</i> I will go live with the children in the city while they attend school there. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> do some harm to a member of one&apos;s own family or group. <i>Ang íya rang anak nag-unay ug káwat sa ílang karabaw,</i> His own son stole the carabao from them. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> commit <tr>suicide</tr>. <i>Nag-unay siya kay disispirádu,</i> He killed himself because he was despondent in love. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> be harmed by one&apos;s own trick, weapon. <i>Mirísi. Naunay ka sa ímung tinuntu,</i> It serves you right. Your foolishness <tr>backfired</tr> on you, and you got it instead. <number>4</number> <itype>[ac]</itype> do s.t. to s.t. one is wearing without taking it off. <i>Giunay lang nákug sursi ang gísì sa ákung púlu,</i> I sewed up the tear in my shirt without taking it off. <number>5</number> <itype>[AN; bN]</itype> do s.t. personally, not delegating it to s.o. else. <i>Aku giyuy mangunay (muunay, mangúnay) íni kay mga tapulan mu,</i> I guess I&apos;ll have to do this myself because you are so lazy. <i>Unayi nag trabáhu kay kuti nà,</i> Work on that personally because it is an intricate job. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. fixed or attached to s.t. <i>Sa mamilúka únay ang sinínà sa karsúnis,</i> In a child&apos;s one-piece suit the pants and the shirt are together in one piece. <form>batu nga &mdash;</form> <tr>bedrock</tr>. <number>2</number> fight among friends or relatives. <i>Sa únay ang amahan hingpatyan,</i> The father was killed in the family fight. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C3; c1]</itype> be <tr>fixed</tr>, <tr>attached</tr> as part of one another. <i>Nag-únay ang púnu ug radiyu kay gibutang ang duha sa usa ka kabinit,</i> The radio and phonograph are a <tr>single unit</tr> because they were put in one cabinet. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ac3]</itype> for friends or kin to do s.t. to each other they shouldn&apos;t. <i>Nag-únay ang managsúun maung gibáliw,</i> The brother and sister committed incest. That&apos;s why they were cursed. <i>Ang mismu níyang amahan ang gikaúnay níya sa pulitika,</i> He ran against his own father in the elections. <form>unay-únay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> put on special wearing apparel for ordinary situations. <i>Ayawg iunay-únay ang bag-u mung sinínà,</i> Don&apos;t go wearing your new dress around the house. <pos>n</pos> clothing for ordinary use. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> rolled tobacco leaf for smoking. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> smoke rolled tobacco leaf. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> roll tobacco leaves for smokes. <form>ti-(&larr;)</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>tiúnay</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=1097>

<p id=20244><form>undag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>sink</tr>, <tr>settle</tr> down to the bottom of a liquid medium. <i>Lawum ang giundágan sa barkung nalúnud,</i> The ship sank in deep waters.

<p id=20245><form>undak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B3(1)4; b6]</itype> <tr>jounce</tr> in riding. <i>Miundak ning trák tungud sa batsi,</i> This bus is jouncing because of the potholes. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>stamp</tr> the feet, walk with heavy footfalls. <i>Ayaw undáka (iundak) ímung tiil kay náay táwu sa sílung,</i> Don&apos;t stamp your feet when you walk because there are people downstairs. <form>pina- ang tíngug</form> speaking in a rough, curt way.

<p id=20246><form>undan</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>aware</tr> of what is happening around one. <pos>n</pos> <tr>awareness</tr>. <i>Wà siyay undan nga gidala sa huspital,</i> He was unconscious when he was brought to the hospital. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; b28]</itype> <tr>know</tr>, be aware of what is going on. <i>Wà pa ku makaundan paghalin námù sa Mindanaw,</i> I was not old enough to know what was going on when we moved to Mindanao. <i>Wà ku makaundan nga gikúut ang ákung kwarta,</i> I did not notice that s.o. had picked my pocket. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> regain <tr>consciousness</tr>. <number>1b</number> come to <tr>understand</tr> fully s.t. about which one had misapprehensions. <i>Hiundanan (naundanan) na níya ang íyang sayup,</i> He has just realized his mistakes. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b8]</itype> grow up under the conditions, environment of. <i>Nag-undan siya sa pagkaharúhay,</i> She grew up in great comfort. <form>&mdash; sa buut</form> <xr>= <sc>undan</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see also</ix> <sc>unud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20247><form>undang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab1]</itype> <tr>stop</tr> doing s.t., come to a stop. <i>Naundang ang ámung pagpangáun sa pag-abut níla,</i> Our meal came to a halt when they arrived. <i>Giundángan námug dáru ang íyang uma,</i> We had stopped plowing his farm. <i>Giundángan na siya sa íyang dugù,</i> Her menstruation has stopped. <form>walay &mdash;</form> <tr>unending</tr>, <tr>incessant</tr>. <form>undang-undang</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>intermittent</tr>, on and off. <i>Undang-undang nga kasakit sa tampihak,</i> Intermittent migraine. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b5]</itype> be intermittent, <tr>periodic</tr>, or on and off. <i>Giundang-undang (giundang-undángan) pagpaági sa túbig sa agwas karun,</i> We only have water periodically these days. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> food served at the end of the work. <form>-in-an nga swildu</form> <tr>separation pay</tr>.

<p id=20248><form>undaundà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c16]</itype> for a process to be broken by short intervals, not going on smoothly. <i>Mag-undaundà siyang musulti mu rag maghunàhúnà ug unsay isunud,</i> He speaks <tr>haltingly</tr> as if he was thinking of what to say next. <i>Pirmíha pagtulud. Ayawg undaundáa (iundaundà),</i> Push continuously. Don&apos;t keep stopping now and then. <pos>a</pos> going on haltingly, not smoothly continuous.

<p id=20249><form>undáyag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> step backwards, dodging to avoid the blows of an attacking opponent. <i>Muundáyag siya kun dasdásun apan síging nagpika,</i> He steps out of the way when he is attacked, but continues to deliver punches.

<p id=20250><form>undayun, undáyun</form> (from <ix>dáyun</ix>) <pos>a</pos> space which is <tr>contiguous</tr> or <tr>continuous</tr> with s.t. <i>Ang kumidur undáyun sa sála,</i> The dining room is a <tr>continuation</tr> of the living room. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> <tr>continue</tr>, <tr>go on</tr> doing s.t. <i>Mipaundáyun siyag lakaw bísan ákung gitawag,</i> She continued on walking away even as I called her. <i>Wà siya makapaundáyun ug iskuyla kay nasakit,</i> He was not able to continue his studies because he got sick. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>go along with</tr> s.o.&apos;s decision, wishes. <i>Magpaundáyun kami sa ímung hukum,</i> We will go along with your decision. <i>Ayaw paundayúni sa tanan níyang gustu,</i> Do not give him everything he wants.

<p id=20251><form>undù</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>dù</bx>. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> address of endearment for a boy. <number>2</number> familiar term of address to a man the same age or younger than the speaker. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> call or address s.o. this way.

<p id=20252><form>unduk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> be <tr>piled</tr> high. <i>Muunduk ang labhanan ug dílì amnun paglaba,</i> The laundry will <tr>pile up</tr> if you don&apos;t take care of it as it comes up. <pos>n</pos> <tr>pile</tr>, <tr>heap</tr> of s.t. <i>Ang unduk sa basúra,</i> The heap of garbage.

<p id=20253><form>undul</form> <pos>a</pos> for plants to have lost their crowns or leaves at the top. <i>Mais nga undul kaáyu human agii sa dúlun,</i> Corn that had its tops eaten away by the locusts. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB; a2]</itype> for plants to lose their crowns, cause them to do so.

<p id=20254><form>unduy</form> <xr>= <sc>undù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20255><form>undyan</form> <xr>= <sc>unyà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20256><form>&umacracu;ng</form> <xr>= <sc>úlung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20257><form>ungà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23P; b]</itype> stop sucking on s.t.; stop suckling. <i>Dì muungà ug supsup sa dugù ang limátuk ug dì mabusug,</i> A leech won&apos;t stop sucking blood until it gets full. <form>ungaúngà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> loosen s.t. by working it <tr>back and forth</tr>. <i>Nag-ungaúngà ku sa halígi arun húmuk ibtun,</i> I&apos;m pushing the post back and forth so that it will be easy to pull it up.

<p id=20258><form>ungà<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>ingà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20259><form>ungab<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1b7]</itype> <tr>bite</tr> a big chunk off. <i>Ug ikaw muungab, mahurut ni,</i> If you take a bite of it, nothing will be left. <i>Ang plíti muungab ug dakù sa ákung swildu,</i> The fare takes a large chunk out of my salary. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> bite. <number>2</number> action of biting. <i>Usa ka ungab mahurut nà dáyun,</i> That would all be gone in a bite. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> the area from which a large chunk has been bitten.

<pb n=1098>

<p id=20260><form>ungab<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b36]</itype> <tr>cry</tr> aloud. <i>Nakamata ku kay nag-ungab siya,</i> I woke up because he cried so loud.

<p id=20261><form>úngad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> <tr>dig</tr> out with the snout or s.t. analogous. <i>Dì na muúngad (mangúngad) ang bábuy ug gawungan,</i> The pig can no longer dig up the soil if a ring is attached to its snout. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23; c]</itype> <tr>bury</tr> one&apos;s face in. <i>Miungad siya sa dughan sa íyang minahal ug mihílak,</i> She buried her face on her boy friend&apos;s bosom and cried. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> bury oneself in what one is doing. <i>Matigayun giyud ang íyang uma kay muúngad siyas trabáhu,</i> His farm will do well because he applies himself assiduously. <number>4</number> <itype>[A12S3]</itype> stay s.w. for one&apos;s subsistence. <i>Náa ra mag-ungad sa mga ginikánan ang mga anak nga nangaminyù,</i> The married children are living with their parents. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> fall down on one&apos;s face. <i>Napandul siya ug napaúngad siyas lápuk,</i> He tripped and fell face first into the mud. <form>inungáran</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> soil that has been all dug up by a pig. <number>2</number> <tr>earnings</tr>, s.t. obtained for a work done.

<p id=20262><form>ungal, úngal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make a loud bellowing cry. <i>Miúngal (miungal) ang higanti pagkaigù sa agtang,</i> The giant bellowed when he got hit on the forehead.

<p id=20263><form>ungas</form> <pos>n</pos> bad scratch. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; b6(1)]</itype> scratch s.t. badly. <i>Siyay miungas sa ákung nawung,</i> She scratched my face.

<p id=20264><form>ungat-úngat</form> <pos>n</pos> the joint between the upper and lower jaw and the muscles and jawbone in the vicinity. <i>Gikápuy ang ákung ungat-úngat ug kináun sa inánag,</i> My jaws were tired from eating the broiled corn.

<p id=20265><form>ungaug</form> <xr>= <sc>alungaug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20266><form>ungaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> be on the brink of death. <i>Nag-ungaw na siya sa kamatáyun,</i> She is on the brink of death. <number>2</number> be at the brink of some calamity. <i>Mag-ungaw na gánì ang ákung kwarta sa kahurutun, mukáun na lang ku ug buwad,</i> When my money is nearly gone I resort to eating dried fish.

<p id=20267><form>ungdan</form> <xr>= <sc>undan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20268><form>unggà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>break</tr> limbs, anything projecting off. <i>Unggáun (iunggà) ku ning úlu sa munyíka,</i> I&apos;ll break the head of the doll off. <i>Naunggà ang pakù sa ayruplánu pagkahúlug niíni,</i> The wing of the airplane broke off when it fell. <number>2</number> [B12; a 12] for a <ix>sungkà</ix> player to lose all his pieces to his opponent. <i>Dì abtag diyis minútus makaunggà ku nímu,</i> In less than ten minutes I&apos;ll have all your pieces. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> being broken off. <i>Unggà nag kawu nang tasáa,</i> That cup doesn&apos;t have a handle any more. <number>2</number> having lost all one&apos;s pieces in <ix>sungkà.</ix> <form>unggaunggà</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>anananggal</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a3]</itype> be <tr>detachable</tr>.

<p id=20269><form>unggal</form> <xr>= <sc>unggà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20270><form>unggu</form> <xr>= <sc>pamaláyi</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>bayi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20271><form>ungguwintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ointment</tr>.

<p id=20272><form>ungguy</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>monkey</tr>. <form>&mdash; nga nahapunan</form> <tr>crestfallen</tr> of countenance. <i>Naunsa ka man nga mu ra ka man ug ungguy nga nahapunan, pri?</i> What happened to you? You look crestfallen (like a monkey overtaken by sunset). <form>dalunggan sa &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>layat<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr> <form>ungguy-ungguy</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>card game</tr> where the players try to match pairs by drawing from each other&apos;s hands. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> play this game.

<p id=20273><form>ungkad, ungkag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3PB12; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>scatter</tr>, be, become <tr>scattered</tr> or <tr>disarrayed</tr>. <i>Kinsay nag-ungkag sa mga papil?</i> Who scattered the papers all over the place? <i>Naungkag ang mga táwu dihang miuwan,</i> The people ran in all directions when it started to rain. <number>2</number> <tr>stir</tr> or <tr>disturb</tr> the peace or calmness of. <i>Ang dautang balità mauy miungkag sa mga lungsuránun,</i> The bad news stirred up the townspeople. <number>2a</number> <tr>break up</tr> a home or a peaceful or friendly relationship. <i>Maungkag ang inyung pagpuyù tungud sa ímung pagbisyu,</i> Your home life will be broken up because of your indulgence in vice. <number>2b</number> <tr>disturb</tr> one&apos;s sleep. <i>Siyay miungkag sa ákung paghinánuk,</i> She disturbed my sleep.

<p id=20274><form>ungkat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>revive</tr>, bring back to one&apos;s consciousness s.t. that has long been forgotten. <i>Ákung ungkátun ang tanang nahitabù arun mahibaw-an ang kamatuúran,</i> I&apos;ll go over everything that happened so that the truth will come out.

<p id=20275><form>unglan</form> <xr>= <sc>unlan</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ulun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20276><form>unglù</form> <pos>n</pos> a person who is <tr>possessed</tr> of a supernatural force, which attacks from time to time causing him to change his form and go out, often to harm others, preying on their blood, livers, et al. The power which possesses the <ix>unglù</ix> is passed to him by <ix>salában</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> become an <ix>unglù.</ix> <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be <tr>addicted</tr> to a despicable vice. <i>Naúngù siya sa madyung,</i> He has become addicted to mahjong. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> for a person who is an <ix>unglù</ix> to get possessed and do his malicious acts.

<p id=20277><form>ungnan</form> <xr>= <sc>unlan</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ulun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20278><form>Úngù<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>unglù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20279><form>Úngù<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>wakwak<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=20280><form>úngud</form> <pos>a</pos> giving serious and undisturbed <tr>attention</tr> to work or activity. <i>Úngud siya sa trabáhu,</i> He is diligent in his work. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> do s.t. seriously and with <tr>diligence</tr>. <i>Mag-úngud mu sa pagtuun arun mu makapasar,</i> You must be diligent in your studies so that you <pb n=1099>can pass. <i>Iúngud ang ímung panahun sa ímung nigusyu,</i> <tr>Devote</tr> your time to your business.

<p id=20281><form>ungul</form> <pos>n</pos> stage of maturity of a coconut where the meat is getting hard but not completely mature. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B25; b6]</itype> for the coconut to reach this stage.

<p id=20282><form>úngul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b3]</itype> object angrily upon being asked for s.t. or told to do s.t. because the person who did so does not have the right (slang). <i>Ug miúngul pa siya pagpangáyù nákug dilihinsiya gúbut untà,</i> Had he objected when I asked for protection money, there would have been trouble. <pos>n</pos> angry complaint. <i>Way úngul ang butanti nga ámung gitirurismu,</i> The voter we terrorized didn&apos;t dare complain.

<p id=20283><form>ung-ung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> appear partly in an opening or hole. <i>Tawga dáyun ang dukt&ucaron;r ug mag-ung-ung na ang bátà,</i> Call the doctor immediately when the child appears in the vaginal opening. <i>Ayaw iung-ung ang ímung úlu sa pultahan kay mahadluk sila,</i> Don&apos;t pop your head out of the door or they&apos;ll be scared. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the <ix>buwà</ix><sub>1</sub> at an early stage of development. <number>2</number> supernatural beings who appear to people showing only their human head above the ground in odd places. They frighten but are harmless.

<p id=20284><form>ungus-ungus, ungus-úngus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> <tr>sniffle</tr> or <tr>whine</tr>. <i>Naghilak ka man tingáli, kay nag-ungus-ungus ka man,</i> You must have been crying because you are sniffling. <i>Nag-ungus-ungus ang irù,</i> The dog is whining.

<p id=20285><form>úngut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB2S]</itype> get <tr>stuck</tr> and not be able to move forward, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Miúngut (naúngut) ang dáru sa dakung batu,</i> The plow got stuck on a big boulder. <i>Siyay nag-úngut (nagpaúngut) sa kambiyu,</i> He caused the gears to <tr>jam</tr>. <i>Lawum nga lápuk ang giungútan sa trák,</i> The truck got stuck deep in the mud. <number>1a</number> <formx>&mdash; ang bàbà</formx>. <number>1a1</number> get <tr>lockjaw</tr>. <number>1a2</number> be <tr>at a loss for words</tr>. <i>Miúngut ang íyang bàbà sa dihang gisukut siya,</i> She didn&apos;t know what to say when she was questioned. <number>2</number> <itype>[B23S6; b3]</itype> become <tr>stopped</tr>, <tr>detained</tr>. <i>Miúngut ang ákung papílis sa imbasi,</i> My papers got <tr>stuck</tr> in the embassy. <number>3</number> be <tr>puzzled</tr>, <tr>stuck</tr> so that one can&apos;t proceed. <i>Muúngut (maúngut) giyud ku áning prublimáha,</i> I&apos;ll be <tr>stumped</tr> by this problem. <number>4</number> <itype>[B2S3(1)6; b(1)]</itype> for s.t. long to pierce into s.t. <i>Nag-ungut ang kwáku sa bàbà sa tigúwang,</i> There was a pipe <tr>stuck</tr> in the old man&apos;s mouth. <i>Wà makaúngut ang panà sa káhuy,</i> The arrow didn&apos;t <tr>stick</tr> into the tree. <number>4a</number> be <tr>fixed</tr>, <tr>glued</tr> s.w. <i>Miúngut ang íyang mata sa dughan sa dalága,</i> His eyes were <tr>glued</tr> to the young woman&apos;s breasts. <number>5</number> <xr>= <sc>úngud</sc>, <ix>v</ix>.</xr> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> being stuck on tight. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>úngud</sc>, <ix>a</ix>.</xr> <form>pina-</form> <pos>n</pos> action that is <tr>prolonged</tr>, done without letting go. <i>Ang íyang hinagkan pinaúngut,</i> He kissed her with a prolonged kiss.

<p id=20286><form>unguy<sub>1</sub></form> (word play on <ix>bungul</ix>) <pos>a</pos> deaf (humorous). <i>Kusga pagsulti kay unguy nang gikaisturya nímu,</i> Speak loudly because you are talking to a deaf man.

<p id=20287><form>*unguy<sub>2</sub></form> <form>unguy-únguy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b(1)]</itype> <tr>malinger</tr>. <i>Mag-unguy-únguy (magpaunguy-únguy) dáyun nang batáa basta náay súgù,</i> That child pretends to be sick as soon as there is work to be done. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> unable to endure work. <i>Unguyan kaáyu sa trabáhu nang tawhána kay tapulan man gud,</i> That man can&apos;t endure work because he is <tr>lazy</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be so one cannot endure work. <form>unguy-unguyan</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>malingerer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b]</itype> be, become a malingerer.

<p id=20288><form>unibirsidad</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>university</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB126; a2]</itype> found a university, become a university.

<p id=20289><form>unidu</form> <xr>= <sc>umidu</sc>, <i>2, 2a.</i></xr>

<p id=20290><form>unidúru</form> <xr>= <sc>inudúru</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20291><form>unipurmi</form> <xr>= <sc>yunipurmi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20292><form>unkuwartu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>one-fourth</tr>. <i>Unkuwartu ra nga karni ang ákung palitun,</i> I&apos;ll only buy a <tr>quarter</tr> (kilogram) of meat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; a12]</itype> amount to a quarter. <i>Unkuwartúha lang pagpalit ang asúkar,</i> Just buy a quarter of a kilo of sugar.

<p id=20293><form>unlan</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ulun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20294><form>unlud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB23; c1]</itype> <tr>sink</tr> into s.t. so as to be submerged. <i>Dì muunlud (maunlud) ang sakayan nga kinatígan,</i> A boat with outriggers won&apos;t sink. <i>Unlúrun (iunlud) ta ka,</i> I&apos;ll pull you under the water. <number>1a</number> for s.t. solid to sink into the earth or land to sink. <i>Nahíwì ang balay kay nagkaunlud ang halígi,</i> The house is crooked because the post is sinking. <number>2</number> <itype>[APB2; c1]</itype> for a business to <tr>go to pot</tr>, cause it to do so. <i>Muunlud ang ímung nigusyu ug dì ikaw ang mangunay,</i> Your business will go to pot if you don&apos;t manage it yourself. <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> lead <tr>sinker</tr> of a fishing net or line.

<p id=20295><form>unminútu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>one minute</tr>. <i>Unminútu ra ang ákung pahúway,</i> I rested for only one minute. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> do s.t. <tr>for a minute</tr>. <i>Muunminútu ra ku pagpakigsulti nímu,</i> I&apos;ll talk to you for only one minute. <i>Wà pa ka makaunminútu ug sulti,</i> You haven&apos;t talked for a minute. <number>2</number> <itype>[B56]</itype> be about a minute. <i>Miunminútu (naunminútu) tingáli tung ákung pagkalípung,</i> I was dizzy for about a minute.

<p id=20296><form>unmumintu</form> <number>1</number> <tr>wait a moment</tr>, excuse me a second. <i>Unmumintu, maglipstik na lang ku,</i> <tr>Just a second</tr>. I&apos;ll just put my lipstick <pb n=1100>on. <i>Unmumintu diay. Kinsa tuy ímung ngálan?</i> Just a minute. What did you say your name was? <number>2</number> <tr>wait a minute</tr>, be silent for a minute. <form>ispíra &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>unmumintu</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr>

<p id=20297><form>unra</form> <xr>= <sc>rilip</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20298><form>unras</form> <pos>n</pos> honors for the dead, a special ceremony at a funeral where the priest accompanies the body from the house to the church, and from there to the cemetery. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> perform the <ix>unras</ix>. <form>&mdash; bihilya</form> <pos>n</pos> this ceremony in which the body remains in the church for some time.

<p id=20299><form>unsa</form> <ix>interrogative</ix> <number>1</number> <tr>what</tr>? <i>Unsay ímung gibúhat?</i> What are you doing? <i>Unsa man nà?</i> What is that? <i>Unsay úras?</i> What time is it? <i>Unsay átù?</i> What would you like? <i>Unsa man diay? Ug dì swildúhan mubíyà giyud,</i> What do you expect? If you don&apos;t pay, of course she&apos;ll quit. <i>Báhin sa unsa?</i> What is it about? <number>1a</number> <formx>bisan (bisag) &mdash;</formx> <tr>whatever</tr>, <tr>anything at all</tr>. <i>Bisan unsay ihátag, dawáta,</i> Whatever they give you, accept it. <i>Bisag unsa mahal run,</i> <tr>Everything</tr> is expensive nowadays. <number>1b</number> <formx>&mdash; nga <r>[time]</r>-a</formx> at what [time]? <i>Unsang urása?</i> At what time? <number>1c</number> <formx>&mdash; ka-<r>[<i>adj.</i>]</r>?</formx> how [adj.] was it? <i>Unsa kadakù ang ílang balay?</i> How big is their house? <i>Tíaw mu ba kun unsa kalisud,</i> Imagine how difficult it is. <number>1d</number> <formx>-y ákù?</formx> what do I care? <i>Unsay ákù ug muláyas ka? Na hala,</i> What do I care if you run away? Go right ahead. <i>Unsay ákù kaníya?</i> What do I care about her? <number>1e</number> <formx>-y ímu <r>[<i>dat.</i>]</r></formx> what do you see in [dat.]? <number>1f</number> <formx>-y ngálan gud</formx> what in heaven&apos;s name? <i>Unsay ngálan gud diay? Minyù?</i> What in heaven&apos;s name do you mean? He&apos;s married? <number>2</number> <tr>how about it?</tr> <i>Unsa, muadtu ba tag dílì?</i> How about it? Shall we go or not? <number>2a</number> say, how is it now? <i>Unsa, human na ba, wà pa,</i> Say, is it done or not? <number>2b</number> <formx>&mdash; na</formx> how are things now? <i>Unsa na? Nadáwat ka na?</i> How about it? Did you get your job? <i>&lsquo;Unsa na?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Mau gihápun,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;<tr>How are things?</tr>&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Oh, just as usual.&rsquo; <number>2c</number> <formx>&mdash; na kahà</formx> how much more so if. <i>Ug dagmálan ka na níya run, unsa na kahag maminyù mu?</i> If he is mean to you now, how will it be when you&apos;re married? <number>3</number> <tr>what do you mean?</tr> <tr>what are you talking about?</tr> <i>Unsay barátu? Mahal uy!</i> What do you mean cheap? It&apos;s expensive. <i>Unsang kwartáha! Nagastu na,</i> What money are you talking about? It&apos;s all gone. <number>3a</number> <tr>what&apos;s the matter with?</tr> <i>Unsa ka bang sultían, mu ra ka mag bungul,</i> What&apos;s the matter with you that when I talk to you you act deaf? <number>4</number> <ix>at the end of a phrase:</ix> it is so, <tr>is it not?</tr> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>sa</bx>. <i>Maáyu, unsa (sa)?</i> It was nice, wasn&apos;t it? <number>5</number> <formx>ug &mdash; pa kadtu, dihà</formx> <tr>and so forth</tr>. <i>Mga bínu, tubà, sirbísa, ug unsa pa kadtu (dihà),</i> Wine, toddy, beer, and <tr>what have you</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; a1]</itype> do what? <i>Muunsa kag hanaan ka níya?</i> What will you do if he aims at you? <i>Nag-unsa man mu samtang wà ku dinhi?</i> What did you do while I wasn&apos;t here? <i>Giunsa man ninyu ang bátang naghilak man?</i> What did you do to the child to make him cry? <number>1a</number> <itype>[a1c]</itype> how does one do. <i>Unsáun ku pagpatay sa (ang) irù?</i> How can I kill the dog? <i>Iunsa man nà nákù pagtáud?</i> How shall I attach it? <number>1a1</number> <formx>bisan &mdash;</formx> no matter what was, is done to it. <i>Bisag giunsa (unsáun) nákù pagbira dílì maibut,</i> No matter how I pulled (pull) it, it didn&apos;t (won&apos;t) come out. <number>1b</number> <formx>unsáun man nga</formx> <tr>what could I do?</tr> <i>Unsáun man ug dì magpatúu, dì hilatiguhan,</i> <tr>I couldn&apos;t help it</tr>. If he doesn&apos;t obey I have to whip him. <number>1c</number> <formx>dílì ingun sa pag-</formx> it is not to make s.o. feel bad. <i>Dílì ni ingun sa pag-unsa nímu, piru tinúud giyud nà,</i> I&apos;m not saying this to hurt you, but it is true. <number>1d</number> <formx>bisag unsáun</formx> <pos>n</pos> name given to the followers of Osme&ntilde;a, who stick with him through his attempts to capture the presidency (sticking to him, whatever he does). <number>2</number> <itype>[B16]</itype> what does it become, happen to it. <i>Maunsa man ang átung láwas ug patay na ta?</i> What happens to our bodies when we die? <i>Nag-unsa man ang patay?</i> What was the position of the body? <i>Makaunsa (makapaunsa) kanang tambála?</i> What can that medicine do? <number>2a</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> what happened to...? <i>Naunsa ka? Nabúang ka ba?</i> What&apos;s the matter with you? Are you crazy? <number>2b</number> <formx>ma- ba</formx> <tr>who cares</tr>. <i>Maunsa ba ug dì mahinayun,</i> <tr>Who gives a darn</tr> if it doesn&apos;t go through? <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> do <tr>harm</tr>. <i>Dì mangunsa ning irúa,</i> This dog won&apos;t do anything. <i>Nangunsa man tu? Dì walà?</i> What did he do to you anyway? Nothing, didn&apos;t he? <form>unsáay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> what happens to. <i>Maunsáay átung nigusyug muritíra ka?</i> What will become of our business if you pull out? <i>Walà giyud makaunsáay ang bagyu sa ámù,</i> The storm didn&apos;t do a thing to our house. <form>ka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> what will happen to. <i>Ug magkaunsa gánì ri, makapangasáwa giyud ka,</i> Whatever happens to her, you will have to marry her. <form>kina-, kinaunsáay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> what it will become. <i>Ug magkinaunsa, nía giyud ku,</i> Whatever happens, I&apos;ll always be here. <form>mag-</form> <tr>how are they related?</tr> <i>Mag-unsa man nà sila? Magsúun ba?</i> How are they related? Are they brothers? <form>ig-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>what relationship</tr>. <i>Ig-unsa ka nákù?</i> <tr>What relation</tr> are you to me? <form>walay unsaunsa</form> no more anything. <pb n=1101><i>Ug mamaláyi ka run, largu ang kasal, wà nay unsaunsa,</i> After you have asked for the hand, you can get married without any further ceremonies.

<p id=20300><form>unsas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ounce</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> measure by the ounce.

<p id=20301><form>unsi</form> <ix>numeral</ix> <tr>eleven</tr>. <i>Unsi ka buuk bátà,</i> Eleven children. <i>Unsi písus,</i> Eleven pesos. <pos>v</pos> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>tris</sc>.</xr> <form>unsiunsi</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> do s.t. on a <tr>ten-to-one</tr> basis. <i>Unsiunsíhan nátug hákut ang mais,</i> We will carry the corn to market on a <tr>ten-to-one basis</tr> (for every ten you carry, you get one for yourself). <number>1a</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> pay on a ten-to-one basis (instead of some other way). <i>Ug átung unsiunsíhun ang swildu, iguígù giyud,</i> If we give them a tenth share, that is fair enough. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> beat s.o. by turns. <i>Ang dinakpan giunsiunsíhan sa mga sikríta,</i> The plainclothesmen took turns beating the suspect.

<p id=20302><form>unsingálan</form> (from <ix>unsay ngálan</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <tr>what</tr>? <i>Unsingálan man nà?</i> What is that? <i>Unsingálan gud ning kagulyánga gud?</i> What&apos;s all this ruckus about anyway?

<p id=20303><form>unsiyálan</form> <xr>= <sc>unsingálan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20304><form>unsuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; b4]</itype> be, become sick after exposing oneself to the cold or taking a bath after having sexual intercourse. <i>Ang pagkalígù human mukáyat makapaunsuy (makaunsuy),</i> Taking a bath after having sexual intercourse can get you sick.

<p id=20305><form>untà</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>tà</bx>. <number>1</number> with requests or suggestions &lsquo;should, <tr>would like to</tr>&rsquo;. <i>Muhulam untà ku ug kwarta nímu,</i> I would like to borrow some money from you. <number>1a</number> <tr>may</tr> [so-and-so] happen. <i>Mahúlug tà ka,</i> I <tr>hope</tr> you fall! <i>Dílì untà siya masaklit sa kamatáyun,</i> May death not take him away. <i>Dì tà ka magbinúang,</i> I hope you don&apos;t do anything foolish. <formx>hináut &mdash;</formx> I <tr>hope</tr>. <i>Hináut untà nga dílì ka maghubug,</i> I hope you do not get drunk. <number>2</number> [so-and-so] was going to be the case, but it isn&apos;t; [so-and-so] might have happened, but it did not. <i>Mugíkan na untà siya apan mibagyu,</i> He was about to leave but there was a storm. <formx>maáyu &mdash;</formx> it would be (have been) better. <i>Maáyu untà ug madala nímu rung hápun,</i> It would be nice if you could bring it this afternoon. <i>Nindut tà ug nadala pa nímu,</i> It would have been nice if you had brought it. <number>2a</number> <ix>in the apodosis of conditions contrary to fact:</ix> then [so-and-so] would have been the case. <i>Maáyung wà makagikan ang sakayan, kayg kagikan pa, malúnud untà,</i> Thank God the boat didn&apos;t leave, because if it had, it would have sunk. <i>Walà untà ku muanhig wà pa ku imbitaha,</i> I wouldn&apos;t have come unless I had been invited. <i>Ug aku pa, mahuman na tà run,</i> I could have gotten it done, if I were to have been the one to do it. <i>Dílì aku, kayg aku pa, nahuman na tà run,</i> It wasn&apos;t me, because if it were, it would have been done now. <i>Ug ugmà pa giyud ang kasal naghíkay tà run,</i> If the wedding were really going to be tomorrow, he would be preparing now. <i>Ug aku pay kaslun magkapulíkì tà ku run, piru siya hayáhay lang,</i> If it were me getting married, I&apos;d be going crazy; but he&apos;s just taking it easy. <number>2b</number> [so-and-so] should not be the case. <i>Ngánung mutúlù man ning bangáa nga wà man untay sulud?</i> Why does this jar leak when it is supposed to be empty? <i>Háin man siyang nía man tà tu run?</i> Where is he since he was supposed to be here? <number>2c</number> <formx>&mdash; kay</formx> because of [so-and-so], [such-and-such] should have been done. <i>Untà kay gawíun nímu samtang wà siya dinhi, nananghid kang dáan,</i> Since you wanted to use it while he was gone, you should have asked before he left.

<p id=20306><form>untu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> one of the four top front teeth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> have one&apos;s upper <tr>incisors</tr>. <i>Lima pa ka búlan ning batáa apan giuntuhan na,</i> The baby is only five months old but she already has upper teeth.

<p id=20307><form>untu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> bear down hard as in delivery or defecation.

<p id=20308><form>untul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AP34; b6]</itype> <tr>bounce</tr>, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Maáyung muuntul ang gáhing búla,</i> Hard balls bounce well. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>rebound</tr>, fail to register or to take a firm hold on. <i>Miuntul ang ákung gitun-an, dì na masulud sa ákung úlu,</i> The things I studied won&apos;t register in my head. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23; b4]</itype> for checks to bounce. <i>Miuntul ang tsíki nga ákung gipailísan sa bangku,</i> The check that I cashed in the bank bounced. <number>4</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> be taken <tr>aback</tr>, stop in one&apos;s tracks due to surprise. <i>Miuntul (nauntul) ku pagkakità ku sa anínu,</i> I was <tr>taken aback</tr> when I saw the shadow. <number>4a</number> <itype>[A23P; b3]</itype> have second thoughts about buying s.t. <i>Sa maung prisyu muuntul giyud ang pumapálit,</i> At that price the buyers will surely have second thoughts. <pos>n</pos> amount of bounce. <form>untul-untul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4; b(1)]</itype> <tr>jounce</tr>, <tr>bounce</tr> up and down. <i>Miuntul-untul ang sakayan sa dagkung balud,</i> The boat was bounced around in the big waves. <i>Muuntul-untul mulakaw ang tagabúkid bísan ug pátag na,</i> Mountaineers bounce as they walk, even in the lowland. <form>-um- nga humay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. upland <tr>rice</tr> bearing fine, white grains that are hard to husk when pounded.

<p id=20309><form>untup</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>cut close</tr> near the base. <i>Untup kaáyung pagputul sa dagámi,</i> The cornstalks were cut very close to the base. <number>2</number> <tr>curt</tr>, <tr>concise</tr>. <pb n=1102><i>Untup kaáyu siya ug tubag,</i> His answers are very <tr>brief</tr>. <number>3</number> <tr>just</tr> the exact magnitude, amount. <i>Untup kaáyu ang bugas nga lung-águn pára paniudtu,</i> The rice is <tr>just enough</tr> for dinner. <number>3a</number> <tr>exactly</tr> at a certain time. <i>Untup kaáyu nga alas syíti ang ímung pag-abut,</i> You arrived exactly at seven. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> cut s.t. close to the base. <i>Nagpangpang hinúun nang ímung tingkuy kay giuntup man pagkatupi,</i> The nape of your neck looks as if there was a cliff above it because the hair was cut short there, but not above it. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> spin a top by throwing it straight down hard. <i>Giuntúpan níya ang kasing sa kuntra ug nabuak kini,</i> He smashed his top down on top of his opponent&apos;s and broke it. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> be, become <tr>short</tr>, <tr>curt</tr>. <i>Mauntup ang ímung tubag ug wà kay láing ikasulti,</i> Your answer will be short if you have nothing else to say. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be just exact or enough for. <i>Ug mauntup ra ning ákung kwarta pára pamilíti wà na kuy ikapaínit,</i> If my money is just enough for my fare, then I won&apos;t have any more to buy snacks. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A2; b6c1]</itype> arrive on time.

<p id=20310><form>untuy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> big, porcelain or enamel-coated, round <tr>plate</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> use this sort of plate.

<p id=20311><form>untuy<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> be cuckolded and unaware of it. <i>Giuntuy lang intáwun ang inusinting bána sa marúnung níyang asáwa,</i> The wife was making a fool out of her trusting husband.

<p id=20312><form>untuy<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>undù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20313><form>únu</form> <tr>one</tr> (used only in counting). <i>Dì pa ka mulíhuk? Únu, dus, ...</i> You&apos;re not going to do it? O.K. One, two<corr>,</corr> ... <pos>a</pos> the <tr>best</tr> there is, <tr>second to none</tr>. <i>Únu siyang musáyaw,</i> He is the best dancer. <form>&mdash; lus dús</form> for there to be a <tr>fifty-fifty chance</tr>. <i>Únu lus dús lag mabúhì ba ang naligsan,</i> It&apos;s a fifty-fifty chance that the victim will survive. <form>numiru &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>number one</tr>, <tr>tops</tr>. <i>Numiru únung palahúbug,</i> Number one drunkard. <i>Numiru únung mananagat,</i> The best fisherman. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> give s.o. a first warning. <i>Ákù ta na kang giunúhan, ha,</i> Watch out. This is your first warning. <form>&mdash; ug igù, syát</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> hit in one shot. <i>Unúhun kug igù kanang langgam sa káhuy,</i> I will hit that bird in the tree with only one shot. <form>walay &mdash;</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> <tr>you can&apos;t win</tr>, have no way to win people&apos;s approval, for whichever way it is done, it will be wrong in their eyes. <i>Wà giyud tay pagaunúhan (giunúhan) kay ug magdaginut tag gastu nganlan tag tihik, ug kusug pud tang mugastu ingnun tag gastadur,</i> You can&apos;t win. If you&apos;re careful with your money they call you cheap. If you spend your money they call you a spendthrift.

<p id=20314><form>unud</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>flesh</tr>. <i>Unud sa báka,</i> Cow&apos;s flesh. <i>Unud sa imbaw,</i> The flesh of the clam. <i>Unud sa mangga,</i> The flesh of the mango. <form>&mdash; sa ímung, íyang &mdash;</form> one&apos;s <tr>offspring</tr> (lit. flesh of one&apos;s flesh). <form>baligyà sa &mdash;</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> practice prostitution (lit. sell one&apos;s flesh). <form>kalípay sa &mdash;</form> <tr>sexual pleasure</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>content</tr>, integral part within s.t. <i>Liking way unud,</i> A cigar with no tobacco in it. <i>Impanádang gamay ug unud,</i> A meat pie with very little meat in it. <number>2a</number> <tr>content</tr>, <tr>meaning</tr>. <i>Pangatarúngan nga way unud,</i> Empty reasoning. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B23N; b6]</itype> put on flesh, become <tr>fleshy</tr>. <i>Nangunud na ang kamúti. Makálut na,</i> The sweet potatoes have developed nice and fat. You can dig them up now. <i>Giunuran na sad ang íyang láwas,</i> He has gotten flesh back on his body. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> give content or filler to s.t. <i>Dì ku muunud ug barut nga tabákù,</i> I do not use a poor k.o. tobacco in my pipe. <i>Ilagà kunu ang giunud sa syúpaw,</i> S.o. said they used rat meat as the filling for the Chinese sandwich. <form>undan</form> <pos>a</pos> having flesh. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>undan</sc>.</xr> <form>undánun, maundánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fleshy</tr>, <tr>muscular</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>pithy</tr>, full of substance or meaning. <i>Undánun kaáyu ang ímung sulti,</i> What you said is full of meaning. <form>kaunuran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>flesh</tr>, <tr>muscles</tr> collectively. <i>Nangúrug ang ákung kaunuran sa kalágut,</i> My flesh trembled in anger. <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>filler</tr>, <tr>filling</tr>. <i>Balahíbung gagmay ang paunud sa unlan,</i> Pillows are stuffed with fine feathers. <pos>v</pos> (A; c] use as filler. <form>-nun</form> <pos>a</pos> pertaining to the flesh. <form>-nung tingúhà</form> <tr>carnal desire</tr>.

<p id=20315><form>unugan</form> <pos>n</pos> place where wild animals or birds habitually stay or go. <i>Ang bábuy ihálas didtu lang níla atángi sa unugan,</i> They lay in wait for wild pigs at the place they habitually pass. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> make a place into a <tr>lair</tr>.

<p id=20316><form>*unuk-unuk</form> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; bc]</itype> keep silent and <tr>idle</tr>. <i>Dílì giyud mahuman nang ímung trabáhu kay imu man lang nang gipaunuk-unukan,</i> You&apos;ll never get done with your work if you just remain idle with it. <i>Ipaunuk-unuk lang nang ímung labad sa úlu. Maáyu ra lagi nà,</i> Just <tr>take it easy</tr> with your headache and you will get better.

<p id=20317><form>unuk-únuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b5]</itype> <tr>beset</tr>, bother persistently at a particularly inconvenient time. <i>Naatrasáwu na man gánì ku sa upisína, miunuk-únuk sab ning ulan pagbundak,</i> I am already late to the office as it is, and here the rain is tying me up. <i>Gipapha siyas trabáhu ug giunuk-únuk pag sakit,</i> He was fired from his job, and that is when he had to get <pb n=1103>sick of all times. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> characterized with annoying persistence.

<p id=20318><form>unum</form> <ix>numeral</ix> <tr>six</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>tulu</sc>.</xr> <form>kan-uman</form> <tr>sixty</tr>.

<p id=20319><form>-unun</form> suffix forming nouns similar in meaning to the direct passives. <number>1</number> <ix>added to bases which occur with direct passive verbal affixes:</ix> the thing to be [so-and-so]-ed, that is [so-and-so]-ed. <i>Ang pangasaw-unun,</i> The bride-to-be. <i>Mahal ang mga palitúnun run,</i> Things are expensive these days. <i>Kan-unun,</i> Things to eat. <number>2</number> added to roots which do not normally take the direct passive. <i>Labhunun,</i> Things to be washed. <i>May hatagunun pa diay ku nímu,</i> Oh, I still have s.t. to give you.

<p id=20320><form>un-un<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> meat or fish stewed in vinegar. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> cook meat or fish in vinegar. <form>-in-, -in-an</form> <xr>= <sc>un-un<sub>1</sub></sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr>

<p id=20321><form>un-un<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b8]</itype> <number>1</number> for solids to settle, but not in a liquid. <i>Muun-un ang harína ug maúyug ang sudlanan,</i> The flour will settle if you shake the container. <i>Nagkaun-un ang túri kay húmuk ang yútang gitukúran,</i> The tower is sinking because it is built on soft ground. <number>2</number> for s.t. in the body to move downward. <i>Ug magmabdus, dílì mangalsag bug-at kay muun-un ang bátà,</i> A pregnant woman shouldn&apos;t lift heavy things because the baby will descend. <pos>n</pos> fine particles of milled or pounded rice, buri, or cassava flour.

<p id=20322><form>un-ún<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>shrub</tr> of waste spaces producing a dark red, juicy, edible, berry, about 1 cm. in diameter and furnishing firewood.

<p id=20323><form>un-ún<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>un-un<sub>2</sub></sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr>

<p id=20324><form>únung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC2; b6(1)]</itype> stick to s.o. loyally, through thick and thin. <i>Muúnung ku nímu sa mga kalisdánan ug kaharúhay,</i> I&apos;ll stick to you through thick and thin. <i>Akù siyang giunúngan pagbilar,</i> I stuck the wake out with him. <number>2</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> involve or <tr>implicate</tr> s.o. in a misdeed. <i>Iúnung ku níya sa íyang mga salà,</i> He wants to implicate me in his offenses. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> stay with s.o. to take care of him. <i>Muúnung kus mga bátà samtang nag-iskuyla sa syudad,</i> I am going to the city to set up house for the children while they attend school there. <number>4</number> <itype>[b5]</itype> die with a fetus in the womb or in giving birth. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fetus in the womb of a mother or animal that died. <number>2</number> mother or animal that died while pregnant. <i>Nadiskubrihan námung únung diay ang giíhaw,</i> We discovered that the animal we slaughtered was pregnant. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>únung</sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <tr>mind</tr> what s.o. says or does. <i>Dì ku mag-unung sa kasábà ni Nánay kay ági man lang nà,</i> I don&apos;t mind Mother&apos;s scolding because it won&apos;t last. <i>Kamu ray alkansi ug ungnun ninyu ang mga tabìtábì,</i> You only hurt yourselves if you mind idle talk. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>unung</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr> <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> devotedly sticking to s.o. through thick and thin.

<p id=20325><form>unur</form> <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s <tr>honor</tr>, <tr>reputation</tr>. <i>Unur sa pamilya,</i> The honor of the family.

<p id=20326><form>únur</form> <xr>= <sc>ánur</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20327><form>unurabli</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>honorable</tr>, <tr>decent</tr>. <i>Unurabling pagkatáwu. Mutúman giyug sáad,</i> An honorable man that keeps his word.<i> Pangítà ug trabáhu nga bísag gamay rag swildu basta unurabli,</i> Look for a job, even if it does not pay well, as long as it is decent.

<p id=20328><form>unurári</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>honorary title</tr>. <i>Si Míyur Búris gihímung unurári upisyal sa intirskulastik mit,</i> Mayor Borres was made the <tr>honorary officer</tr> for the interscholastic meet. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; c1]</itype> be conferred an honorary title.

<p id=20329><form>unuraryu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>honorarium</tr>.

<p id=20330><form>unus</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>squall</tr>, sudden burst of heavy wind. <form>&mdash; sa kinabúhì</form> rigors of life. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a4b4]</itype> for there to be a strong gust of wind. <i>Nag-unus nang dáan paglarga sa barkung natundag,</i> There were already <tr>squalls</tr> when the boat that sank left the harbor. <i>Giunus (giunusan) mi sa taliwálà sa lawud,</i> We were caught by a squall in the middle of the sea.

<p id=20331><form>únus</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>tris</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20332><form>unus-únus</form> <pos>a</pos> done <tr>alternately</tr>, not together. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do <tr>one after another</tr>. <i>Mag-unus-únus tag ihid,</i> Let&apos;s sneak out <tr>one at a time</tr>.

<p id=20333><form>unut</form> <xr>= <sc>nunut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20334><form>únut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C2]</itype> for people or animals of the opposite sex to engage in horseplay with sexual overtones. <i>Ang irù nga mangúwag kanúnayng mag-únut,</i> Dogs in heat are constantly engaging in horseplay. <number>2</number> <itype>[C]</itype> for two women to claw at each other and pull each other&apos;s hair. <i>Nagkaúnut ang duha ka babáyi tungud sa pangabubhu,</i> The two women are clawing each other because of jealousy.

<p id=20335><form>unyà</form> <ix>short forms:</ix> <bx>unyà, nyà</bx>. <number>1</number> at a <tr>later</tr> time. <i>Mukáun ku unyà,</i> I will eat later. <i>Unyà ra nà nákù buhátun,</i> I will do it later. <form>&mdash; nga</form> [word referring to time] this [day, month, etc.] coming up. <i>Unyang hápun,</i> This afternoon (coming). <i>Unyang alas dus,</i> At two o&apos;clock (this coming afternoon). <form>&mdash; sa <r>[day of week, month, year]</r></form> next [so-and-so]. <i>Unyà sa Martis,</i> Next Tuesday. <i>Unyà sa sunud túig,</i> Next year. <number>1a</number> <formx>matag karun ug &mdash;</formx> <tr>every now and then</tr>. <i>Matag karun ug unyà mulìlì siya sa bintánà,</i> He gets up every <tr>now and then</tr> to take a peep out of the window. <number>2</number> <tr>furthermore</tr>, in addition. <i>Dúm kaáyu tu, unyà way búwang nakítà,</i> It was very dark. And the moon was not <pb n=1104>out. <number>2a</number> <tr>then</tr>, the next thing that happens, happened. <i>Mitan-aw siya nákù, unyà midágan,</i> He looked at me, then he ran. <number>2b</number> <tr>also</tr>, the next thing in the conversation. <i>Namisíta mi nímu. Unyà baligyáan ka námù ug tíkit sa bayli,</i> We came to visit you. And also we would like to sell you a ticket to the dance. <number>2c</number> <tr>so</tr>? (urging speaker to continue). <i>Unyà, naunsa na man tung amahan?</i> So, what became of the father? <number>2d</number> <tr>nevertheless</tr>. <i>Gidid-an siya sa dukt&ucaron;r. Unyà, muinum siya gihápun,</i> The doctor forbade him to drink. But nevertheless he still drinks anyway. <number>3</number> <ix>particle giving a warning:</ix> <tr>lest</tr>. <i>Hílak nyà arun latiguhun ka nákù,</i> Cry and I will whip you. <number>4</number> <formx><r>[<i>verb base, noun, adj.</i>]</r> &mdash;</formx> it is [so-and-so], <tr>my foot</tr>. <i>Pangadyì unyà. Bisag mitan-awg sini,</i> He&apos;s attending prayers, my foot! He went to the show. <i>Bag-u unyà. Bísag sa tyimpu pa nang mampur,</i> New, my foot! It&apos;s older than the hills. <i>Báka unyà, bisag irù,</i> What do you mean beef? This is dog meat. <pos>n</pos> when you get to doing it (coitus) (humorous). <i>Kinahanglang mutúu ka sa ímung asáwa, kay ag unyà,</i> You have to do what your wife tells you because you are going to get you-know-what from her. <form>unyaunyà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>put off</tr> doing s.t. to a later time. <i>Dì ku muunyaunyà ug unsay isúgù nákù,</i> I won&apos;t put off what I am told to do.

<p id=20336><form>unyas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>plectrum</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>diamonds</tr> in playing cards (which resemble a plectrum). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> use or make a plectrum.

<p id=20337><form>unyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>union</tr> or <tr>organization</tr>. <i>Unyun sa pamúu,</i> <tr>Labor union</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C; c1]</itype> form a union. <i>Wà maunyun ang mga trabahadur,</i> The laborers were not united. <number>2</number> <itype>[C3; c]</itype> <tr>agree</tr>, <tr>be in accord</tr>. <i>Unyúnan na lang nátù ang íyang sugyut,</i> Let&apos;s agree to his suggestion. <i>Iunyun námù ang ámung mga búhat sa ámung gipamúlung,</i> We will act in <tr>accordance</tr> with what we said.

<p id=20338><form>unyur</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>*marts</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20339><form>up<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>off work</tr>, not on duty. <i>Up na ku,</i> I&apos;m <tr>off duty</tr> now. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B236; c1]</itype> be off duty. <i>Muup (maup) ku sa alas singku,</i> I&apos;ll be off at five o&apos;clock.

<p id=20340><form>up<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> switch s.t. off, be switched off. <i>Kinsay nag-&ucaron;p sa bintiladur?</i> Who switched the electric fan off? <i>Awtumátik ning punúha. Muup (maup) ra nig íya,</i> This phonograph is automatic. It <tr>switches off</tr> by itself. <pos>a</pos> <tr>turned off</tr>.

<p id=20341><form>úpa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ANC23; b26]</itype> for fowl to serve. <i>Dì makaúpa ang ugis kay daug sa usa,</i> The white cock cannot cover because it is afraid of the other one. <form>inupáhan</form> <pos>n</pos> the chick that results from a particular mating. <i>King mga pisúa inupáhan ni sa ugis,</i> These chicks are the offspring of the white cock.

<p id=20342><form>úpà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> chew food for s.o. else, esp. for a child to eat. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> spit s.t. out. <i>Giupáan ku sa núkus sa íyang átà,</i> The squid squirted its ink out at me. <i>Akung giúpà ang midisína kay pait kaáyu,</i> I spat out the medicine because it was very bitter. <pos>n</pos> pulp left after sucking the juice of s.t. chewed. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> chewed food for s.o. else to eat.

<p id=20343><form>upak</form> <pos>n</pos> a piece or part of s.t. in cake or bar form. <i>Usa ka upak kámay,</i> A cake of sugar. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; a1]</itype> cut s.t. into bars or pieces; get broken. <i>Upaka únà ang mahariyal únà ibaligyà,</i> Cut the candy into cakes before you sell it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> break or cut off a piece for s.o. <i>Giupakan nákù siyag duha ka báhin sa tsukulit,</i> I broke off two pieces of the chocolate bar for him.

<p id=20344><form>úpak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bark</tr> of trees. <i>Ang úpak maáyung isugnud,</i> Bark of trees make good fuel. <i>Usa ka úpak tungug,</i> A strip of mangrove bark. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> gather, take the bark off of trees. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB2; a2]</itype> <tr>peel</tr> off, get peeled off. <i>Ínit sa adlaw ang nakaúpak sa íyang pánit,</i> His skin peeled in the heat of the sun. <i>Nagkaupak ang hapin sa diksiyunaryu,</i> The cover of the dictionary is working its way off.

<p id=20345><form>úpal</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. soft, fine-weave cloth.

<p id=20346><form>upas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> lose flavor from being left uncovered. <i>Muupas (maupas) ang sigarilyu ug byáan nga abyirtu,</i> The cigarettes lose their flavor if you leave them around open. <number>2</number> lose fertility. <i>Muupas ang yútà ug dílì abunúhan,</i> The land will lose its fertility if you don&apos;t fertilize it. <pos>a</pos> lacking in flavor or potency.

<p id=20347><form>úpas</form> <pos>n</pos> banana leaf stalk.

<p id=20348><form>upat</form> <ix>numeral</ix> <tr>four</tr>. <i>Upat ka buuk bátà,</i> Four children. <pos>v</pos> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tulu</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; ug (ang) mata</form> <pos>a</pos> having glasses (four-eyed) (humorous). <form>&mdash; ang tiil</form> for a wife to have clandestine relations with another man (humorous). <i>Inig talikud sa bána sa trabáhu, upat dáyuy tiil sa asáwa,</i> When the husband leaves for work his wife meets her lover (lit. gets four legs). <form>ika-</form> <tr>fourth</tr>. <form>kap-atan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>forty</tr>. <form>maka-, ka-</form> <tr>four times</tr>. <form>tag-, tagup-at</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> four apiece. <number>2</number> odds of four to three in betting. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC2; c]</itype> give four to three odds in betting. <i>Gitagupátan ang ámung manuk,</i> Our cock was given odds of four to three. <form>tinagup-at</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> do by fours.

<p id=20349><form>upaup</form> <xr>= &dagger;<sc>alupaup</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>álup</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p id=20350><form>upaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bald</tr>, lacking hair on the head. <number>2</number> bald, devoid of vegetation. <i>Upaw nga mga búkid,</i> <tr>Deforested</tr> mountains. <number>3</number> <tr>infertile</tr>. <pb n=1105><i>Upaw nang dáan ang yútà sa Marigundun,</i> The land in Marigondon has always been infertile. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> grow bald. <i>Naupaw ka sa hilabihang pininsar,</i> You have grown bald from worrying too much. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> be, become denuded of forest. <number>3</number> become <tr>barren</tr>, infertile. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make s.o. bald or s.t. barren. <i>Giupáwan ku siya kay gikutu,</i> I cut off her hair bald because she had lice. <form>bísan pag mangaúpaw</form> <tr>come what may</tr>, <tr>by hook or by crook</tr> (lit. even if I go bald trying). <i>Bísan pag mangaúpaw magdátù giyud ku ug mag-idad kug kwarinta,</i> By hook or by crook I&apos;ll become rich by the time I&apos;m forty.

<p id=20351><form>upaw<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> block a shot in basketball. <i>Luksu inigsiyát arun dì ka upawan,</i> Jump when you shoot so that your shot won&apos;t be blocked. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> prove much better than s.t., putting it to shame. <i>I, bag-u ka mag kutsi. Upawan mag akúa,</i> My, you&apos;ve got a new car! It puts mine to shame.

<p id=20352><form>upay, úpay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>heal</tr> a wound or sore. <i>Nagkaupay na ang ákung mga núka,</i> My scabies are healing. <number>2</number> <tr>relieve</tr> emotionally. <i>Ang ímung mga tambag mauy nakaupay (nakapaupay) sa ákung mga kaguul,</i> Your advice has relieved my worries. <form>ka-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>relief</tr>, <tr>healing</tr>. <form>ka-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> healing as a resultant state. <i>Walay kaupayun sa ákung mga kagul-ánan,</i> There is no relief for my sorrows. <pos>a</pos> at the verge of being healed.

<p id=20353><form>up bit</form> <pos>n</pos> off-beat, k.o. fast <tr>dance</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do the off-beat.

<p id=20354><form>uphag</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>uninteresting</tr>. <i>Nagpanghuy-ab ku nga nagtan-aw sa uphag kaáyu nga sini,</i> I was yawning looking at the <tr>boring</tr> movie. <number>2</number> having a dry, not cared-for look. <i>Uphag kaáyu ang ákung buhuk kay way hisù,</i> My hair looks <tr>drab</tr> and not groomed because I didn&apos;t put oil in it. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B156]</itype> be uninteresting. <i>Wà nay manan-aw sa dráma nga nag-uphag,</i> Nobody likes to see a stage play that is boring. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become drab and not well-groomed.

<p id=20355><form>uphak</form> <xr>= <sc>hup-ak</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20356><form>úpin</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>open</tr>, <tr>frank</tr>. <i>Amígung úpin kaáyu nga dílì maúlawng mutug-ans íyang kagíkan,</i> A very open person who doesn&apos;t feel embarrassed telling about his origins. <number>2</number> <tr>outspoken</tr>. <i>Úpin kaáyu siyang musaway sa administrasiyun,</i> He is very open in his criticisms of the administration. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>klús</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; kard</form> <xr>= <sc>tindída</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>tind&icaron;r</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20357><form>upiniyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>opinion</tr>, <tr>judgment</tr>. <i>Pamináwun ta ang upiniyun sa usag-usa,</i> Let&apos;s listen to each person&apos;s opinion.

<p id=20358><form>úpin tsik</form> <pos>n</pos> in chess, a situation where one&apos;s king or queen is open to checkmate.

<p id=20359><form>upira<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> perform an operation. <i>Upirahan ta ang ímung hubag,</i> We&apos;ll have to <tr>operate</tr> your boil. <form>-siyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>operation</tr>.

<p id=20360><form>upira<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>opera</tr>. <form>-tik(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> having an <tr>operatic</tr> quality, with plenty of tremolo (humorous).

<p id=20361><form>upirarya</form> <pos>n</pos> a dressmaker&apos;s helper who usually does the finishing touches, e.g. sewing on buttons. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> work as a dressmaker&apos;s helper.

<p id=20362><form>upiraryu</form> <pos>n</pos> a barber or tailor who works in s.o. else&apos;s shop on a piecework basis. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; c1]</itype> be, become an employee of this sort. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> work as a barber or tailor in s.o. else&apos;s shop.

<p id=20363><form>upirisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>operation</tr> to achieve some object. <i>Upirisyun sa pagsíkup sa numiru únung huk,</i> Operation to capture the number one Huk. <number>2</number> surgical operation. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> for an industrial enterprise to be in operation.

<p id=20364><form>upirit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>operate</tr> a machine or device. <i>Dakug swildu ang makamaung muupirit ug buldúsir,</i> One who knows how to operate a bulldozer is highly paid. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>upirisyun</sc>, <ix>v</ix>.</xr> <form>-ur(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> one who operates or takes charge of machinery. <i>Upirítur sa buldúsir,</i> Bulldozer <tr>operator</tr>. <number>2</number> one who owns a transportation line. <i>Upirítur sa Atlas taksi,</i> The owner of the Atlas taxi. <number>3</number> radio or telegraph operator. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> work as the operator of machinery. <number>2</number> be, become a radio or telegraph operator.

<p id=20365><form>upiríta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>operetta</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6c1]</itype> have or stage an operetta.

<p id=20366><form>upirturyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>offertory</tr> in the mass. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> say the offertory.

<p id=20367><form>úpis</form> <xr>= <sc>lúpis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20368><form>upisína</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>office</tr>. <number>2</number> office, <tr>work day</tr>. <i>May upisína ba tas Lúnis?</i> Do we have office on Monday? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23; b(1)]</itype> go to the office, be in the office. <i>Muupisína ku ug píkas adlaw lang,</i> I&apos;ll be in the office only half day. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>hold office</tr>. <i>Mag-upisína ta maskig pista upisiyal,</i> We will hold office though it will be a holiday. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make an office s.w.

<p id=20369><form>upisir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>officer</tr> of an organization or in the armed forces. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; c1]</itype> be, become an officer.

<p id=20370><form>upisiyal</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>official</tr>, a person holding an office or position of authority. <i>Upisiyal sa militar,</i> Military officer. <number>1a</number> any of the chess pieces other than the pawns. <number>2</number> official, coming from the proper authority. <form>pista &mdash;</form> <tr>public holiday</tr>, officially declared. <form>kandidátu &mdash;</form> <tr>official candidate</tr> endorsed by the party. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B16; c1]</itype> be, become, make into an official. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; b6c1]</itype> be, become official. <i>Maupisyal na gánì ang ímung apuwintmint,</i> <pb n=1106>Once your appointment becomes official. <form>-is(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>upisiyal</sc>, <i>n1</i> (plural).</xr>

<p id=20371><form>upisiyun</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>upisyu</sc>, <i>n1 2.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>apisiyun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20372><form>upisyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>occupation</tr>. <i>Wà kuy láing upisyu run, panahì ra,</i> I have no other job other than sewing at this time. <number>2</number> s.t. to keep oneself busy with. <i>Wà ka bay láing upisyu gawas sa pagpamantay?</i> Don&apos;t you have anything better to do than nose into other people&apos;s business? <number>3</number> religious office, set of prayers one has vowed to recite. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> make s.t. one&apos;s line of work. <number>2</number> occupy oneself with. <number>2a</number> always do. <i>Nag-upisyu lang kug trabáhu. Wà na giyuy lingawlíngaw,</i> All I do is work. I never have fun.

<p id=20373><form>upluk</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> lacking in ability, not up to what would normally be expected of one. <i>Upluk kaáyu sa klási,</i> Very slow to understand in class. <i>Upluk duktúra,</i> A <tr>half-baked</tr> doctor. <number>1a</number> <tr>foolish</tr>, <tr>stupid</tr>. <number>2</number> fond of playing tricks, pranking with a straight face. <i>Upluk kaáyu siya ug dì ka pahiulian sa íyang tistis,</i> He is very fond of playing jokes with a straight face, and he never lets on that he has played a joke. <number>3</number> fond of asking for things, but not willing to give when one has s.t. and is asked. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become half-baked, <tr>dull</tr>, or <tr>stupid</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b5]</itype> <tr>cheat</tr> s.o. out of s.t. by hoodwinking him. <i>Uplúka (uplúki) lang sa kwarta apan ayawg pangasaw-a,</i> Just cheat her out of her money. Don&apos;t marry her.

<p id=20374><form>uprisar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> offer for sale. <i>Dúnay nag-uprisar ug sáma niíni nga barátu ra,</i> Somebody offered s.t. like this for sale cheaper. <i>Giuprisar ang ílang balay ug yútà,</i> They put their house and lot up for sale.

<p id=20375><form>uprisir</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>offer</tr>. <i>Dì ku muuprisir nímu ug pagkáun nga dì maáyung pagkalútù,</i> I won&apos;t offer you food that is not well cooked. <i>Giuprisihan ku níyag trabáhu,</i> He offered me a job. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; a]</itype> <tr>force</tr>, <tr>compel</tr> s.o. to do s.t. <i>Kawad-un ang nakauprisir (nakapauprisir) níya pagpangútang,</i> Poverty forced him to take things on credit. <i>Uprisira siya pagpabáyad,</i> Force him to pay.

<p id=20376><form>ups</form> expression uttered on exerting great effort, esp. in lifting weight.

<p id=20377><form>uptikal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>optical store</tr>.

<p id=20378><form>uptiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>optometrist</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>optician</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> be, become an optometrist or optician. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> take up optometry.

<p id=20379><form>úpu</form> <xr>= <sc>kalabásang putì</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>kalabásà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20380><form>upù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>duck</tr>, <tr>dodge</tr> to avoid a blow or hide. <i>Ug wà siya makaupù maigù giyud ang íyang náwung,</i> Had he not dodged, he would have gotten it in the face. <i>Wà níya iupù ang íyang úlu mau nga napangkà,</i> He did not lower his head so he bumped it.

<p id=20381><form>upud</form> <ix>as a predicate modifier:</ix> <xr>= <sc>usab</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> go, <tr>bring with</tr>. <i>Nag-úpud sila sa sini,</i> They went to the movies together. <i>Unsa pa may updun mu?</i> What are you going with me for? <i>Giupdan ku siya sa pagsúgat sa barku,</i> I <tr>accompanied</tr> her to meet the boat. <i>Iupud nà siya ninyu panúruy,</i> Take him with you when you go out. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do s.t. <tr>again</tr>, <tr>repeat</tr> doing s.t. <i>Dúna giyuy nag-upud sa ákung búhat unyà nasayup ra ba hinúun,</i> S.o. did my work again, and has spoiled it instead. <i>Dì maáyuug updun (iupud) nang buháta,</i> Don&apos;t repeat what you did. <pos>n</pos> <tr>companion</tr>. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>upud</sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr>

<p id=20382><form>upung</form> <pos>n</pos> bunch of stems or stalks, enough to grasp in the two hands. <i>Pila ka upung ang ímung naáni?</i> How many bunches have you harvested? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> get a bunch of stalks, put in a bunch. <i>Upunga ang humay,</i> Tie the rice into bunches. <form>-in-, upung-upung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> be all one of the same height. <number>1</number> for children to be so close they are almost of the same height. <i>Mag-upung-upung (mag-inupung) ang inyung anak ug dílì mu magkuntrul,</i> Your children will be so close they&apos;ll be almost the same height if you don&apos;t practice birth control. <number>2</number> for a crowd to be so great one can&apos;t distinguish the different heights. <i>Nag-inupung ang mga táwu sa plása,</i> There was a sea of people in the plaza.

<p id=20383><form>upunir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>oppose</tr>, contend forcefully against. <i>Nag-upunir gihápun sila sa ímung paági kay walà sila kagustu,</i> They are still opposing your procedure because they don&apos;t like it. <i>Ayaw ug upunihi ang ákung risulusiyun,</i> Don&apos;t oppose my resolution.

<p id=20384><form>up-up</form> <xr>= <sc>alup-up</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>álup</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p id=20385><form>upurtunista</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>opportunistic</tr>. <i>Upurtunista kaáyung tawhána, mubalhinbalhin ug partídu,</i> You are an <tr>opportunist</tr>, changing parties whenever it suits your purpose. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become opportunistic.

<p id=20386><form>upus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. long used up until only a <tr>stub</tr> is left. <i>Upus sa kandílà,</i> <tr>Stump</tr> of a candle. <number>2</number> cigarette or cigar stub. <i>Nagpatákà lag butang sa íyang upus,</i> She just puts her cigar stub anywhere. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> wear s.t. down. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> for one&apos;s years or patience to be used up. <i>Naupus na ang ákung paílub,</i> My patience has come to an end. <i>Nagkaupus na ang íyang kinabúhì,</i> His life is slowly coming to an end.

<p id=20387><form>upusisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>opposition</tr>, <tr>resistance</tr>. <i>Way upusisiyun kanang balaúra,</i> There is no opposition to that bill. <number>2</number> <tr>opposition party</tr> in Congress. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be in, join the opposition.

<pb n=1107>

<p id=20388><form>upuy-upuy, upuy-úpuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P]</itype> behave meekly or timidly before s.o., usually from fear or lack of self-confidence. <i>Miupuy-upuy pagsulud ang suluguun sa lawak sa íyang agálun,</i> The maid entered her master&apos;s room timidly. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> keep to oneself. <i>Nagpaupuy-upuy lang siyas suuk ug wà muapil sa kukabildu,</i> He kept to himself in the corner and did not participate in the conversation.

<p id=20389><form>upyu</form> <xr>= <sc>ampiyun<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=20390><form>urabang</form> <xr>= <sc>uyabang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20391><form>uradur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>orator</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a2]</itype> be, become an orator.

<p id=20392><form>urakan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hurricane</tr>, name reserved for strong typhoons. <i>Ang urakan sa 1912,</i> The Great Hurricane of 1912.

<p id=20393><form>urakulu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>oracle</tr>, <tr>prophet</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>prophecy</tr>. <i>Nagnúud ang urakulu,</i> The prophecy came true.

<p id=20394><form>úral</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>oral</tr>. <i>Púru úral ang ámung iksámin,</i> We had all oral exams. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> communicate orally. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> eat alone without anything to go with it (humorous). <i>Maáyung klásis kan-un, maúral,</i> A good variety of rice that is good even if eaten all by itself. <i>Urálun ta na lang ning sinugbang isdà kay walà na may kan-un,</i> Let&apos;s just eat the broiled fish alone because there&apos;s no more rice. <number>2</number> do s.t. relying on one&apos;s memory or knowledge without any other aid. <i>Bilib ku nímug makaúral kag úlì niíning makináha,</i> I would really be impressed if you could put the machine together without referring to the manual. <number>3</number> eat with the bare hands s.t. that should be eaten with silverware. <i>Urála na lang nà ninyung pagkáun kay kápuy ipanghúgas unyà,</i> Just eat with your fingers to save washing the silverware.

<p id=20395><form>uran</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put s.t. on for daily wear. <i>Nag-uran kug dáan kay mamanday ku,</i> I am wearing old clothes because I&apos;ll do some carpentry work. <pos>n</pos> s.t. worn casually. <i>Ang sinínà níyas balay mau puy uran sa uma,</i> The clothes he wears around the house is what he wears in the fields. <form>uran-úran</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; c6]</itype> <number>1</number> wear s.t. in a casual way. <number>2</number> use s.t. in a situation it is too good for. <i>Anúgun sa ímung dagway nga giuran-úran nímug suruyg isdà,</i> You have a lovely face. What a pity to waste it on peddling fish! <form>ig-l-/r-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> clothes usually worn for a certain job.

<p id=20396><form>urang-utan, urang-utang</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>orang-utan</tr>.

<p id=20397><form>uran-uran</form> <tr>for some time</tr>; <tr>for quite a time</tr>. <i>Uran-uran giyud námung paábut nímu,</i> We have been waiting for you for some time.

<p id=20398><form>úra pru núbis</form> <ix>phrase of the litany:</ix> pray for us.

<p id=20399><form>uráray</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> be situated in a low place or elevation. <i>Lungsud nga nag-uráray sa tiilans búkid,</i> A town nestled at the foot of a mountain. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> draw oneself close to, <tr>snuggle</tr> close to. <i>Mipauráray siya sa ákung buktun úsà matúlug,</i> He <tr>nestled</tr> in my arms before going to sleep.

<p id=20400><form>uraryu</form> <pos>n</pos> hand of a clock or watch. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> attach the hands of a clock or watch.

<p id=20401><form>úras</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>hour</tr>. <i>Pila ka úras ang byáhi?</i> How many hours does the trip take? <number>2</number> <tr>time of day</tr>. <i>Unsay úras?</i> What <tr>time</tr> is it? <i>Unsang urása siyang miabut,</i> What time did he arrive? <number>3</number> time that s.t. is done. <i>Alas utsu ang úras sa ámung panihápun,</i> Our supper time is at eight o&apos;clock. <number>3a</number> time that s.t. inevitable will finally happen. <i>Haduul na ang úras sa masakitun,</i> The sick man&apos;s hour is close at hand. <i>Úras na tingáli nímu kay nagsakit man ang ímung tiyan,</i> It must be the time now (for you to have your baby) because your stomach hurts. <number>3b</number> point at which s.t. happened. <i>Nag-uwan sa úras sa ílang pag-abut,</i> It was raining at the time of their arrival. <i>Way mitábang nákù sa úras sa ákung kalisud,</i> No one helped me when I was in trouble. <number>3c</number> <formx>dì &mdash;</formx> for s.t. to happen at an unsuitable time. <i>Tingálig manganak ka ug dì úras ning ímung pagkahúlug,</i> You&apos;ll probably give birth prematurely because you fell. <number>4</number> a period or time available for doing s.t. <i>Wà kuy úras nga itan-aw ug sini,</i> I don&apos;t have time to go to movies. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>time</tr>, mark the time. <i>Akuy muúras sa íyang pag-abut,</i> I&apos;ll mark down the time of his arrival. <number>2</number> <itype>[B256; b(1)]</itype> be an hour, <tr>take an hour</tr>. <i>Giurásan ang ákung pagtrabáhu sa ímung kálù,</i> It took me one hour to make your hat. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>clock</tr>, <tr>watch</tr>. <form>-in-</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>by the hour</tr>. <i>Inuras ang ímung trabáhu,</i> You work by the hour.

<p id=20402><form>urasanta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Holy Hour devotion</tr>, a one-hour devotion offered to the Sacred Heart of Jesus led by a priest and said once a month in church. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> offer a Holy Hour devotion. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> attend or offer a Holy Hour devotion.

<p id=20403><form>urasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> special set prayers in the liturgy. <number>1a</number> a magical formula in Latin or pseudo-Latin which has curative or other magical powers, esp. as <i>sumpà.</i> It is applied by reciting or by putting written representations on or near whatever it is supposed to affect. The <ix>urasiyun</ix> is effective only in the hands of the owner. <number>2</number> the <tr>angelus prayer</tr> said by the family in the evening, and sometimes at dawn. <number>3</number> <tr>twilight</tr> (lit. the time when the angelus is said). <number>3a</number> the bell announcing the <pb n=1108>angelus. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> pray the <ix>urasiyun</ix> in the liturgy or the angelus. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> treat with a magic formula. <i>Giurasiyunan níya ang irù. Wà kapaghut,</i> He uttered a magical formula at the dog and it couldn&apos;t bark. <number>3</number> <itype>[B1256; b4]</itype> for evening to fall. <i>Naurasiyun na lang. Walà pa giyud muabut ang gisúgù,</i> It got to be evening and the boy we sent on an errand still hadn&apos;t arrived. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> one who possesses an <ix>urasiyun</ix>, <i>1a.</i>

<p id=20404><form>uray<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. sickness of supernatural origin which causes women to abort, giving birth to an octopus or other sea creature (actually a misshapen fetus). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12SP; b4]</itype> become the victim of <ix>uray</ix>. <i>Malagmit urayan ka ug pakabuntagan nímu ang ímung panti,</i> You&apos;re likely to become a victim of <ix>uray</ix> if you don&apos;t take your panties in.

<p id=20405><form>uray<sub>2</sub>, úray</form> title of respect for a related woman older than the speaker, esp. an elder sister, aunt, or cousin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> address s.o. <ix>úray</ix>.

<p id=20406><form>urbanidad</form> <form>way &mdash;</form> <tr>unrefined</tr>, unversed in urban ways. <i>Way urbanidad. Dì ka kamaung mangáyug katahúran,</i> You are a boor. You don&apos;t know to greet people.

<p id=20407><form>urbanisar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become <tr>civilized</tr>, <tr>polished</tr> in one&apos;s ways. <i>Ang mga tulunghaan makaurbanisar (makapaurbanisar) sa táwu,</i> Schools teach people refinement and civilization.

<p id=20408><form>urdín</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>religious order</tr>.

<p id=20409><form>urdin</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>order</tr> given by a higher authority. <i>Kinahanglan buhátun mu karun dáyun. Urdin kanà,</i> You must do it immediately. That&apos;s an order. <number>2</number> order, <tr>command</tr>. <i>Urdin diaristu,</i> <tr>Warrant of arrest</tr>. <i>Urdin sa pagpangusísa,</i> <tr>Search warrant</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> issue an order. <number>2</number> command s.o. to do s.t. <form>-ansa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ordinance</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> enact into an ordinance. <form>urdinansahun</form> <pos>n</pos> things to be made into an ordinance.

<p id=20410><form>urdinar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b26]</itype> <tr>ordain</tr> into priesthood. <form>urdinasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ordination</tr>.

<p id=20411><form>urdinaryu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>ordinary</tr>, not especial. <i>Urdinaryu kaáyu ang ílang mga butang sa báy,</i> They just have ordinary things in their house. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> use s.t. that should be special for ordinary wear. <i>Dì ku muurdinaryu ug mahalun nga sinínà,</i> I won&apos;t use expensive clothes for ordinary wear. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become ordinary. <i>Sa nadúgay na, naurdinaryu na lang ang taas nga buhuk,</i> After some time it became an ordinary thing to have long hair.

<p id=20412><form>urdir</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>command</tr>, give an order. <i>Kinsay nag-urdir ninyu sa pag-atras?</i> Who commanded you to retreat? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> order s.t. in a restaurant or cafe, <i>Unsa may inyung urdírun?</i> What will you <tr>order</tr>? <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>order</tr>, <tr>command</tr>. <number>2</number> item ordered in a restaurant or cafe. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> buy by mail order. <i>Magpaurdir ku ug bisiklíta pára nímu,</i> I will buy you a bicycle by mail order. <form>máni &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>money order</tr> or <tr>telegraphic transfer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> send a money order or telegraphic transfer. <form>mid tu &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>made-to-order</tr>.

<p id=20413><form>urgan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>electric organ</tr>, of the kind used by combos. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> play the electric organ.

<p id=20414><form>urgandi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>organdy</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> wear, make into organdy cloth.

<p id=20415><form>urganisar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>organize</tr>, bring s.t. into being. <i>Nag-urganisar pa siya sa Lihiyun ni Maríya,</i> She is organizing a Legion of Mary unit. <form>urganisasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>organization</tr>.

<p id=20416><form>urganista</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>urganu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20417><form>urgansa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>embossed cloth</tr>.

<p id=20418><form>urganu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>organ</tr>, a large musical instrument. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b(1)]</itype> have, be accompanied by an organ. <form>urganista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>organist</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> be, become an organist.

<p id=20419><form>urhinti</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>urgent</tr>, calling for immediate attention. <i>Urhinti ba kaáyu ang túyù mu kaníya?</i> Do you have a very urgent purpose in visiting her?

<p id=20420><form>urig</form> <pos>n</pos> intense <tr>sexual desire</tr> of a person or an animal, esp. women (euphemism for <ix>ulag</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be in a highly-sexed mood. <i>Nagkaurig na nang bayhána human makasuway,</i> That woman became <tr>lustful</tr> after she had experienced sex once.

<p id=20421><form>urihinal</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>original</tr>, <tr>first copy</tr> of several struck at the same time. <i>Ang urihinal nga kupya mauy ímung tagúan,</i> You keep the original copy for yourself. <number>2</number> an original of a work of art. <number>3</number> <tr>script</tr>, copy of one&apos;s lines in a drama.

<p id=20422><form>*urímaw</form> (colloquial) <form>pa&N;-</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>urímus</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>pangurímus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20423><form>urímus</form> word used in the novena asking the congregation to pray the final prayer. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> say the concluding prayer. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256N]</itype> be <tr>done in</tr>, <tr>killed</tr> (get so people will be saying <i>&apos;urímus&apos;</i> for one). <i>Ug matumbahan kas káhuy maurímus ka,</i> If that tree falls on you, you will be <tr>done for</tr>. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> do oneself irreparable harm which sometimes results in death. <i>Hala, ínum arun mangurímus ka,</i> Go ahead, drink, so you can do yourself in.

<p id=20424><form>úrins</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>orange</tr> fruit or tree. <number>2</number> orange in color. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B125]</itype> become orange in color. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear s.t. orange in color. <form>&mdash; dyús</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>orange juice</tr>.

<p id=20425><form>urinúla</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chamber pot</tr> or <tr>bedpan</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> use a chamber pot.

<pb n=1109>

<p id=20426><form>urit</form> <xr>= <sc>hala</sc>.</xr> <i>Urit! Adtu na mi,</i> <tr>All right</tr>! We are going now. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>cease</tr> doing s.t. and <tr>call it a day</tr>. <i>Muurit kug sayu kay nagláin ang ákung láwas,</i> I think I&apos;ll call it a day as I&apos;m not feeling well.

<p id=20427><form>urkid</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>orchid</tr>. <form>maripúsa &mdash;</form> butterfly orchid: <bio>Phalaenopsis amabilis</bio>. <form>taygir &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> variety of orchid with spotted leaves and petals. <form>&mdash; tri</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>orchid tree</tr>, ornamental tree, the flowers of which resemble orchids. Various species have various colors: <bio>Bauhinia spp</bio>. <form>walingwaling &mdash;</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>walingwaling</sc>.</xr> <form>wayitdab &mdash;</form> white dove orchid: <bio>Dendrobium crumenatum</bio>.

<p id=20428><form>urkilyas</form> <xr>= <sc>trinsas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20429><form>urkista, urkistra</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>orchestra</tr>, the main floor of a movie house. <number>2</number> a group of musicians usually playing string instruments.

<p id=20430><form>urkiyu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>honest-to-goodness</tr>, <tr>genuine</tr>. <i>Ang urkiyu nga sugarul dílì mupusta ug sinintabus,</i> An honest-to-goodness gambler does not bet nickles and dimes. <i>Kining kapíha urkiyu, dílì puyay,</i> This is genuine coffee not ersatz.

<p id=20431><form>urlun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>orlon</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> wear orlon.

<p id=20432><form>urna</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>glass case</tr> where a religious image or s.t. precious is kept. <number>2</number> <tr>ballot box</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> place or encase s.t. of religious importance in a glass case.

<p id=20433><form>ursa</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for dough to rise. <number>2</number> <itype>[A123P; b4]</itype> for a disease that breaks out in s.t. to come out. <i>Ang tubà makaursa (makapaursa) sa dálap,</i> Palm toddy can make measles appear and hasten development. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> do s.t. with a great amount of force. <i>Iursa ang inyung tanang kusug arun nà ninyu maalsa,</i> Exert all your strength so you can lift that up. <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>leaven</tr>. <i>Tubà usáhay ang paursa sa bingka,</i> Palm toddy is sometimes used to make the rice cake rise. <number>2</number> medicine used to make a disease appear and hasten development.

<p id=20434><form>*urti</form> <form>walay &mdash;</form> without restraint, without stopping. <i>Way urti ang hukasay ning salídang bumba,</i> This dirty movie has love scenes without end. <i>Ayawg panagána. Way urti ang káun dinhi,</i> Don&apos;t hesitate. No one holds back on their food around here. <form>urtiurti walay &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>walay urti</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> do s.t. with restraint (usually in negative sentences).

<p id=20435><form>urtikarya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hives</tr>. <i>Tambal kini sa sakit sa pánit ug sa urtikarya,</i> This is a treatment for skin diseases and hives. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a12]</itype> have an attack of hives.

<p id=20436><form>úru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gold</tr>. <form>&mdash;, pláta, mála</form> gold, silver, bad luck: a formula for determining whether a household will have good or bad luck. As one climbs the stairs the formula is recited one word for each step. If one reaches the top with <ix>úru</ix>, the house will have exceptionally good luck; with <ix>pláta</ix>, fairly good luck; with <ix>mála</ix>, bad luck. <form>&mdash; tsína</form> <tr>24-carat gold</tr>. <form>búda di-</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>búda</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> cover teeth with gold capping. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> be in gold.

<p id=20437><form>urud</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>pregnant</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be, become pregnant.

<p id=20438><form>urug, úrug</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fashion</tr>, <tr>style</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> go into style, <tr>vogue</tr>. <i>Naúrug na run sa pagpalupad ug tabánug,</i> Kite-flying is the latest <tr>fad</tr>.

<p id=20439><form>urug-úrug</form> <xr>= <sc>ulug-úlug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20440><form>úruk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> for a top to spin fast so as to stay exactly vertical. <i>Dì kaúruk ang kasing ug hínay ang túyuk,</i> A top is not immobile when it spins slow.

<p id=20441><form>úrul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> take all the hair or leaves off. <i>Akuy muúrul sa ímung buhuk,</i> I&apos;ll <tr>shave</tr> your hair. <i>Urúlun sa kanding ang mga dáhun sa tanum ug anhà nà nímu ihigut,</i> The goat will eat all the leaves of your plants if you tie it there.

<p id=20442><form>úrum</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>nightmare</tr>, dream where one is extremely frightened but cannot move or shout. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> have a nightmare. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> prone to having nightmares. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> get prone to having nightmares.

<p id=20443><form>úrung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2S6; c1]</itype> <tr>stop</tr>, cause one to do so. <i>Nag-urung ang puntírus rilu,</i> The watch hand is not moving. <i>Iúrung (urúngun) nákù ang ákung pagtabakù,</i> I&apos;ll <tr>quit</tr> smoking. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> be <tr>idle</tr>, <tr>unemployed</tr>. <i>Mag-úrung lang únà siya rung tuíga kay wà may bakanti pára sa maistra,</i> She will be <tr>out of work</tr> this year because there are no vacancies for teachers. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> suspend or dismiss from work. <i>Paurúngun kas trabáhu ug sad-an ka,</i> You will be dismissed from work if you are guilty. <form>urung-úrung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> do s.t. <tr>on and off</tr>.

<p id=20444><form>úrung<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>úrum</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20445><form>Urúpa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Europe</tr>. <form>ilagà sa &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>guinea pig</tr>.

<p id=20446><form>úrus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S3P]</itype> <tr>sizzle</tr>. <i>Muúrus ang unud ug isugba sa káyu,</i> Meat sizzles if you broil it over fire. <number>2</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> sizzle with sexual urges. <i>Giurúsan nang bayúta kay nanghíkap,</i> This fairy is sizzling for sex again. He grabbed me. <pos>n</pos> sound of <tr>sizzling</tr>. <form>urus-urus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> be <tr>intense</tr>, as if sizzling. <i>Kapugngan pa ang bahà kay sa gugmang gaurus-urus,</i> It is easier to control a flood than a sizzling love.

<p id=20447><form>úrus<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> suit of the Spanish cards in the shape of a gold coin. <number>2</number> suit of circles in mahjong. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> draw an <ix>úrus</ix> card or mahjong piece.

<p id=20448><form>uruy</form> <number>1</number> particle with a statement that disabuses <pb n=1110>the interlocutor of his misconceptions, softening the blunting effect of the contradiction. <i>&lsquo;Wà pa mahuman ang trabáhu?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Human na uruy!&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;They didn&apos;t finish the work?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Yes, they did.&rsquo; <i>Búhì pa uruy siya,</i> He is still alive. (You believe he died, but he is still alive.) <number>2</number> expressing <tr>contempt</tr> for s.t. the interlocutor did. <i>Hilakhílak uruy, mau rag dílì siyay nakaingun áning tanang kasámuk,</i> Crying indeed! As if she were not the cause of all these troubles. <i>Gibaratúhan ka uruy ánà mu ra ug ikay mubáyad!</i> Oh indeed. You think it is cheap. Well, you can say that when you pay the bill. <number>3</number> <formx><r>[<ix>noun</ix>]</r>-a ba &mdash;</formx> what do you mean [noun], when all there is is ... <i>Bisitáha ba uruy, si Pidru ra diay,</i> What visitor! It is only Pedro. <number>4</number> <formx>ngánu ba &mdash;</formx> so what if ... <i>Ngánu ba uruy ug dílì siya muanhi. Dì magsakit ang ákung tiyan,</i> So what if he doesn&apos;t come. I&apos;m not going to get a stomachache from it. <number>5</number> <formx>ada &mdash;</formx> particle expressing resignation to s.t. bad and indicating the speaker doesn&apos;t care. <i>Ada uruy. Mabúhì man gihápun ta áning trabahúa,</i> Oh, anyway, I can still make a living with this work (even though I might like to have s.t. better). <number>5a</number> expressing contempt in dismissing s.t. as inconsequential. <form>uruy-úruy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2; a3]</itype> be gentle with one another, instead of treating each other with the usual gruffness. <i>Mag-uruy-úruy ta kay wà na tay ginikánan,</i> Let us go easy on each other because we don&apos;t have parents any more. <i>Bisag bantúgan siya makig-uruy-úruy siya sa ingun nátù,</i> Though he is famous, he goes easy on people like us.

<p id=20449><form>*úruy</form> <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> liquor made by distilling the juice from the nipa or coconut palm bud.

<p id=20450><form>ús</form> <xr>= <sc>ulus</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ulhus</sc>.</xr>

<!-- Check entry near ka a -->

<p id=20451><form>usa<sub>1</sub></form> <ix>numeral</ix> <tr>one</tr>. <number>1</number> <formx>&mdash; ka a</formx> one. <i>Sa usa ka púlung siyay nidaug,</i> In short, he won. <number>b</number> a certain (unnamed) one. <i>May usa ka hárì nga taas kaáyu ug búngut,</i> There was once a king who had a very long beard. <formx>&mdash; niánà ka <r>[<ix>word referring to time</ix>]</r></formx> one [time]. <i>Usa niánà ka adlaw, miadtu siya sa hárì,</i> One day, he went to the king. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; nga</formx> the other one of the two or more. <i>Anhi ka áning manúka pusta? Adtu kus usa,</i> Will you bet on this cock? I will bet on the other one. <i>Adtu líkù sa usang iskína,</i> Turn into the next corner. <number>2a</number> the other day, week, month, year that passed. <i>Dinhi siya sa usang adlaw,</i> He was here the other day. <number>3</number> <formx>ísig (isig) &mdash;</formx> each, each one. <i>Ísig (isig) usa ninyu mubáyad nákù ug singku písus,</i> Each (each one) of you will pay me five pesos. <number>4</number> <formx>&mdash; ug &mdash;</formx> each and every one. <i>Usag usa ninyu magdala sa íyang galamitun,</i> Each and every one of you must bring his own tools. <number>5a</number> <formx>&mdash; usab, sad, upud</formx> [so-and-so] is another one who will [do]. <i>Usa sad siya sa mungadtu,</i> He is also a member of the group going there. <number>5b</number> <formx>&mdash; ka pa</formx> you&apos;re another one who does [such-and-such a bad thing]. <i>Usa ka pang danghag,</i> You&apos;re another careless fellow. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> be, become <tr>resolved</tr> or <tr>decided</tr>. <i>Ug mausa pa untà ang ákung hunàhúnà pagbíyà kaníya!</i> If only I could make up my mind to leave her! <number>2</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> do s.t. with one hand where both hands are usually used. <i>Gaan ra ning aswátun, usaan ra nákù ni,</i> This is easy to pick up. I&apos;ll do it with one hand. <i>Sumbagay ta, usaan ta ka,</i> Let&apos;s have a fight. I&apos;ll beat you with one hand. <number>3</number> <formx>walay ma-</formx> <tr>no one</tr>, not a single soul. <i>Walay mausang mitábang kanákù,</i> Not a single person helped me. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C; a12]</itype> group things together in one. <i>Mag-úsa lang ta dinhis kwartu,</i> Let&apos;s just stay together in the room. <i>Usáhun ta na lang ni arun usa ray sudlan,</i> Let&apos;s just put this together so we use only one container. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> <xr>= <sc>usa</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr> <form>hi-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126C3]</itype> be, become <tr>united</tr> or <tr>unanimous</tr>. <i>Naghiúsa sila sa pagpapuyra sa suluguun,</i> They were unanimous in wanting to have the servant fired. <i>Nahiúsa ang ílang hukum human makabatì sa tinúud,</i> Their decision became unanimous after they heard the truth. <form>usaúsa</form> <pos>n</pos> get-together party. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> have a get-together party. <form>usáhay</form> <tr>sometimes</tr>, <tr>occasionally</tr>. <i>Usáhay dì ku makadungug,</i> Sometimes I cannot hear. <form>binagsa</form> <xr>= <sc>tinagsa</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr> <form>inusára</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> be by oneself, <tr>alone</tr>. <i>Ug manglákaw sila mag-inusára lang ku áning baláya,</i> If they leave, I will be alone in this house. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> do s.t. alone by oneself. <i>Ákung inusaráhun lag dáru,</i> I will do the plowing alone. <form>inusaranhun</form> <pos>a</pos> characterized by being all by oneself. <i>Kinabúhing inusaranhun,</i> A life all alone by oneself. <form>maka-, ka-, kas-a</form> <tr>once</tr>. <i>Kausa (kas-a) miadtu siya sa balay,</i> He came to the house once. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> do s.t. to s.t. all at one time. <i>Maáyu untà ug makas-a nig lútù,</i> It would be nice if these could be cooked all at one time. <form>kag-usà</form>, <form>makag-usà</form>, <form>tag-usà</form> <xr>= <sc>talagsa</sc>.</xr> <form>kahiusáhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> state of being <tr>united</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>marriage</tr>. <i>Karung adláwa mau ang kahiusáhan níla ni Idyun ug ni Bilma,</i> The wedding of Edion and Vilma will take place today. <form>ulusáhun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>wondrous</tr>, <tr>unique</tr> or <tr>peculiar</tr>. <i>Adtu nímu makítà sa sú ang mga mananap nga ulusáhun ug mga hitsúra,</i> You will see strange and peculiar animals in the zoo. <i>Si Samsun sa karáang panahun mauy usa ka táwu nga may ulusáhung <pb n=1111>kusug,</i> Samson of ancient times was a man of <tr>extraordinary</tr> strength. <form>tagsa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> one apiece. <i>Tagáan ta mug tagsa,</i> I&apos;ll give you each one. <form>tagsa ray púlung</form> of few words. <i>Kun muingung dílì, hustu ra, dílì giyud. Tagsa ray púlung niánang tawhána,</i> If he says no it is no, period. He is a man of few words. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>talagsa</sc>.</xr> <form>tagsatagsa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> do s.t. <tr>one by one</tr>. <i>Magtagsatagsa na lang tag pamaúlì,</i> Let us now go home one by one. <form>igtagsa</form> <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s <tr>first cousin</tr>. <form>magtagsa</form> <pos>n</pos> being first cousins. <form>talagsa</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>seldom</tr>. <i>Talagsa ka ra man mamisíta nákù,</i> You seldom visit me. <form>talagsay búngut</form> it will be a long time before [so-and-so] happens. <i>Talagsa lay búngut ug makigsulti ku níya,</i> Don&apos;t expect me to talk to him for a long, long time. <form>panalagsa</form> <pos>a</pos> being at great intervals. <i>Unyà mihagtuk sa atup nga sín ang panalagsang ulan,</i> Then a few <tr>scattered</tr> raindrops rattled on the tin roof. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> do s.t. once in a while, at <tr>infrequent</tr> intervals. <i>Panalagsai akug dúaw,</i> Come visit me once in a while. <form>talagsaun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>rare</tr>, <tr>few</tr>. <i>Talagsaun ra ang asáwa nga makaagwanta sa íyang pagkabána,</i> Few wives could bear the sort of husband he makes. <i>Ang 1904 nga salapì talagsaun kaáyu,</i> The 1904 fifty-centavo coin is very rare. <number>2</number> <tr>extraordinary</tr>. <i>Talagsaun kaáyu ang íyang kaanyag,</i> Her beauty is <tr>remarkable</tr>. <form>&mdash; ra pud</form> <ix>phrase said in reaction to s.t. unbelievable:</ix> &lsquo;that&apos;s unheard of!&rsquo; <i>&lsquo;Mukanta na run nà siya.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Talagsaun ra pud.&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Now he&apos;s going to sing for us.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;The hell I will!&rsquo; <form>tinagsa</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> do one at a time. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC; b]</itype> do the <ix>tinagsa</ix> dance. <pos>a</pos> done one at a time. <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>folk dance</tr> in pairs, wherein the man tries to court an elusive woman, following her with courtship movements wherever she goes.

<p id=20452><form>usa<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>doe</tr>.

<p id=20453><form>úsà</form> <ix>short forms:</ix> <bx>sà, usà</bx>. <number>1</number> <tr>before</tr> [do]ing. <i>Úsà ka mulakaw hipúsa ang ímung kwartu,</i> Before you go out, fix your room. <number>2</number> do [so-and-so] <tr>beforehand</tr>. <i>Mag-ílis úsà ku sa dì pa ta manglákaw,</i> I&apos;ll change my clothes first before we go out. <number>3</number> <tr>for now</tr>, for the time being. <i>Ibutang úsà diri,</i> Put it down here for the moment. <i>Ayaw úsag lakaw,</i> Don&apos;t go for the while. <form>&mdash; pa</form> <number>3a</number> <tr>wait a minute</tr>. <i>Úsà pa gánì,</i> Wait a minute, will you?<i> Úsà pa kay ákung tawgun,</i> Just a second, because I&apos;m going to call him. <number>3b</number> just a second, to change the subject. <i>Úsà pa diay, kinsa tu ka?</i> By the way, who did you say you were? <number>4</number> <formx>&mdash; ka</formx> you just wait. <i>Gihilabtan giyud nímu nang ákung búhat dà. Úsà ka giyud run,</i> You touched my work, did you? Well you just wait what&apos;s going to happen now.

<p id=20454><form>usab</form> <ix>short forms:</ix> <bx>sab</bx> <ix>and</ix> <bx>sad</bx>. <number>1</number> <tr>also</tr>, <tr>in addition</tr>, <tr>as well</tr>, (after negatives) <tr>either</tr>. <i>Gipatay usab ang mga bátà,</i> They killed the children, too. <i>Ikaw sab, utru ka,</i> You, too. You&apos;re another one of the same ilk. <i>Dílì sab ku muadtu,</i> I will not go either. <i>Sa nagtubù siya, nagkadakù sab ang íyang káun,</i> As he grew, his food consumption grew as well. <number>1a</number> <tr>in turn</tr>. <i>Ug ikíha ku níya, ikíha ku sab siya,</i> If he sues me, I&apos;ll sue him in turn. <number>1b</number> <formx>na &mdash;</formx> <number>1b1</number> <tr>again</tr>. Nag-ulan na sab, It&apos;s raining again. <number>1b2</number> in turn. <i>Human sa unus, ang ulan na say mibundak,</i> After the squall, the rain came pouring down. <number>1c</number> [so-and-so] is in conformity with [such-and-such]. <i>Ug mahalun ang ímung kuhaun, dakù sab ug instulmin,</i> If you buy an expensive kind, you&apos;ll have to pay large installments, too. <form>syáru &mdash;</form> under the circumstances it is unbelievable. <i>Syáru sag wà ka kahunàhunà,</i> It&apos;s impossible that you didn&apos;t even think of it. <form>mau ra &mdash; hinúun</form> <xr>= <sc>mau ra pud núun</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>hinúun</sc>, <i>6.</i></xr> <i>1d</i> <form>dílì lang &mdash; kay ...</form> not only is [so-and-so] true. <i>Dílì lang sad kay muinum siya, súgal pud,</i> Not only does he drink, he also gambles. <number>1e</number> [<ix>exclamation</ix>] <form>&mdash;</form> My! [so-and-so] is the case, isn&apos;t it though. <i>Sus! Kapubrisíta sad intáwun níya!</i> My! What a pitiful child, don&apos;t you think? <i>Kagwápu ba sad!</i> How beautiful it is, though! <number>2</number> but then, when [so-and-so] happened, happens. <i>Apan pag-abut sab nákù didtu, wà nag manuk,</i> But then when I arrived, the chicken was gone. <i>Dì ku muinum. Apan ug muinum sad ku, tingbánay dyud,</i> I don&apos;t drink. But when I do, I really drink. <number>3</number> do [so-and-so] when one should not. <i>Bída sad nímu uy! Gitug-an man nímu!</i> Oh you! You went and told. <i>Si Máma sad! Mauy ímung isulti pirmi,</i> Oh, Mother! That&apos;s what you always say! <number>4</number> [<i>adj.</i>] &mdash; <tr>somewhat</tr> [adj.]. <i>Mahímù man sad,</i> It is <tr>quite</tr> possible. <i>Gwápa man sad,</i> She is quite pretty. <i>Udtu na sad ming migíkan,</i> It was already quite late when we left. <number>5</number> <formx>man &mdash;</formx> anyway, [so-and-so] is OK because. <i>Ihátag na lang. Daut man sad,</i> Might as well give it away because it&apos;s no good anyway. <i>Sahug dì siya mangasáwa. Maáyu man sag siya ray nagkarsúnis,</i> Who cares if he doesn&apos;t marry me? Anyway there is lots of fish in the ocean. <i>Ngánu man sad?</i> Anyway, who cares? <number>6</number> <ix>with imperatives:</ix> particle giving a pleading tone. <i>Sígi <pb n=1112>sad uy,</i> Oh, come on! Do it. <i>Iuban sad ku, magbinut-an lagi ku,</i> Please take me. I&apos;ll be a good girl. <number>7</number> [<ix>interrogative</ix>] <form>man &mdash;</form> just out of curiosity, who, when, why, how much, etc. <i>Tagpíla man sad ni?</i> By the way, just out of curiosity, how much is this? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2C; c]</itype> do s.t. again. <i>Mag-úsab pa ta ug dúlà?</i> Will we still play with each other again? <i>Usbun kug bása, památì,</i> I will read it again. Listen. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>modify</tr>, <tr>redo</tr>. <i>Usba ring ákung karsúnis,</i> <tr>Alter</tr> these pants of mine. <i>Ang inhinyíru mauy muusab sa plánu,</i> The engineer will <tr>revise</tr> the plans. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>change</tr>, <tr>substitute</tr> with s.t. else. <i>Dì ku muusab sa ákung hukum,</i> I will not change my decision. <form>ka-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> changes that have taken place. <i>Way kausában dinhi sa syudad,</i> The city hasn&apos;t changed. <form>usbunun</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. to be altered.

<p id=20455><form>usad</form> <xr>= <sc>usab</sc>, 1&ndash;7 (but not as <ix>v</ix>).</xr>

<p id=20456><form>usáhay</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>usa<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p id=20457><form>usámud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126P; b6]</itype> <tr>stumble</tr> or <tr>fall</tr> forward flat on one&apos;s face. <i>Nausámud (napausámud) siya sa pagdágan,</i> He stumbled and fell flat on his face when he ran.

<p id=20458><form>úsap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2SN; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>chew</tr>, <tr>grind</tr> with the molars. <i>Usápun sa mga bábuy ang mga sáhà sa ságing ug dì nà kuralun,</i> The pig will chew up the banana shoots if you don&apos;t fence the plantation. <number>2</number> <tr>chew up</tr>, <tr>crush</tr> between two moving parts like with the molars. <i>Lindug sa tubu nga giúsap sa ligsanan,</i> Cane stalks that were crushed by the rollers.

<p id=20459><form>usar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>use</tr>, make of. <i>Dì siya muusar ug butang sa láing táwu,</i> He does not use other people&apos;s things. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>wear</tr> s.t. <i>Dì ku muusar ug lipstik,</i> I don&apos;t use lipstick. <i>Íya pa ning usarun (iusar) sinináa sa panarbáhu,</i> He&apos;ll still wear this shirt to work. <form>usádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>used up</tr>, <tr>worn-out</tr>. <i>Magpalit kug bag-ung sapátus. Usádu na kaáyu ning ákù,</i> I&apos;ve got to buy a new pair of shoes. My old ones are all used up now. <number>2</number> a woman that has had sexual experience. <i>Usádu na kaáyug dagway nang bayhána,</i> That woman looks like she has already been used. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> get used up.

<p id=20460><form>usbaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> <tr>improve</tr>, <tr>prosper</tr>. <i>Ang íyang pagpaningkámut nakausbaw (nakapausbaw) níya gíkan sa kakabus,</i> He rose from poverty through hard work. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB2; c1]</itype> <tr>rise</tr> in degree or quantity. <i>Ang manidy&icaron;r mauy nag-usbaw sa íyang swildu,</i> The manager gave him a <tr>raise</tr>. <i>Miusbaw ang kadagátan sa Miditiranyan,</i> The Mediterranean Sea rose. <i>Ang traktur makausbaw (makapausbaw) sa áni,</i> A tractor can increase the rice production. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>prosperous</tr>. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>improvements</tr> or <tr>progress</tr>. <form>tingusbáwan</form> <pos>n</pos> improvements, either planned or accomplished. <i>Untà íyang panalangínan ang átung mga tingusbáwan,</i> May He bless the things we plan to accomplish. <i>Kining taytáyana usa sa mga tingusbáwan sa íyang pagkagubirnadur,</i> This bridge is one of the improvements he brought about while he was governor.

<p id=20461><form>usbung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> topmost part of plants or trees, <i>Usbung sa kasagbutan,</i> Topmost part of the shrubs. <number>2</number> s.t. formed into a mound. <i>Usbung sa ánay,</i> Termite hill. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>rise</tr> up, <tr>soar</tr> up to a higher level. <i>Labihang nakausbung sa iruplánu nga dyít,</i> How the jet plane soared. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>usdung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20462><form>usdak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> let s.t. <tr>drop</tr> with a light thud. <i>Ayaw iusdak ang malíta kay náay mabuak sa sulud,</i> Don&apos;t drop the trunk like that because there is s.t. breakable inside. <number>1a</number> <itype>[C]</itype> <formx>&mdash; ang tiil</formx> <tr>walk</tr> with noisy footfalls. <i>Maglágut ku ug usdákan kug tiil,</i> I get angry if s.o. walks with heavy footfalls in my presence. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; b8]</itype> <tr>slip</tr> and <tr>fall</tr> down on one&apos;s buttocks. <i>Nausdak ku sa hagdanan,</i> I fell down the stairs. <pos>n</pos> sound of thumping. <form>-in-</form> <xr>= <sc>usdak</sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr>

<p id=20463><form>usdu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>two</tr>, esp. <tr>two pesos</tr> (slang).

<p id=20464><form>usdu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> filled heaping high so as to form an elevation. <i>Usdu ra kaáyu ang sulud sa kartun dì na masira,</i> The contents of the box are piled so high that the box can no longer be closed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> be heaping high.

<p id=20465><form>usdug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>help</tr> s.o. lift s.t. to put it on his head. <i>Usdúgi siya sa táru,</i> Help him lift the can onto his head.

<p id=20466><form>usdung</form> <pos>a</pos> filled or piled to heaping. <i>Ang kan-un usdung kaáyu nga pagkabutang sa bandihádu,</i> The hominy is piled high on the platter. <pos>n</pos> moundlike top or heap. <i>Ang usdung sa nilabhan nga gisulud sa planggána túpung nákù,</i> The mound of clothes I put in the wash basin is as tall as I am. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> be heaping high. <i>Iusdung (usdúnga) pagtakus,</i> Make it heaping measures.

<p id=20467><form>usig, úsig</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>bark</tr>. <i>Kinsay giúsig sa irù?</i> Who is the dog barking at? <number>2</number> <itype>[A2S]</itype> <tr>cough</tr> (colloquial). <i>Sayu pa nà siyang miúsig,</i> He has been coughing since early morning. <form>hi&N;-</form> <pos>a</pos> given to barking. <form>-l-un</form> <pos>a</pos> prone to being barked at.

<p id=20468><form>úsik</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>waste</tr>. <i>Úsik kaáyung ilábay ning kan-úna!</i> What a waste to throw this food away. <i>Úsik, wà ku makapalit!</i> What a pity, I couldn&apos;t buy it. <pos>n</pos> name given to a variety of types of sorcery all of which cause grave illness. <number>1</number> k.o. <tr>sorcery</tr> similar to voodoo, in which s.t. is done to a representation of the victim, which in turn hurts the victim. <number>2</number> <pb n=1113>k.o. sorcery inserting insects into the victim. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a3b(1)]</itype> waste. <i>Dì ku mag-úsik ug panahun,</i> I won&apos;t waste my time. <i>Wà nákù usíki ang kwarta,</i> I did not spend the money uselessly. <number>1a</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> feel bad over the loss or waste of s.t. <i>Giusíkan ku sa mga kahigayúnang ímung gipalabay,</i> I regret all the opportunities you allowed to go by. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; a3]</itype> <tr>spill</tr> s.t. out of a container, thus wasting it. <i>Daghang kan-ung naúsik sa lamísa,</i> You spilled a lot of rice on the table. <number>2a</number> <formx>&mdash; ang, ug dugù</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a3b3]</itype> <tr>spill blood</tr>. <i>Kung kinahanglánun, usíkan nákug dugù ang pagpanalípud sa ákung yútang natawhan,</i> I will shed my blood in the defense of my native land if necessary. <number>3</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> be a victim of the sorcery <ix>úsik</ix>. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> things that spill or fall off onto s.t. <i>Kining mátang sa paggaling daghag usik,</i> This way of milling results in a lot of <tr>spillage</tr>. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>wasteful</tr>, <tr>extravagant</tr>. <i>Usikan kaáyu siya,</i> She is very wasteful. <pos>n</pos> <tr>sorcerer</tr> who can practice <ix>úsik</ix>. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having or entailing waste. <i>Mausíkun nga paági,</i> <tr>Wasteful</tr> procedure. <i>Anak nga mausíkun,</i> The <tr>Prodigal Son</tr>.

<p id=20469><form>usísa</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>ask</tr>, seek to be informed. <i>&lsquo;Unsa, nakagustu ka sa ímung trabáhu?&rsquo; miusísa nákù si Husi,</i> &lsquo;How do you like your work?&rsquo; Joe asked me. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>study</tr>, <tr>examine</tr> closely to <tr>analyze</tr>. <i>Nag-usísa ang piskal sa kásu sa pagpatay,</i> The fiscal is conducting an investigation on the homicide case. <i>Usisáhun nátù ug unsay nakapakunhud sa átung baligyà,</i> Let us study what made our sales drop. <number>3</number> analyze, <tr>test</tr> to determine s.t. <i>Nag-usísa silas yútà ug magkinahanglan bag abúnu,</i> They are testing the soil to see if it needs fertilizer. <pos>n</pos> <tr>investigation</tr>, <tr>inquiry</tr>. <form>mausisáhun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>questioning</tr>, <tr>inquisitive</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>scrutinizing</tr> with full attention to details.

<p id=20470><form>uska</form> <ix>short for</ix> <bx>usa ka</bx>. <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>usa</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20471><form>uslub<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; c1]</itype> for earth to fall in, either collapsing or from a process of erosion. <i>Nauslub (miuslub) ang lugar nga gisigíhag ági sa túbig,</i> The place where the water constantly passes over has become depressed. <pos>n</pos> earth that has been eroded. <i>Dakù ang uslub sa pangpang nga gikan-an sa túbig,</i> The water ate a large amount of dirt from the cliff.

<p id=20472><form>uslub<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>dip</tr> or <tr>immerse</tr> into a liquid. <i>Iuslub sa dukt&ucaron;r ang bátà sa inadlaw nga túbig ug mutaas ang hilánat,</i> The doctor will dip the child in warm water when his fever rises. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> treat with <ix>uslub</ix>. <pos>n</pos> k.o. treatment by steam, esp. for stomach disorders derived from eating the wrong thing at <corr>the </corr>wrong time or in the wrong combination, where the substance that caused the disorder is boiled in a pot, and the patient is made to cover himself together with the pot in a blanket and inhale the vapors, following which he is wrapped in more blankets and made to sweat profusely.

<p id=20473><form>Usminya</form> <pos>n</pos> Sergio <tr>Osmeña</tr>, Sr., the second president of the Philippine Commonwealth, and a native of Cebu City. <form>pwinti &mdash;</form> a park in Cebu. <form>Usminyista</form> <pos>n</pos> political followers or supporters of Osmeña (or, now, his family).

<p id=20474><form>usmud</form> <xr>= <sc>usámud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20475><form>usngad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> for a pig to dig out or push hard with its snout. <i>Nayabu ang pasaw sa bábuy kay íya mang giusngad,</i> The pig pushed its feed hard with its snout and it spilled. <i>Nabuhùbuhù ang nátad nga giusngáran sa bábuy,</i> The front yard which the pig dug out with its snout is full of holes. <pos>n</pos> a boat having its top pointing at an angle above its body. <form>inusngaran</form> <pos>n</pos> diggings made by a pig with its snout.

<p id=20476><form>uspag</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dry</tr>, <tr>unkempt</tr> of skin or hair. <i>Uspag kaáyu ug pánit ang nagpuyù sa isla,</i> People living on islands have very dry skin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for hair or skin to be dry and unkempt.

<p id=20477><form>uspital</form> <xr>= <sc>huspital</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20478><form>ustiya, ustiyas, ustíyas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>host</tr>, the bread of the Eucharist. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a2]</itype> make the host.

<p id=20479><sc>úsu<sub>1</sub></sc> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>mode</tr>, <tr>fashion</tr>. <i>Bilbátum ang úsu karun,</i> Bell-bottoms are the mode these days. <number>2</number> <tr>fad</tr>, thing in <tr>rage</tr>. <i>Úsu kaáyu karun ang pangáwat ug manuk,</i> Chicken stealing has become the latest fad. <i>Úsu na man run nga ang bána mauy bílin sa báy,</i> It is now the <tr>practice</tr> for husbands to tend the house. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c16]</itype> be the fashion, thing in <tr>vogue</tr>. <i>Maúsu na sab ang tabánug,</i> The fad for flying kites will come back into vogue again. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> start a fad, initiate a movement. <i>Gipausúhan nímu ang ímung anak ug kalígù maduminggu. Na, mangítà na hinúun,</i> You started bringing your child to the beach on Sundays and now he expects it. <form>pina-</form> <pos>a</pos> according to the <tr>latest style</tr>. <i>Buhuk nga pinaúsu,</i> The latest style hairdo. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B456; a1]</itype> have, wear s.t. of the latest style.

<p id=20480><form>úsu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bear</tr>.

<p id=20481><form>usub</form> <xr>= <sc>usab</sc>, <ix>v</ix>.</xr>

<p id=20482><form>úsuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> drive stakes into the ground. <i>Iúsuk ang sundang dihà sa yútà,</i> Stick the knife into the ground. <number>2</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> put stakes around. <i>Ákung usúkan ang mga tanum,</i> I&apos;ll put (drive) stakes around the plants. <number>3</number> slam s.o. or s.t. to the ground. <pos>n</pos> <tr>cigarette</tr> (slang). <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stake</tr>.

<p id=20483><form>úsuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for smoke to rush in a thick <pb n=1114>stream. <i>Miúsuk ang asu sa tambutsu,</i> The smoke gushed out of the exhaust pipe.

<p id=20484><form>úsung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> help s.o. lift and carry s.t. on his head or shoulders. <i>Akuy muúsung nímu sa sáku,</i> I&apos;ll help you lift the sack for you to carry on your shoulder.

<p id=20485><form>usúra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>usury</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be, become usury. <i>Mausúra nà ug dakù ang intiris,</i> It would be usury if you charge excessive interest. <form>usuríra</form> <xr>= <sc>usuríru</sc> (female).</xr> <form>usuríru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>usurer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become a usurer.

<p id=20486><form>us-us</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>slide down</tr> on s.t. holding on partially. <i>Mius-us ang mga bátà sa pasamánu,</i> The children slid down the stairs. <i>Makaus-us ka ug dalì sa plagpul kay dangug,</i> You can easily slide down the flagpole because it is slippery. <number>1a</number> <itype>[B2; b6(1)]</itype> for s.t. to <tr>slip down</tr> lower. <i>Nagkaus-us ang ímung tiyan. Hápit ka nang muanak,</i> Your stomach is slipping down. It won&apos;t be long now and you&apos;ll have your baby. <number>2</number> <itype>[APB; b7]</itype> for quantities to go down; cause them to do so. <i>Muus-us (maus-us) ang prisyu sa bugas ug daghan ang abut,</i> The price of rice will go down if there is a good harvest. <i>Tambal nga muus-us (mupaus-us) sa hilánat,</i> Medicine that will bring the fever down. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>reduce a sentence</tr>. <i>Ang huwis mius-us sa ímung sintinsiya,</i> The judge reduced your sentence. <form>&mdash; ang, sa kabúhì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> bring the <ix>kabúhì</ix> to just above the navel, where it is supposed to be. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>low</tr>, having slipped down. <i>Us-us kaáyu ang ímung karsúnis. Biraha sa táas,</i> Your pants have slipped too far down. Pull them up. <number>2</number> lowered in quantity, degree.

<p id=20487><form>usuus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <number>1</number> for s.t. hot to <tr>give off steam</tr>. <i>Nag-usuus pa nang kapi. Mapásù kag ímung imnun,</i> The coffee is still <tr>steaming</tr>. You&apos;ll burn yourself if you drink it. <number>2</number> for a pain to give a burning sensation.

<p id=20488><form>usúus</form> <xr>= <sc>alasúus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20489><form>uswa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>reprimand</tr> s.o. in a scolding way, harping on all his past faults. <i>Uswáhan ku siya inig-abut níya. Dúgay nga muulì,</i> I&apos;ll give him a good cussing-out when he comes home. He always comes home late. <form>uluswahan</form> <pos>n</pos> worthy of being reprimanded; a good reason for being reprimanded. <form>mauswáhun</form> <pos>a</pos> in a <tr>reprimanding</tr>, <tr>scolding</tr> way.

<p id=20490><form>uswag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>raise</tr>, move s.t. or oneself to a higher position. <i>Ug muuswag ka ug diyútay makahigdà ku sa ímung tiilan,</i> If you <tr>move up</tr> a little I can lie down beneath your feet. <i>Ákung iuswag ang atup ug mga diyis pulgádas,</i> I&apos;ll move the roofing up about ten inches. <number>1a</number> <itype>[B]</itype> rise in quantity. <i>Niuswag ang prisyu,</i> The price has gone up. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>go upstairs</tr>, into the house. <i>Muuswag ta kay tugnaw dinhi sa sílung,</i> Let&apos;s go into the house because it&apos;s cold down here. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> bring s.t. upstairs. <i>Iuswag (uswága) ang mga silya,</i> Carry the chairs upstairs. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> turn a light on. <i>Giuswágan níya ang sugà kay hínay ra kaáyu ang síga,</i> He turned the lampwick up some more because the light was too low. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>postpone</tr>, <tr>put off</tr> to a future date. <i>Dílì na mahímung uswágun ang kasal,</i> It is no longer possible to postpone the wedding. <number>5</number> <itype>[A23P; c1]</itype> <tr>improve</tr>, <tr>progress</tr>. <i>Muuswag ang inyung kahimtang ug makatrabahu ka na,</i> Your situation will improve once you have work. <pos>n</pos> <tr>improvement</tr>, rise in degree or quantity. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>progress</tr>, <tr>improvement</tr>. <form>ka-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> improvement finally attained. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>progressive</tr>. <i>Usa ka mauswágun kaáyung lungsud,</i> A very progressive town.

<p id=20491><form>usyus</form> <xr>= <sc>asyus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20492><form>usyúsa</form> <xr>= <sc>asyúsa</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20493><form>usyúsu</form> <xr>= <sc>asyúsu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20494><form>útak</form> <xr>= <sc>útuk<sub>1</sub></sc>, <i>n1, 2</i> (slang).</xr>

<p id=20495><form>útan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vegetables</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> cook vegetables. <i>Maútan ang kamansi,</i> Seeded breadfruit can be eaten as a vegetable. <i>Ákung utánan ang prítung isdà,</i> I&apos;ll cook the fried fish with vegetables. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> for young corn plants to be eaten by fowl. <i>Diyútay ra ang mais manúbù ug utánun sa mga manuk,</i> Few of the corn plants will grow to maturity if the chickens eat at them. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> pick, <tr>gather vegetables</tr>. <form>-un(&rarr;), -l-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>uncooked vegetables</tr>.

<p id=20496><form>útang</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>debt</tr>. <i>May útang ku nímung duha ka adlawng trabáhu,</i> I owe you two days&apos; work. <form>&mdash; buut</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>buut</sc>, <i>4.</i></xr> <form>&mdash; kabubut-un</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>kabubut-un</sc></xr> <ix>under</ix> <xr><sc>buut</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> get s.t. on credit. <i>Miútang (nangútang) ku ug usa ka gantang bugas,</i> I bought a <corr sic="gan-">ganta</corr> of rice on credit. <i>Inyu ba diay nang utángun?</i> You mean you&apos;re not paying cash for it? <number>1a</number> <itype>[AN; a2]</itype> get a <tr>loan</tr>. <i>Kadtung muútang (mangútang) ug dakù kinahanglan may garantíya,</i> If you apply for a good-sized loan, you must have collateral. <number>1b</number> <formx>&mdash; (sa hárì)</formx> <itype>[a12]</itype> <tr>take a life</tr>. <i>Ay kug hadlúkag búnù kay utángun ta ka sa hárì (utángun ta ka),</i> Don&apos;t try to scare me with a talk of a fight because I will <tr>kill</tr> you. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3S; a3b6]</itype> owe s.o. a favor. <i>Siya ang nautángan mu sa ímung kinabúhì,</i> You owe your life to him. <form>utang-utang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> incur many small debts. <i>Gamay ra ang nahabilin sa swildu kay nakautang-utang ku,</i> I have little left from my salary because I incurred so many small debts. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> extend <tr>credit</tr>. <pb n=1115><number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> get in the last word in a dispute. <i>Dì siya mupaútang (magpaútang) ug sulti sa íyang bána,</i> She won&apos;t let her husband have the last word. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> one who owes one s.t. <form>hi&N;-(&rarr;), pala-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> always buying things on credit or asking for loans. <form>-unun</form> <pos>n</pos> goods for sale on credit.

<p id=20497><form>utang-útang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>slipmouth fish</tr>: <bio>Leiognathus sp</bio>.

<p id=20498><form>utap, útap</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr><corr sic=cooky>cookie</corr></tr> made of flaky pastry and formed into thin, tongue-like shapes, sold commercially. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make, have <ix>utap</ix>.

<p id=20499><form>utas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> faint due to a sickness, hunger. <i>Nautas na sad ang masakitun,</i> The sick man became unconscious again. <form>-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> prone to fainting spells. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get subject to fainting spells.

<p id=20500><form>útas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> do s.t. <tr>always</tr> or <tr>constantly</tr>. <i>Ug mag-útas lang mu ug tábì dinhà wà muy mahímù,</i> If you <tr>keep on</tr> talking like that, you&apos;ll never accomplish anything. <i>Dì ku makaútas ug bantay niánà kay may láin kung búhat nga giatiman,</i> I can not keep constant watch over it because I have other things to attend to.

<p id=20501><form>utaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>iron</tr>, <tr>press</tr>. <i>Wà níya utawa ang mga hábul,</i> She did not iron the sheets. <pos>n</pos> <tr>iron</tr>. <form>-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ironing board</tr>. <form>-an(&larr;) nga kinabáyù</form> <pos>n</pos> ironing board with legs. <form>-l-un(&larr;), -unun(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> things to iron. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pressed clothes</tr>. <form>tigpa&N;-, tig-l-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> person who does the ironing.

<p id=20502><form>utaw-útaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b(1)]</itype> <tr>float</tr> or move gently in the air or on the surface of a liquid. <i>Muutaw-útaw (mipautaw-útaw) lang ku kay kápuyng ilanguy,</i> I will just float because it is tiresome to swim. <i>Mga pangánud nga nag-utaw-útaw (nagpautaw-útaw) sa kahangínan,</i> Clouds that float gently in the wind.

<p id=20503><form>utay-utay, utay-útay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; c1]</itype> do s.t. <tr>little by little</tr>, have s.t. happen to it a little at a time. <i><corr sic=Utay-utaya>Utay-utáya</corr> lang pagbáyad,</i> Pay for it little at a time. <i>Utay-utáya paggámit ang sabun,</i> Use the soap little at a time.

<p id=20504><form>utbu</form> <xr>= <sc>ulbu</sc>, <i>n, v1, 1a, 2, 3.</i></xr>

<p id=20505><form>utbung</form> <pos>n</pos> tender stalks with leaf buds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> pick the tips of plants or their axillary <tr>shoots</tr> off. <i>Mitambuk ang mga dáhun sa tabákù nga giutbúngan na sa salingsing,</i> The leaves of the tobacco plants grew stout after their suckers were picked off.

<p id=20506><form>utik</form> <xr>= <sc>dutù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20507><form>utika</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> phlegm of a person with <xr><sc>tb</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> TB. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a4]</itype> have <tr>tuberculosis</tr>. <i>Nag-utika (giutika) na lang nang tawhána sa íyang kaabusádu,</i> That man has got TB because he abused his health. <form>utikahun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tubercular</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become <tr>consumptive</tr>.

<p id=20508><form>util</form> <xr>= <sc>hutil</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20509><form>útin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>penis</tr>. <form>pubri nga &mdash;</form> poor father as head of the family (humorous). <i>Walà giyud siya makatilaw ug mga maáyung pagkáun kay anak man siya sa pubring útin,</i> He never tasted good food because he is a son of a poor father (lit. poor penis). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> hit on the penis. <i>Ug utínun nímu siyag banyak makuyapan giyud,</i> If you hit him on the penis with a kick, he will surely faint. <form>utin-utin</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>parrot fish</tr>. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> having a penis.

<p id=20510><form>utingkad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> <tr>ransack</tr>, search thoroughly or examine every part. <i>Ákung utingkarun ning mga butang sa kaban arun makit-an tung lyabíha,</i> I&apos;ll search everything in this trunk so I can find the key.

<p id=20511><form>utingkag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>utingkad</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; a3b6]</itype> for a home to be broken. <i>Ang pagkababayidur sa bána mauy nakautingkag (nakapautingkag) sa ílang kaugalíngun,</i> Her husband&apos;s fondness for women broke up their home.

<p id=20512><form>utingkay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> <tr>disarrange</tr> s.t., usually in searching for s.t. <i>Dì ku gustung inyung utingkáyun ang mga libru sa laybrari,</i> I don&apos;t want you to disarrange the books in the library. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> find, come across s.t. in ransacking or searching through. <i>Nakautingkay kug buláwan sa sulud sa kaban,</i> I came across a piece of gold in rummaging through the trunk. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> go into the details of s.t. to find out about it. <i>Sa kurti utingkáyun ang tanan nga nahitabù báhin sa kásu,</i> In court all facts surrounding the case will be examined in detail. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> find out by ransacking details. <i>Nautingkayan na hinúun ang makauúlaw níyang kagahápun,</i> They stumbled over the shameful details of her past.

<p id=20513><form>utitud</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tiny, biting red <tr>ant</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infested with this k.o. ant. <form>utiturun</form> <pos>a</pos> infested with red ants. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> get to be infested with red ants.

<p id=20514><form>utíut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>creak</tr>, <tr>squeak</tr>. <i>Miutíut ang sawug nga kawáyan,</i> The bamboo flooring creaked. <i>Wà makautíut ang ligid,</i> The wheel does not squeak any more. <pos>n</pos> <tr>creaking</tr>, <tr>squeaking</tr> noise.

<p id=20515><form>utlánan</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>ulut<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p id=20516><form>utlub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> bite s.t. off with the front teeth or for machinery to do an analogous thing. <i>Muutlub lang ku ug gamay sa ímung kindi,</i> I&apos;ll just take a small bite of your candy. <i>Nautluban ang ákung tudlù sa galingan,</i> The mill took a small piece off of my finger. <form>pa&N;- sa dílà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> bite one&apos;s tongue. <i>Nagpangutlub kus ákung dílà arun dílì makakatawa,</i> I bit my tongue to refrain from <pb n=1116>laughing. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. a part of which has been bitten off.

<p id=20517><form>utmil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>oatmeal</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> eat, raise s.o. on oatmeal. <i>Giutmil si Búbuy sa gamay pa siya,</i> Boboy was raised on oatmeal when he was small.

<p id=20518><form>utnga<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> emit a somewhat prolonged <tr>grunt</tr> as when one is lifting s.t. heavy or has suffered pain. <i>Miutnga siya sa pag-alsa sa usa ka sákung kupras,</i> He grunted when he lifted the sack of copra. <i>Nakautnga siya sa pagsuntuk sa íyang tiyan,</i> He grunted when he received the blow in the stomach.

<p id=20519><form>utnga<sub>2</sub>, utngà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> <tr>come off</tr>, <tr>let go</tr> of s.t. attached firmly to s.t. <i>Dì muutnga ang limátuk ug dì mabusug,</i> A leech won&apos;t let go until it is full. <i>Miutnga na ang lansang sa sawug,</i> The nail came out of the flooring.

<p id=20520><form>utra</form> <xr>= <sc>utru</sc>, <i>1</i> (female).</xr>

<p id=20521><form>utrabis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do s.t. a second time. <i>Muutrabis pa pagminyù ang byúda kay nagdalaga,</i> The widow must want to get married <tr>again</tr> because she is primping herself up. <i>Utrabis! Wà pa man ka mabúngì,</i> Do it again, why don&apos;t you. You didn&apos;t break anything the first time. <pos>n</pos> s.t. having been repeated. <i>Utrabis na nà níya sa pirst grid,</i> This is his second time around in the first grade.

<p id=20522><form>utru</form> <number>1</number> [so-and-so] is another one of those bad people. <i>Utru ka sab. Paríhas mung búang,</i> You&apos;re another one. You&apos;re both fools. <number>2</number> repeated action. <i>Utru gánì, ayg ingna ánà,</i> The next time don&apos;t do it like that. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> do s.t. <tr>again</tr>. <i>Dì ka na kautrug binúang nákù,</i> You can&apos;t fool me again. <i>Íya pa ning iutrug lútù,</i> She&apos;s going to cook it again.

<p id=20523><form>utsing</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; a2]</itype> have <tr>sexual intercourse</tr> (humorous).

<p id=20524><form>utsinta</form> <number>1</number> number <tr>eighty</tr>. <number>2</number> humorous euphemism for <ix>utsing ta</ix>, let&apos;s have intercourse. <pos>v</pos> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>disiutsu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20525><form>utsu</form> <ix>number</ix> <tr>eight</tr>, confined to phrases with words of Spanish origin. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>tris</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> for a bicycle tire to be deformed (lit. twisted into an eight).

<p id=20526><form>utud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; a]</itype> cut s.t. long in two or s.t. off of it. <i>Utdun níya ang pán álang ninyung duha,</i> She will break the bread for the two of you. <i>Giutdan níya ang hílu,</i> He cut a piece off the thread. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become short after s.t. has been cut off. <i>Nagkautud ang písì nga sígig kabugtù,</i> The rope is getting shorter and shorter because it keeps breaking. <pos>a</pos> short after a part has been cut off. <pos>n</pos> <tr>sibling</tr>. <form>(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>utud</sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr> <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>blood relation</tr>.

<p id=20527><form>utug</form> <pos>a</pos> for a penis to be erect. <pos>n</pos> the erected penis. <i>Hikápa ang ákung utug,</i> Touch my <tr>hard-on</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b4]</itype> <number>1</number> get erect. <i>Sa sulti lang gánì nag-utug na ang íyang útin,</i> His penis <tr>erects</tr> even if he just listens to stories. <i>Giutgan ku,</i> I have an <tr>erection</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>tauten</tr> or <tr>erect</tr> like the penis. <i>Miutug ang pasul pagdágan sa isdà,</i> The fishline tautened when the fish lunged away. <form>pa-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>masturbate</tr>. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>masturbation</tr>. <number>2</number> s.t. that helps one have an erection. <form>ulutgan</form> <pos>a</pos> having a tendency to get erections. <form>pala-</form> <pos>n</pos> given to masturbation.

<p id=20528><form>utuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> cook land crabs with shredded coconut meat, spices, <corr sic=tumeric>turmeric</corr>, but no water.

<p id=20529><form>utuk<sub>2</sub>, útuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> a top that spins so fast and steadily that it appears motionless. <form>&mdash; ug kinúmù</form> <pos>a</pos> having the ability to deliver fast and furious blows. <i>Útuk kaáyug kinúmù nang banáha kay kanúnay lang gipahubag ang nawung sa asáwa,</i> He is a husband with a fast and steady fist. His wife&apos;s face is constantly swollen. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; b6]</itype> be fast and steady in spinning. <form>pa-ay</form> <pos>n</pos> contest to see whose top spins most steadily. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> hold such a contest.

<p id=20530><form>útuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>brain</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>intelligence</tr>, <tr>mental ability</tr>. <i>Gamíta ang ímung útuk,</i> Use your brain. <number>3</number> mastermind of evil doings. <number>4</number> <formx>&mdash; sa bukug</formx> <tr>marrow</tr>. <form>lísù sa &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>lísù sa buut</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>lísù</sc>.</xr> <form>singtánun ug &mdash;</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to get angry easily. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>brainy</tr>, <tr>intelligent</tr>. <form>-an(&rarr;), pa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>intellect</tr>, <tr>mental ability</tr>.&dagger;

<p id=20531><form>utul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> [A: a] sever s.t. long. <i>Utla ang kawáyan sa makaduha,</i> Break the bamboo into two. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>cut down</tr>. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A; ab7]</itype> cut s.t. out of or off of s.t. <i>Ákung giutlan ug diyútay ang tiil sa lamísa,</i> I cut a small piece off the leg of the table. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>put an end to</tr> s.t. <i>Utlun ku ang inyung pagtagbùtagbù,</i> I&apos;ll put an end to your secret meetings. <i>Giutlan mig túbig,</i> Our water connection was <tr>cut off</tr>. <pos>a</pos> s.t. cut off from s.t. <i>Gisumpay ug bálik ang utul sa íyang tudlù,</i> They sewed his <tr>severed</tr> finger back on. <form>&mdash; sa adlaw</form> <tr>half day</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa píkas</form> a quarter. <form>(&larr;)<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; a]</itype> divide s.t. into two. <i>Utlun nátù ang ímung tsukulit,</i> We&apos;ll divide your chocolate between us. <form>(&larr;) ug tinái, kinabúhì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sibling</tr>. <i>Útul siya nákù ug tinái,</i> She is my <tr>sister</tr>. <form>ka-(&larr;), ig-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sibling</tr>. <form>utul-utul</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>broken</tr>, cut into pieces. <number>2</number> for stools to be hardened and small from constipation. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> be broken into tiny pieces. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for stools to get hard and small. <number>2a</number> <itype>[a4b4]</itype> suffer from <tr>constipation</tr>.

<p id=20532><form>útul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13B12; b5]</itype> lose the leaves, hair, feathers. <i>Kanding ang nag-útul sa kamunggay,</i> A goat stripped the <ix>kamunggay</ix> tree bare of its leaves. <i>Naútul ang úlu ni Tasyu,</i> <pb n=1117>Tacio&apos;s head became bald. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bald</tr>, stripped of most leaves.

<p id=20533><form>utung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> hold one&apos;s breath. <i>Miutung siyang misáwum,</i> He held his breath as he dived. <i>Miutung siya sa kasakit,</i> He couldn&apos;t breathe for the pain. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> bear down hard in delivering a child or defecating. <i>Miutung ku ug kusug sa pagpaguwà sa dakung tubul,</i> I bore down hard to get the hard stools out. <number>3</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> suffer, bear to the end. <i>Utungun (iutung) ku na lang ning gastu sa ákung anak sa pag-iskuyla,</i> I&apos;ll have to bear it until I can get my son through school. <pos>n</pos> ability to hold one&apos;s breath. <i>Taas siyag utung,</i> He is able to hold his breath for a long time. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be able to hold one&apos;s breath for a long time. <form>ka-un</form> <pos>a</pos> feel like bearing down.

<p id=20534><form>utut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fart</tr>, gas released from the stomach. <form>bitik sa &mdash;</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>bitik</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; <r>[gen.]</r></form> <ix>expression of disbelief or denial:</ix> what [gen.] maintains is false! <i>Utut nímu! Ingun ka ug dì muanhi unyà nía ka man lagi,</i> You little liar! You said you were not coming, but here you are! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2N; c]</itype> <tr>break wind</tr>. <i>Muutut (mangutut) ka man lang bísag náay mga táwu!</i> Why do you break wind in front of people! <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13P]</itype> break wind frequently. <i>Mag-útut ka giyug mukáun kag inánag,</i> You&apos;ll keep having to break wind if you eat broiled young corn. <form>pala-(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> one who keeps breaking wind.&dagger;

<p id=20535><form>ut-ut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB12; b5]</itype> lose all one&apos;s possessions through foolishness; cause one to do so. <i>Ang súgal ug babáyi mauy nakaut-ut (nakapaut-ut) níya,</i> Gambling and women has driven him to poverty. <i>Giut-útan siya ánang bayhána,</i> That woman milked him dry. <pos>a</pos> having lost all of one&apos;s possessions foolishly.

<p id=20536><form>ut-ut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> boil rice in a small pot. <i>Mag-ut-ut ku kay aku rang usa ra,</i> I&apos;ll cook rice in a small pot because it&apos;s only for me.

<p id=20537><form>ut-ut<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> for dogs to <tr>bark</tr>. <i>Muut-ut nang irúa ug náay táwu,</i> That dog barks when there are people around. <pos>n</pos> bark.

<p id=20538><form>ut-út</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>úlut<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=20539><form>utwang</form> <xr>= <sc>hutwang<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=20540><form>úu</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>u</bx>. <number>1</number> <tr>yes</tr>. <i>Ú, túa na ku,</i> Yes, I&apos;m coming. <number>2</number> in narrations, rhetorical answer to an unasked question. <i>Misulud siya sa lángub, ú misulud dáyun siya,</i> He went into the cave, yes, he went right in. <form>aw &mdash;</form> <tr>of course</tr>, it is <tr>obviously</tr> so. <i>Aw ú, unyà ra ka mubáyad ug ihatud na nákù dinhi,</i> Of course, you only have to pay when I deliver it. <form>&mdash; walay tiil, íkug</form> expression inquiring as to the sincerity of one&apos;s intentions of doing s.t. (humorous). <i>&lsquo;Muari ka unyà sa balay?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Ú&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Ú way tiil?&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Will you come to the house later?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Yes.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Is that yes meaning no (lit. yes without legs)?&rsquo;

<p id=20541><form>úù</form> word said to induce young children to defecate. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> child&apos;s word for <tr>defecate</tr>.

<p id=20542><form>úun</form> <xr>= <sc>un-ún<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=20543><form>úwag</form> <xr>= <sc>úlag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20544><form>uwag-úwag</form> (from <ix>úlag</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> animal ovaries. <number>2</number> the two pockets of fat which are found on the top of the tail of chickens, so called because they are believed to stimulate sex urges.

<p id=20545><form>uwahi</form> <xr>= <sc>ulahi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20546><form>uwak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>crow</tr>. <form>mamutì (muputì) ang &mdash;</form> [so-and-so] is <tr>impossible</tr> (lit. the crow will turn white first). <i>Muputì pay uwak ug muhátag ku,</i> It will be <tr>a snowy day in May</tr> before I contribute any. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> the sound of the crow. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> say s.t. in <tr>protest</tr>, <tr>gripe</tr>. <i>Nag-úwak ang mga trabahadur sa kadúgay sa ílang swildu,</i> The laborers were <tr>complaining</tr> about how long it took them to get their pay. <form>kang-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> place where crows abound.&dagger;

<p id=20547><form>uwandis</form> (from <ix>ulandis</ix>) <pos>n</pos> k.o. light-skinned <tr>cooking banana</tr> which looks like the <i>sab-a,</i> not commercially grown.

<p id=20548><form>uwang-uwang</form> <xr>= <sc>saling-uwang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20549><form>uwápay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>parrot fish</tr>.

<p id=20550><form>uwaping</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. edible <tr>mushroom</tr> that grows on rotten abaca or banana stalks, with a thin pileus, brown on top, and a slender stalk. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> gather <ix>uwaping</ix>.

<p id=20551><form>uway</form> <pos>n</pos> general name for <tr>rattans</tr>. <form>&mdash; palásan</form> <pos>n</pos> large brittle species used for furniture making. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> cut rattan cane into strips. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> gather rattan. <form>ma&N;-r-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rattan gatherer</tr>.

<p id=20552><form>úway</form> <pos>n</pos> address to aunts, female cousins of the parents&apos; generation.

<p id=20553><form>uwídu</form> <pos>n</pos> music played by ear. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> <tr>play by ear</tr>.

<p id=20554><form>uwígik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b3]</itype> for pigs to squeal. <pos>n</pos> squealing of pigs.

<p id=20555><form>úwil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> give s.o. <tr>sweet-talk</tr> to get s.t. out of him (colloquial). <i>Ug akuy muúwil ánà, musugut nà,</i> If I sweet-talk him, he&apos;ll agree. <i>Giuwílan ni Pidru si Huwan sa pagpapalit ug sigarilyu,</i> Pedro sweet-talked Juan into buying cigarettes for him. <number>2</number> <tr>lubricate</tr>, put <tr>oil</tr> on. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>flattery</tr> (colloquial). <number>2</number> lubrication <tr>oil</tr>. <form>&mdash; ab wintirgrin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>oil of wintergreen</tr>.

<p id=20556><form>uy</form> <number>1</number> <ix>particle initial to the sentence:</ix> <number>1a</number> an impolite way of attracting attention. <i>Uy, Pituy, dalia nang ímung búhat,</i> Hey! Pete. Hurry up with that work! <number>1b</number> exclamation <pb n=1118>of surprise upon noticing s.t. <i>Uy Pilang! Ingun kug dì na ta magkítà,</i> <tr>Why</tr>, Pilang, I didn&apos;t think I&apos;d ever see you again. <number>1c</number> exclamation of delight or worry. <i>Uy! Malípay ku ug buhátun mu nà,</i> <tr>My</tr>! Would I ever be happy if you did that! <number>2</number> particle final in the sentence. <number>2a</number> <ix>contradicting the interlocutor&apos;s opinion or an opinion he might form:</ix> don&apos;t think it&apos;s not like this.&mdash;it is. <i>Mahal uy! Tíaw muy tag-utsu ang usa!</i> It&apos;s expensive, for your information. Imagine! Eight pesos apiece! <formx>dílì ku &mdash;</formx> I don&apos;t want to, don&apos;t think I do. <i>&lsquo;Paghúbù.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Dílì ku uy!&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Get undressed!&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;No, I won&apos;t.&rsquo; <number>2b</number> <ix>with imperatives:</ix> go on now, do it. <i>Sábà uy. Hibatian tang Pápa,</i> Keep quiet <tr>now</tr>. Daddy might hear us. <i>Ayaw úsà ug lakaw uy. Maniudtu pa gánì ta,</i> Hey! Don&apos;t go yet. We are going to have lunch yet. <number>2c</number> particle indicating surprise upon discovering s.t. <i>Sus, Mam, maáyu giyud ka kaáyu uy!</i> <tr>Goodness</tr>, Ma&apos;am. You sure are good. <number>2d</number> particle expressing annoyance. <i>Sus nis Iduk uy! Nakulbaan kug maáyu,</i> <tr>My goodness</tr>, Edok. You sure gave me a scare. <form>ada &mdash;</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ada</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20557><form>úy</form> <xr>= <sc>uluy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20558><form>uyab<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> girl or <tr>boy friend</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ANC; a2]</itype> be sweethearts, get for a <tr>sweetheart</tr>, make into a sweetheart. <i>Mag-úyab na sila kay sígi sa sini,</i> They must be sweethearts because they keep going to the show together. <i>Byúda ang íyang giuyab,</i> He made a widow his <tr>fianc</tr>ée.

<p id=20559><form>uyab<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> let fighting cocks clash for a short time for practice. <i>Iuyab ang mga hiniktan,</i> Let the fighting cocks clash for practice. <pos>n</pos> cockfight for practice. <i>Way uyab kining manúka,</i> This cock has no practice in fighting.

<p id=20560><form>úyab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>rinse</tr> with clean water. <i>Íya nang giuyában ang linabhan,</i> She has rinsed the laundry.

<p id=20561><form>uyabad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b3]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>bawl</tr>, <tr>cry out</tr> loudly. <i>Nag-uyabad ang bátà kay nangáyù ug dulsi,</i> This child is bawling because it is asking for candy. <number>2</number> grumble to oneself. <i>Unsa may ímung giuyabaran nga dakù ka mag báhin?</i> What are you <tr>griping</tr> about when you have a big share?

<p id=20562><form>uyabang</form> <pos>n</pos> fry of river shrimps. <i>Ang uyabang mga pínung ulang,</i> The young of river shrimps are tiny.

<p id=20563><form>úyag</form> <number>1</number> <tr>so</tr> that [such-and-such] a thing happen. <i>Uban lang úyab kapalitan kag sapátus,</i> Just come with me so I can buy you some shoes. <number>2</number> <tr>instead</tr> of doing [so-and-so] as one should have, he did s.t. else (and s.t. bad happened). <i>Úyag pa bítawng paiskuyláhun siya, nyà wà giyud magtuun. Dan, wà núuy titulu,</i> He was supposed to go to school, but he didn&apos;t. So, he doesn&apos;t have a degree. <number>3</number> [so-and-so] was going to happen (or not going to) but you did s.t. to ruin matters. <i>Úyag nat&umacracu;g untà tung bátà, ímu pa giyung gipúkaw,</i> The child was doing fine asleep but you had to go and wake him up. <i>Úyag wà tà tu kahibáwu sa ákung sikrítu, ímu núung gibuku,</i> He would not have known about the secret, but you had to go and tell him.

<p id=20564><form>uyágak</form> <xr>= <sc>iyágak</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20565><form>uyakut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> mind talk not worth heeding. <i>Makunsimisiyun ka lang ug mag-uyakut ka sa mga sulting dugmuk,</i> You&apos;ll only worry yourself to death if you mind that idle talk. <number>2</number> mind business, work which is not worth it, does not give a profit. <i>Dílì ku mag-uyakut ug nigusyung dì makabúhì,</i> I won&apos;t kill myself for a business that doesn&apos;t even allow me to earn a living.

<p id=20566><form>uyámut</form> <form><r>[<i>adj.</i>]</r> &mdash;</form> quite [adj.] I should say, rather [adj.]. <i>Daghan uyámut silag kwarta,</i> They had a rather goodly amount of money. <i>Lahì uyámut ang íyang kinaíya kay sa íyang igsúun,</i> She has a quite different personality from her sister. <i>Pubring uyámut,</i> Quite poor, I would say. <i>Ngil-ad uyámut nga dì na ka muatúbang sa ímung nautángan ug kabubut-un,</i> It is rather unseemly, I should say, that you turn your back on s.o. you should be grateful to. <pos>a</pos> <tr>miserable</tr>, extremely <tr>poor</tr>. <i>Uyámut kaáyu ming mga iskwátir,</i> We squatters are miserably poor. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be extremely poor. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> extreme <tr>poverty</tr>.

<p id=20567><form>úyang</form> <tr>title</tr> for one&apos;s grandmother or a grandparent&apos;s sister or a female cousin of the grandparent&apos;s generation. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <number>1</number> voc. of <ix>uyang</ix>. <number>2</number> <tr>address of respect</tr> for old women not related. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>address</tr> s.o. as <ix>uyang</ix>.

<p id=20568><form>uyap</form> <pos>n</pos> tiny salt-water <tr>shrimps</tr>. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> catch, gather tiny shrimps.

<p id=20569><form>uyas</form> <pos>a</pos> past its usefulness or productiveness. <i>Ang apuhan námù uyas na,</i> Our grandparents are already very old. <i>Uyas ang yútà sa bakilid,</i> The soil on the slope is <tr>infertile</tr>. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become <tr>unproductive</tr>. <i>Muúyas (maúyas) ang dágat kun kanúnay dinamitáhan,</i> The sea will become bare if they constantly fish with dynamite.<i> Nagkauyas ang mga lubi,</i> The coconut trees are becoming unproductive.

<p id=20570><form>úyat<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> hang on s.t. to bend it downward. <i>Nabálì ang sanga kay íyang giuyátan,</i> The branch broke because he hung on it with all his weight.

<pb n=1119>

<p id=20571><form>úyat<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> take hold of s.t. or <tr>hold</tr> s.t. lifting it. <i>Siyay nag-úyat sa kápa sa rayna,</i> She held the queen&apos;s cape. <i>Nakaúyat siya sa alambri sa kuryinti,</i> He accidentally took hold of the electric wire.

<p id=20572><form>uyat-úyat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>tease</tr> s.o. or <tr>annoy</tr> him by persistent, irritating actions or remarks. <i>Ákù siyang uyat-uyátun nga dì na muulì ang íyang Máma,</i> I&apos;ll tease her by saying her mother isn&apos;t coming back any more.

<p id=20573><form>uyauya</form> <pos>a</pos> good enough amount to do for modest use or consumption. <i>Gamay kaáyung tindahána apan uyauya usab ang hálin, iguígù giyung makasapal sa gastu,</i> This store is very small, but it has a goodly sale, enough to cover the expenses.

<p id=20574><form>uyit</form> <xr>= <sc>iwit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20575><form>uylab</form> <xr>= <sc>uylap</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20576><form>uylap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>flare up</tr>, burst into flames. <i>Dalì kaáyung miuylap ang kaláyu,</i> The fire quickly flared up. <number>1a</number> for a light to <tr>flicker</tr>. <i>Salipdi ang sugà arun dì muuylap ang síga,</i> Cover the lamp so that its light won&apos;t flicker. <number>2</number> for pain to <tr>pulsate</tr>. <i>Nag-uylap ang kangutngut sa ákung hubag,</i> I have a pulsating pain in my boil.

<p id=20577><form>uyuan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>uncle</tr>: parent&apos;s brother or male cousin of the parent&apos;s generation. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> have an uncle. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> respect as one&apos;s uncle. <i>Kun nanguyuan ka kanákù, patúu sa ákung tambag,</i> If you respect me as your uncle, heed my advice.

<p id=20578><form>úyug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2S; a1]</itype> <tr>shake</tr> back and forth in any direction with quick motions, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Miúyug ang balay paglínug,</i> The house shook in the earthquake. <i>Uyúga siya ug kusug arun mumata,</i> Shake him hard to wake him up. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> mature coconut, at the stage when the water sounds if it is shaken. <form>(&rarr;) ug útuk</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>feeble-minded</tr>. <i>Uyug tingáli ug útuk kay dì makasabut dáyun,</i> He must be feeble-minded because he cannot understand right away. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B25; b6]</itype> for a coconut to reach maturity. <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ceremony</tr> and party upon blessing a house or inaugurating a building. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> hold a house <tr>blessing</tr>.

<p id=20579><form>uy-ug</form> <xr>= <sc>úyug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20580><form>úyuk</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. in the <tr>center</tr>. <tr>middle</tr> part: <number>1</number> middle part of the place where the fire is built in the stove. <number>2</number> <tr>bone marrow</tr>. <number>2a</number> young <tr>palm frond</tr>, esp. coconut. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>alúyuk</sc>.</xr> <number>3a</number> the whorl on the fingers made by the prints. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> place where the <ix>úyuk</ix> is located. <form>kina-an(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>kinaaluyukan</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>alúyuk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20581><form>úyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. <tr>long</tr>, <tr>parallel</tr> to, <tr>alongside</tr>. <i>Mga balay nga úyun sa karsáda,</i> Houses built along the road. <number>2</number> in <tr>accordance</tr>, <tr>conformance</tr> with. <i>Úyun sa átung gikasabútan,</i> In accordance with our agreement. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> put long things parallel to s.t. or each other, be put parallel. <i>Mag-úyun tag higdà arun ta muarang dinhi,</i> Let us lie down beside each other so that we can both fit on this place. <i>Wà magkaúyun ang mga bughà,</i> The pieces of firewood weren&apos;t placed parallel to each other. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A2; b6c1]</itype> stay, place oneself parallel to s.t. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2C3; bc3]</itype> <tr>agree</tr>, <tr>go along</tr> with s.t. <i>Dì ku muúyun sa inyung plánu,</i> I won&apos;t agree to your plan. <i>Sumálà sa gikauyúnan,</i> According to the agreement we came to. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>úyun</sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr> <form>(&rarr;) ug bàbà</form> female genitalia (humorous). <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>úyun</sc>, <ix>v2.</ix></xr> <form>uyun-úyun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b(1)]</itype> agree with, go along with half-heartedly. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> do s.t. <tr>lengthwise</tr>. <i>Ipaúyun paghíwà ang patátas,</i> Cut the potatoes lengthwise. <pos>n</pos> done lengthwise. <form>pahi-, pasi-</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>úyun</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>adjust</tr> oneself to s.t. or adjust s.t. so others can agree to it. <i>Pasiúyun na lang ku sa pagkáun dinhi, kay way láin,</i> I&apos;ll just adjust myself to the food here, because there is nothing else. <i>Gamay ra ákung gibutang síli kay ákung ipahiúyun sa tanan,</i> I put in very little chili pepper so everybody could eat what I was fixing. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>agreement</tr> reached. <i>Ang kauyúnan sa míting,</i> The agreement reached in the meeting.

<p id=20582><form>úyung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>title</tr> for one&apos;s grandfather or a grandparent&apos;s brother or a male cousin of his generation. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> become <tr>old</tr>. <i>Miúyung (naúyung) lag kalit ang íyang nawung sukad mamatay ang íyang asáwa,</i> His face suddenly aged when his wife died. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> become a grandfather.




</body>
</text>
</TEI.2>