<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN" [

<!ENTITY larr       CDATA "&#x2190;"          -- leftwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY rarr       CDATA "&#x2192;"          -- rightwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY glots      CDATA "&#x0294;"          -- glottal stop -->

<!ENTITY amacr      CDATA "&#x0101;"          -- a with macron -->
<!ENTITY imacr      CDATA "&#x012B;"          -- i with macron -->
<!ENTITY umacr      CDATA "&#x016B;"          -- u with macron -->

<!ENTITY Acaron     CDATA "&#x01CD;"            -- A with caron -->
<!ENTITY acaron     CDATA "&#x01CE;"            -- a with caron -->
<!ENTITY Icaron     CDATA "&#x01CF;"            -- I with caron -->
<!ENTITY icaron     CDATA "&#x01D0;"            -- i with caron -->
<!ENTITY Ucaron     CDATA "&#x01D3;"            -- U with caron -->
<!ENTITY ucaron     CDATA "&#x01D4;"            -- u with caron -->

<!ENTITY amacrgra   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0300;"  -- a with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY imacrgra   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0300;"  -- i with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY umacrgra   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0300;"  -- u with macron and grave -->

<!ENTITY amacracu   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0301;"  -- a with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY imacracu   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0301;"  -- i with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY umacracu   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0301;"  -- u with macron and acute -->

<!ENTITY amacrcir   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0302;"  -- a with macron and circumflex -->
<!ENTITY imacrcir   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0302;"  -- i with macron and circumflex -->
<!ENTITY umacrcir   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0302;"  -- u with macron and circumflex -->

<!ENTITY schwa      CDATA "&#x0259;"          -- schwa (turned e) -->
<!ENTITY N          CDATA "N"                   -- N symbol (as used in this dictionary) -->

<!ENTITY prime      CDATA "'"            -- prime -->
<!ENTITY Prime      CDATA "''"            -- double prime -->


]>
<TEI.2 lang=en>
<teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
        <titleStmt>
            <title>A Dictionary of Cebuano Visayan</title>
            <author>John U. Wolff</author>
        </titleStmt>
    </fileDesc>
    <profileDesc>
        <langUsage>
            <language id=en>English</language>
            <language id=en-US>English (United States)</language>
            <language id=ceb>Cebuano</language>
        </langUsage>
    </profileDesc>
</teiHeader>
<text>
<body>
<pb n=950>
<div1 type=Letter id=letter.t n=T>
<head>T</head>


<p id=17729><form>ta<sub>1</sub></form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>kita</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17730><form>ta<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tala<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=17731><form>tà<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>short for <sc>untà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17732><form>tà<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>short for <sc>tátà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17733><form>táak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>step on</tr>, <tr>tread</tr>. <i>Ngánung gitaákan man nímu ang ákung sabud?</i> Why did you step on my seedbed? <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> come to a place for the first time. <i>Nakatáak (nakataak) na kug Amirika,</i> Now, I have set foot in America. <i>Taákun ku bisag impirnu pagpangítà nímu,</i> I&apos;ll go to hell and back in my search for you.

<p id=17734><form>taal</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>genuine</tr>, <tr>pure</tr>. <i>Sáyaw nga taal Pilipínu,</i> Native Filipino dance. <i>Taal nà siyang Árab,</i> He is a full-blooded Arab. <number>2</number> <tr>mellow</tr> and <tr>well-aged</tr>. <pos>a</pos> said of root crops that have been left to mature in the ground. <i>Kamúting taal,</i> Mature sweet potatoes. <i>b</i> said of wine or vinegar. <i>Súkà nga taal,</i> Fully-aged vinegar. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); a2]</itype> become well-aged.

<p id=17735><form>taan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> set a trap of any sort. <i>Itaan ang búbu, lit-ag,</i> Set the fish trap, the noose. <form>taantáan</form> <pos>n</pos> method of fishing with a hook and line in shallow waters where the fisherman looks in the water with a <ix>silip</ix> or goggles at the same time as he holds his line and maneuvers his boat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> fish in this way.

<p id=17736><form>*taantaan</form> <form>{pa-|pataantaan}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> let s.t. happen to s.t. or oneself a while longer. <i>Magpataantaan pa ku ug bulad sa adlaw,</i> I&apos;ll stay out in the sun just a bit longer. <i>Ákung gipataantaanan ang lúgaw sa kaláyu,</i> I let the porridge cook on the fire just a little longer.

<p id=17737><form>taas</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>long</tr>, <tr>tall</tr>, <tr>high</tr>. <i>{&mdash;|taas} ug ilung</i> not see s.t. right in front of one&apos;s nose. <i>Taas kag ilung kay wà ka kakità sa lápis sa ímung atubángan,</i> You&apos;re blind because you didn&apos;t see the pencil right in front of your nose. <form>{&mdash;|taas} ug tinuntu</form> <tr>extremely naughty</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|taas} ug lupad</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>lupad</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B3(1); b6]</itype> grow, appear long, tall. <i>Mutaas ka kun maghayhil,</i> You&apos;ll appear tall if you wear heels. <i>Wà makataas ang káhuy kay giawngan,</i> The tree didn&apos;t grow tall because it was stifled by other trees. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> add more length, height. <i>Tas-i ang lamísa,</i> Make the table higher (longer). <number>3</number> <itype>[a]</itype> do s.t. in a long way. <i>Ayaw tas-a ímung ampù,</i> Don&apos;t make your prayers long. <number>4</number> <itype>[B23(1)4; b6]</itype> rise in temperature, pressure, and other quantities. <i>Nagkataas ang íyang hilánat,</i> His fever is getting higher and higher. <pos>n</pos> fifth bottle (slang). <form>{(&larr;)|táas}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); a1]</itype> be <tr>stretched</tr> long, <tr>tall</tr>. <i>Mitáas íyang líug ug pinangítà nákù,</i> She <tr>craned</tr> her neck looking for me. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>i-</sc>.</xr> <form>{pa-|pataas}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>raise</tr>. <i>Magpataas sa kamut ang dúnay pangutána,</i> Anyone who has a question should raise his hand. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>lengthen</tr>, increase the length. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>upward</tr>. <i>Isíbug ang kwadru pataas,</i> Move the picture upwards. <number>2</number> <tr>length-</tr>*wise, <form>{-g-|tagas}</form> <tr>high</tr>, <tr>tall</tr>, <tr>long</tr> (plural). <form>gitas-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>height</tr>, <tr>length</tr>. <form>{ha-|hataas}</form> <pos>a</pos> very <tr>long</tr>, <tr>high</tr>. <i>Hataas nga panahun,</i> A very long time. <form>{i-|itaas}, {i-(&larr;)|itáas}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>upstairs</tr>. <form>katas-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>uplands</tr>. <form>kahitas-an</form> <number>1</number> <tr>sky</tr>, <tr>heavens</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>God</tr>. <i>Ihangad sa kahitas-an ang ímung suliran,</i> Look to God for the solution to your problems. <form>mapahitas-un, mahatas-un, mahitas-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>haughty</tr>. <i>Mapahitas-un ang mga dátù,</i> The rich people are haughty. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> become haughty. <form>kamapahitas-un, kahatas-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>haughtiness</tr>.

<p id=17738><form>taay</form> <xr>= <sc>tayà<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=17739><form>t&amacracu;b</form> <xr>= <sc>tálab</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17740><form>tabà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pork fat</tr>.

<p id=17741><form>tabaghak</form> <xr>= <sc>baláhak</sc>, <ix>n, v</ix>.</xr>

<p id=17742><form>tabagnul</form> <pos>n</pos> a disease of bananas and root crops characterized by the appearance of hard masses of dark spores which sometimes break up into fine dust. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be affected with <tr>rust</tr>. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|tabagnulun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>blighted</tr> with fruit rust.

<p id=17743><form>tabagsak</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>sardine</tr>, slightly fatter than the <ix>tagnípis</ix>: <bio>Sardinella sp</bio>.

<p id=17744><form>tabagsuy</form> <xr>= <sc>tibagsuy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17745><form>tabak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13P; b6P]</itype> <tr>give</tr>, <tr>furnish</tr> s.o. with s.t. that can be worn on one&apos;s person for a purpose. <i>Kinsay nagtabak (nagpatabak) nímu ánang tráhi?</i> Who furnished you that suit? <i>Walà siya mahadluk kay gitabakan (gipatabakan) ug pistúla,</i> He was not afraid because he was furnished a pistol.

<p id=17746><form>tab-ak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> cover s.t. or s.o. by heaping or dumping s.t. onto it. <i>Daghan kaáyung trabáhu ang gitab-ak ni bus sa sikritarya,</i> The boss <tr>heaped</tr> a pile of work on the secretary.

<p id=17747><form>tabakalíra</form> <pos>n</pos> large warehouse belonging to the Tabacalera organization where farmers sell their products.

<p id=17748><form>tabákù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tobacco</tr>. <number>2</number> piece of <tr>tobacco</tr> rolled for smoking. <form>{(&rarr;)|tabakù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>smoke</tr>. <i>Ang <pb n=951>dáhun sa lumbuy maáyu tabak-un sa hubákun,</i> <ix>Lungbuy</ix> leaves are good for asthmatics to smoke. <form>{pa&N;-|panabákù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> be <tr>smoking</tr>. <i>Wà gánì tay ipanabákù, sini na núun,</i> I don&apos;t even have money for smoking much less for movies. <form>tabakun-an, {-an(&rarr;)|tabakúan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tobacco field</tr>.

<p id=17749><form>tabal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> preserve large fish by salting but not drying under the sun. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> keep a piece of gossip. <i>Gitabal nákù ang íyang pagkadisgrasyáda,</i> I kept it a <tr>secret</tr> that she once had a baby out of wedlock. <form>{-in-|tinabal}</form> <pos>n</pos> fish preserved with salt.

<p id=17750><form>tabal-ak</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. large woven <tr>sack</tr>, usually made of buri leaves, commonly used for holding brown sugar or salt. <i>Usa ka tabal-ak kámay,</i> A buri bag full of brown sugar. <pos>a</pos> for a woman to be fat and shapeless like a <ix>tabal-ak</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make this k.o. container. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> do by the <ix>tabal-ak</ix>. <number>3</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> get to look like a <ix>tabal-ak</ix>. <i>Lawásan pa nà run, apan manghinap&umacrcir; ka túig karun matabal-ak na pud nà,</i> She may have a good body, but give her ten years and she will look like a sack. <form>{-in-|tinabal-ak}</form> <pos>n</pos> put in the <ix>tabal-ak</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>tabal-ak</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr>

<p id=17751><form>tában</form> (from <ix>talában</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; a12]</itype> <tr>elope</tr>. <i>Nagtában ang duha ug wà na lang pakasal,</i> The two eloped and did not get married formally. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>talában</sc>.</xr> <form>{pa-|patában}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> give, put s.t. miscellaneous along with the thing of primary interest. <i>Magpatában siyag kwarta matag sulat níya,</i> He <tr>encloses</tr> money each time he writes. <i>Gipatabánan ug midiyas ang gipalit kung sapátus,</i> A pair of socks went together with the shoes I bought. <number>2</number> do s.t. additional, do s.t. but not without making unwanted remarks. <i>Muhátag lagi, apan patabánan ug sirmun,</i> Sure, she&apos;ll give you some but not without reading you a lecture. <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>enclosed</tr> or put along with.

<p id=17752><form>tabanaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>whore</tr>, <tr>prostitute</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>fake</tr>. <i>Dì ku mudáwat niánang tabanaw nga kwarta,</i> I won&apos;t accept that fake money. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a1c1]</itype> be a prostitute.

<p id=17753><form>tábang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>help</tr>, give a hand. <i>Tabángi siya,</i> Help her. <i>Kun may ikatábang ku sangpit lang,</i> If I can do s.t., just call on me. <form>{(&rarr;)|tabang}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>rescue</tr>, attend to s.o. suddenly ill. <i>Tabanga siya kay hápit na malumus,</i> Rescue him because he&apos;s drowning. <number>2</number> <itype>[a]</itype> be <tr>helped</tr>, <tr>remedied</tr>. <i>Matabang pa kahà ning dakù mag sayup,</i> Can this big error still be <tr>corrected</tr>? <number>3</number> manage to do all of s.t. <i>Dì na matabang ning kadaghanúna,</i> I can&apos;t manage to do this much work. <number>4</number> <itype>[A3; b(1)]</itype> gang up to do s.t. together. <i>Nap&umacrcir; ang mitabang nákug sumbagay,</i> Ten people ganged up to fight against me. <i>Tabangan nátù nig káun kay daghan,</i> Let&apos;s all of us help eat this because there&apos;s so much. <number>5</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> hook in a big catch with a <tr>gaff</tr>. <i>Tabanga ang íyang kuhà arun dì makabuhì,</i> Hook in his catch with a gaff so that it can&apos;t get away. <pos>n</pos> a <tr>gaff</tr> attached to a handle used to help pull in a big fish caught on a fishline. <form>{pa&N;-|panábang}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> assist in child delivery. <i>Akuy nanábang pagpanganak níya,</i> I delivered her baby. <pos>n</pos> <tr>help</tr>, <tr>aid</tr>. <form>{-ay|tabangay}, {-in-ay|tinabangay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2]</itype> help each other. <form>{hi&N;-|hinábang}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c5]</itype> send aid (usually material assistance). <i>Gihinabángan ang Byapra sa Ridkrus,</i> Biafra is receiving <tr>aid</tr> from the Red Cross. <pos>n</pos> <tr>aid</tr>, <tr>assistance</tr> sent. <form>{paki-|pakitábang}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S3]</itype> ask for help. <i>Nakitábang (mipakitábang) ang kundinádu sa kinataliwad-an sa íyang kaguul,</i> The condemned man called out for help in the midst of his sorrows. <i>Nagpakitábang (nagpakitabang) ang babáying gilúgus,</i> The woman who was being raped cried for help. <form>singgit {paki-|pakitábang}</form> <pos>n</pos> cry for help. <form>{ma&N;-r-(&rarr;)|mananabang}</form> <pos>n</pos> medically untrained midwife. <form>{ma&N;-r-(&rarr;)|mananabang} ug sanggì</form> harvest help. <form>tabangtábang, {ka-|katábang}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>helper</tr>, <tr>assistant</tr>. <form>{ma-in-un|matinabangun}, {pahi&N;-un|pahinabangun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>helpful</tr>.

<p id=17754><form>tab-ang</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>flat</tr> in taste, lacking sugar or salt. <i>Pun-ig kámay ang kapi kay tab-ang ra,</i> Put more sugar in the coffee because it tastes flat. <i>Ang isdà sa dágat dílì mabúhì sa túbig tab-ang,</i> Marine fishes do not live in fresh water. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> be flat in taste. <number>2</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> for a man or woman to feel cool toward his sweetheart. <i>Nagbúlag ang managtrátu kay gitab-angan na ang usag-usa kaníla,</i> The sweethearts separated because they got tired of each other. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|tab-angan}</form> <pos>a</pos> mentally deficient. <i>Wà giyud magtúnu ang íyang gipanulti, mu ra giyug táwung tab-angan,</i> The things he says do not make sense. He seems to be a stupid fool.

<p id=17755><form>tabangkà</form> <xr>= <sc>kagùkù<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=17756><form>tabangkù</form> <pos>n</pos> young <tr>barracuda</tr> (<ix>rumpi kandádu</ix> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>rumpi</sc></xr>).

<p id=17757><form>tabánug</form> <xr>= <sc>talabánug</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>banug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17758><form>tábas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> cut lengthwise or through s.t. flat. <i>Gitábas ang trúsu nga himúung tabla,</i> The log was cut into boards. <number>1a</number> go over a surface as if cutting it. <i>Ang gamayng sakayan nitábas sa mabalud nga lawud,</i> The small boat plowed through the stormy seas. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> make a dress. <form>{&mdash;|tábas} sa nawung</form> <pos>n</pos> shape of the face. <i>Nindut kaáyug tábas ang íyang nawung,</i> She has a finely-shaped face. <form>{(&rarr;)|tabas}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> style of dress. <i>Minugbù ang tabas sa sinínà karun,</i> Short dresses are the <tr>style</tr> now. <number>2</number> k.o. cock feather coloration of a splotch of darker color on a light field. <form>{-in-an(&rarr;)|tinabasan}</form> <pos>n</pos> the style of a particular article of clothing.

<pb n=952>

<p id=17759><form>tábaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>joist</tr>, parallel board to which the floor boards are nailed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; c]</itype> put in joists. <i>Ang báhì sa pugáhan lig-un itábaw,</i> The core of the <ix>pugáhan</ix> palm make strong joists.

<p id=17760><form>tabawung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>trunkfish</tr>: <bio>Ostracion spp</bio>.

<p id=17761><form>tábay</form> <xr>= <sc>atábay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17762><form>tabáyag</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible <tr>squash</tr>, round in shape with a knob-like protrusion at the top. The shell becomes hard when mature and is used as a container: <bio>Lagenaria leucantha var</bio>.

<p id=17763><form>tabì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c6]</itype> <tr>gossip</tr>, spread secrets. <i>Ayaw siya suginli kay mutabì (manabì) dáyun,</i> Don&apos;t tell her because she gives away secrets. <i>Ayaw ni itabì (ipanabì) kay makauúlaw,</i> Don&apos;t gossip about this because it&apos;s embarrassing. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>talk</tr>, <tr>chat</tr>. <number>2</number> unpleasant <tr>gossip</tr>. <form>{(&larr;)|tábì}<sub>1</sub>, {hi&N;-(&larr;)|hinábì}</form> <pos>n</pos> action of gossiping or chatting. <i>Tábì (hinábì) ray inyung mahímù ug wà matiwas ang trabáhu,</i> All you can do is <tr>blah-blah</tr>, and you never finish any work. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13C]</itype> engage in gossip or chatting. <i>Túa na ang duha, nagtábì (naghinábì) na pud,</i> There they are, shooting off their mouths again. <form>{-an|tabian}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>talkative</tr>, <tr>loquacious</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>gossiper</tr>.

<p id=17764><form>tábì<sub>2</sub></form> <number>1</number> <ix>particle of courtesy used to ask permission to leave for a second, ask a question, pass in front of s.o.:</ix> <tr>excuse me</tr>. <i>Tábì, kinsay ímung ngálan?</i> Excuse me, what&apos;s your name? <i>Tábì úsà, byáan tikawg kadiyut,</i> Excuse me, I have to leave you a second. <number>2</number> particle telling s.o. to get out of the way rather brusquely. <i>Tábì diha u sikáran tika,</i> Get out of the way or I&apos;ll kick you. <form>{&mdash;|tábì} iskína</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> name of news column and radio program that exposes anomalies. <number>2</number> child that has a young sibling (and <corr sic=this>thus</corr> is shunted off to the corner). <number>3</number> woman beyond her prime (and not yet married). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256; a12]</itype> be aired in this program or column. <number>2</number> <itype>[B35]</itype> wind up a spinster. <form>{pa&N;-|panábì}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> say excuse me.

<p id=17765><form>tabíbì</form> <xr>= <sc>tíbì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17766><form>tabid<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B346; c1]</itype> <tr>trickle</tr>, <tr>drip</tr>, flowing down a side. <i>Magtabid nang íyang láway ug matúlug,</i> Her saliva trickles from her lips as she sleeps.

<p id=17767><form>tabid<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>braid</tr> the hair. <i>Tabira nang buhuk mu, ayaw ipunitil,</i> Braid your hair instead of having it in ponytail. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make into a <ix>tabid</ix>. <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>hamper</tr> for containing clothes woven from bamboo strips around <measure reg="6.1 m">20&prime;</measure> by <measure reg="6.1 m">20&prime;</measure>, with a cover. <form>{-in-|tinabid}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>braided hair</tr>.

<p id=17768><form>tabig</form> <xr>= <sc>tabid<sub>2</sub></sc>, <i>v2, n.</i></xr>

<p id=17769><form>tabígì</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>mangrove</tr>, the bark of which yields a red dye used for strengthening fishlines, nets or coloring the floor of a house: <bio>Xylocarpus granatum</bio>.

<p id=17770><form>tabíki</form> <pos>n</pos> houses in Spanish times made of stones evenly piled and plastered smoothly with lime. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> build structures of <ix>tabíki</ix>.

<p id=17771><form>tabikung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; c1]</itype> sit on s.t. <tr>straddling</tr> it. <i>Mitabikung siya sa baksit sa bisiklíta,</i> She sat on the backseat of the bicycle, straddling it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> have sexual intercourse (euphemism). <i>Mihanà ang laki pagtabikung sa bayi,</i> The male set out to mount the female.

<p id=17772><form>tábil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> put up a curtain in order to conceal s.t. <i>Gitabílan ang katri sa pasyinting gilígù,</i> They put a curtain around the bed of the patient while he was being given a bath. <number>2</number> <tr>blanket</tr>, <tr>engulf</tr> (literary). <i>Ang kangitngit mitábil na sa kalibútan,</i> Darkness covered the earth. <pos>n</pos> curtain for covering s.t. <form>puting {&mdash;|tábil}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>movie screen</tr>. <number>2</number> world of the movies. <form>{(&rarr;)|tabil}</form> <xr>= <sc>tábil</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=17773><form>tabiláwan</form> (coined from <ix>tábil</ix> and <ix>laráwan</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>stage curtain</tr>, <tr>backdrop</tr>.

<p id=17774><form>tabili</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. lizard, about <measure reg="46 cm">1&frac12;&prime;</measure> long with shining yellow and green skin, found out-of-doors. <form>{&mdash;|tabili} sa dágat</form> <pos>n</pos> lizard fish, a k.o. fish around <measure reg="15 cm">6&Prime;</measure> long, living on sandy bottoms of shallow waters.

<p id=17775><form>tabílis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S]</itype> <tr>flow</tr>, <tr>drip</tr> continuously. <i>Mitabílis ang túbig sa tangking nabuslut,</i> Water flowed continuously from the water tank that had a hole in it. <form>{-in-|tinabílis}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>continuous flow</tr>, <tr>dripping</tr>, <tr>trickling</tr>.

<p id=17776><form>tabilung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. rounded slipmouth of two species: one with fine, black scales which peel off easily, and the other a smooth, rounded and silvery species: <bio>Leiognathus spp</bio>.

<p id=17777><form>tabilus</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. slipmouth with a small mouth which could be elongated when stretched: <bio>Leiognathus sp</bio>.

<p id=17778><form>tabing</form> <xr>= <sc>marbas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17779><form>tabírak</form> <xr>= <sc>binignit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17780><form>tabirnakulu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tabernacle</tr>.

<p id=17781><form>tabirwak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vagina</tr>, said of women who have given birth to one or more children.

<p id=17782><form>tabisay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>flow</tr> down vertically in a thin stream, usually touching a surface. <i>Nagtabisay ang dugù gíkan sa kílay nga nasìsì,</i> Blood flowed from the cut eyebrow. <i>Ang íyang suwang gitabisayan sa láway,</i> Saliva dribbled down his chin.

<p id=17783><form>tabíwis</form> <xr>= <sc>tabílis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17784><form>tabla<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>draw</tr>, <tr>tie</tr>. <i>Tabla ang risulta sa iliksiyun,</i> The election ended in a draw. <number>2</number> having experienced an equal amount of s.t., usually unpleasant. <i>Tabla ta. Púlus hilatusan,</i> <pb n=953>We both came out the same. We both got a whipping. <number>3</number> just like, just as if. <i>Ang ímung pagluib nákù tabla ra sa ímu akung gipatay,</i> When you betrayed me it was just as though you had killed me. <i>Tabla ka ug búang ánang ímung taas nga buhuk,</i> You are like a madman with your long hair. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> declare a game a draw, end in a draw. <i>Tabláhun ta na lang ni kay ngitngit na,</i> Let&apos;s call the game a draw because it&apos;s getting dark. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> play s.o. to a draw. <i>Maáyu nag makatabla kag kampiyun,</i> It would be good enough if you could play a champion to a draw. <form>{pa&N;-|panabla}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> give one&apos;s life to get revenge. <i>Kay nadisgrasya na ku manabla na lang ku níya,</i> Because he has violated me, I&apos;ll give my life to kill him.

<p id=17785><form>tabla<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>board</tr>, a piece of sawed lumber, made of lumber. <i>Muskitírung tabla,</i> <tr>coffin</tr> (lit. mosquito net of wood). <number>2</number> pieces of cloth cut ready for sewing. <i>Upat ka tabla ang karsúnis,</i> Trousers are sewn from four pieces of cloth cut according to the measurements. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> saw into boards. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> cut cloth for sewing. <form>{-in-|tinabla}</form> <pos>a</pos> gore, a style of skirt. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> wear, make into a gore style skirt.

<p id=17786><form>tabla<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make off with s.t. that belongs to s.o. else. <i>Nakatabla siyag duha ka líbu nga kubransa,</i> He made off with two thousand pesos that he had collected.

<p id=17787><form>tabládu</form> <xr>= <sc>intabládu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17788><form>tablaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> get a big enough quantity of s.t. pleasant not to desire any more. <i>Dì ku matablaw pagtinan-aw nímu,</i> I can&apos;t get enough of looking at you. <i>Makatablaw (makapatablaw) sad tung inyung híkay,</i> Your dinner was more than filling.

<p id=17789><form>tablíta, tablítas</form> <pos>n</pos> tablet, <tr>capsule</tr>.

<p id=17790><form>tablíya</form> <pos>n</pos> ground cacao pressed into solid pieces. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> mold cacao into pieces. <form>{-in-|tinablíya}</form> <pos>n</pos> molded into cubes or bricks. <i>Nangismágul siyag tinablíyang buláwan,</i> He smuggles gold bullion. <i>Tinablíya nga batu,</i> Stone blocks.

<p id=17791><form>tablug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; c]</itype> <tr>swing</tr>, make a swinging motion. <i>Mutablug ang kawáyan kun hangínun,</i> The bamboo poles swing to and fro when the wind blows them. <i>Siyay nagtablug sa dúyan nákù sa gamay pa ku,</i> She rocked my cradle when I was young. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> throw s.t. out with a swinging motion. <i>Gitablug níla sa barku ang mga patay,</i> They threw the dead men overboard. <i>Tablúgan ta unyà ka ug inínit,</i> I&apos;ll throw hot water on you, if you don&apos;t watch out. <form>{(&rarr;)|tablung}</form> <pos>n</pos> rope or cloth that holds up a hammock. <form>tablugtablug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>dangle</tr> as a result of almost being cut off. <i>Nagtablugtablug ang íyang tudlù nga hápit maputul,</i> His finger that was almost cut is dangling.

<p id=17792><form>tablun</form> <pos>n</pos> a log squared off and ready for sawing into boards. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>square off</tr> a log.

<p id=17793><form>tabtab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> hack s.t. off with several blows. <i>Siyay nagtabtab sa písing gibugkus sa kaban,</i> He cut off the rope that bound the trunk.

<p id=17794><form>tábù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>meet</tr> s.o. <i>Tabúun nátù siya sa piyir,</i> We&apos;ll meet him at the pier. <i>Pirmi lang kasábà ímung itábù inig-abut nákù,</i> You always meet me with nagging when I come home. <number>1a</number> <itype>[C; c3]</itype> meet each other on the way. <i>Ambut ása siya. Gikatábù man tu nákù,</i> I don&apos;t know where he&apos;s going. We met on the way. <number>1b</number> <itype>[AC; a2]</itype> assemble, meet, cause people to do so. <i>Ang mayur mauy mitábù sa mga draybir,</i> The mayor assembled the drivers. <i>Magtábù ta sa simbahan,</i> We will assemble in church. <number>2</number> <itype>[C3; c1]</itype> for two ends to meet, make them meet. <i>Tabúa (itábù) ang masig ka tumuy arun glúhan,</i> Make both ends meet so they can be glued. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> converge at a place for market. <i>Magtábù dinhi malúnis,</i> They hold market here on Mondays. <pos>n</pos> periodical converging to hold market. <form>{pa&N;-|panábù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>go shopping</tr>, esp. at a periodical market. <i>Manábù ku sa Mantalúngun,</i> I&apos;ll attend the market day in Mantalongon. <form>{hi-(&rarr;)|hitabù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>happen</tr>, <tr>take place</tr>. <i>Nahitabù nga nagkasákay mi,</i> It so happened that we rode on the same vehicle. <number>2</number> for s.t. bad to happen. <i>Ug magpadáyun kag paíbug nákù mahitabù ra man ta,</i> If you keep on flirting with me s.t. will happen between us. <i>Dúna tingaliy nahitabù sa báy kay gikulbaan man ku,</i> S.t. bad must have happened at home because I feel uneasy. <pos>n</pos> <tr>incident</tr>, <tr>happening</tr>. <i>Gisaysay níya ang hitabù,</i> He told about the incident. <form>{ha-|hatabù}/{hi&N;-|hinabù}/{ha&N;-(&rarr;)|hanabù}</form> <xr>= <sc>hitabù</sc> (but not as frequent).</xr> <form>{hi&N;-|hinábù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C3; c3]</itype> <tr>meet</tr> s.o. by chance. <i>Na, kay naglikay ku, nagkahinábù na hinúun mi,</i> I was trying to avoid him, but instead we ran into each other. <form>tabùtábù</form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>market</tr>. <form>tabuan</form> <pos>n</pos> place where periodic markets are held. <form>{-in-an|tinabúan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gift</tr> given by s.o. who arrives from a trip.

<p id=17795><form>tabudlung</form> <xr>= <sc>budlung<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=17796><form>tabudyus</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>cylindrical</tr>. <i>Tabudyus ang panghaw sa barku,</i> The ship&apos;s chimney is cylindrical. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the fry of the <ix>gisaw</ix>. <number>2</number> sweet made of starch from the trunk of buri palm mixed with grated coconut meat, sugar, and <pb n=954>water, wrapped in banana leaves and rolled to cylinders the size of a child&apos;s arm, about <measure reg="18 cm">7&Prime;</measure> long, and roasted. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> roll into a cylinder, tube. <i>Nagtabudyus siyag sín nga himúung túbu sa túbig,</i> He rolled a galvanized sheet into a cylinder to make a water pipe. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> prepare <ix>tabudyus</ix>.

<p id=17797><form>tabug</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>tablug</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <number>2</number> beehive hanging from a tree branch shaped like a mammary gland. <form>tabugtabug</form> <xr>= <sc>tablugtablug</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tablug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17798><form>tábug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; 1]</itype> drive, send away. <i>Tabúga ang bábuy nga misulud sa kural,</i> Drive the pig that got into our yard away. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> throw s.t. away to dispose of it. <i>Itabug tikas bintánà,</i> I&apos;ll throw you out the window.

<p id=17799><form>tábug<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. in excess, way beyond reasonable bounds. <i>Nagtábug (nagpatábug) ka man lag prisyu sa ímung baligyà!</i> You are pricing your merchandise ridiculously high! <i>Nakapatábug kug sulti tungud sa ákung kalágut,</i> I said a lot of things I should not have because of my anger. <number>2</number> do s.t. without forethought. <i>Nagpatábug lag tíru, lagmit makaigù,</i> The way he is just shooting so carelessly, he might just hit s.o. <number>3</number> do s.t. hurriedly and carelessly. <i>Dì ku makapatábug ug lútù sa sud-an,</i> I can&apos;t cook the food hurriedly and poorly.

<p id=17800><form>tábug<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tablug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17801><form>tabugsuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large spider conch.

<p id=17802><form>tabugsuk<sub>2</sub></form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>bugsuk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17803><form>tabuguk</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small octopus, larger than the <ix>tamalà</ix>, smaller than the <ix>kugíta</ix>.

<p id=17804><form>tabuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>cross over</tr>, bring s.t. across to the opposite side. <i>Mutabuk na ta sa karsáda,</i> Let&apos;s cross the street. <i>Kuyaw tabukun ning subáa kay sulug,</i> This river is dangerous to cross because the current is strong. <i>Itabuk ning asin sa píkas p&umacrcir;,</i> Bring the salt across to the other island. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> emigrate to another island. <i>Mitabuk siya sa Mindanaw pamásin nga muasinsu,</i> He migrated to Mindanao in the hope that he would be successful there. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> move from one group or affiliation to a rival one. <i>Ang Libiral nga diputádu mitabuk ngadtu sa Nasyunalista,</i> The Liberal congressman crossed over to the Nacionalista Party. <pos>n</pos> area on the other side, across the street. <i>Túa siya manarabáhu sa tabuk,</i> He works on the other island (other bank). <form>{-anan(&larr;)|tabukanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ferryboat</tr>. <number>2</number> small, make-shift bridge. <form>{-anun(&larr;)|tabukánun}</form> <pos>n</pos> people from across the street, the other island. <form>{-l-un|talabukun}</form> <pos>a</pos> to be reached by crossing a body of water.

<p id=17805><form>tabukaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. yaws, swelling with an oozing opening in the center, growing to <measure reg="2.6 cm">1&Prime;</measure>, after which <ix>sungkil</ix> develops.

<p id=17806><form>Tabúli</form> <pos>n</pos> a pagan ethnic group of Cotabato.

<p id=17807><form>tábun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>cover</tr> s.t. to protect or conceal it. <i>Tabúni ang kan-un arun dílì langawun,</i> Cover the food so it won&apos;t get flies on it. <number>2</number> <tr>cover up</tr> for s.o.&apos;s mistakes. <i>Nagdasà siya kay mutábun ang ginikánan sa íyang binúang,</i> He is abusive because his parents cover up for his foolishness. <number>3</number> <tr>drown out</tr> a sound. <i>Hápit tabúni ang íyang tíngug sa makusug nga áwit,</i> Her voice was almost drowned out by the loud song. <pos>n</pos> <form>{&mdash;|tábun} sa láyag</form> <tr>Passion Sunday</tr>, the second Sunday before Easter when it was the custom to cover the tabernacle and statue with a piece of purple cloth. <form>{(&rarr;)|tabun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cover</tr>. <i>Hápit walay tabun ang íyang dughan,</i> Her breast was almost uncovered. <form>tabuntábun</form> <xr>= <sc>tábun</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr> <form>tabuntábun, tabuntabun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>eyelid</tr>.

<p id=17808><form>tábun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>tulábung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17809><form>tábung</form> <xr>= <sc>tulábung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17810><form>tab-ung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac1]</itype> keep fruits in a dark, warm place to hasten ripening. <form>{-in-an|tinab-ungan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fruit ripened in this way. <number>2</number> unsavory secrets about one&apos;s past experiences.

<p id=17811><form>tabunuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fertile</tr>. <i>Tabunuk ang yútà sa pátag,</i> The soil in the plains is fertile. <i>Káda túig man manganak, tabunuk giyung matrísa,</i> She gives birth every year. She has a fertile womb. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become fertile.

<p id=17812><form>tabúnun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>brown-skinned</tr>. <pos>n</pos> the <tr>brown race</tr>. <i>Si Risal garbu sa yútang tabúnun,</i> Rizal is the pride of the land of the brown race.

<p id=17813><form>tabunus</form> <pos>n</pos> a covered <tr>receptacle</tr> esp. for soiled clothes about <measure reg="61&ndash;91 cm">2&ndash;3&prime;</measure> long, made of sawali.

<p id=17814><form>taburíti</form> <pos>n</pos> wooden or rattan <tr>chair</tr> with a backrest.

<p id=17815><form>tabuylug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; b2c1]</itype> <tr>swing</tr>, <tr>spin</tr> around; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Mitabuylug ang bátà sa písì,</i> The child hung to a rope and swung around. <i>Nagtabuylug ang tyubíbu,</i> The merry-go-round is spinning around.

<p id=17816><form>tabuylug<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> <tr>go together</tr>. <i>Magtabuylug ta ngadtu sa sini,</i> Let us go to the show together. <i>Gitabuylug níya paghigut ang mga bábuy,</i> He tied the pigs together on one peg. <pos>n</pos> constant companion. <i>Íyang anak ang ákung tabuylug,</i> His son is my constant companion. <form>{-in-|tinabuylug}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> walk together in groups; walk side by side together. <i>Dílì kita makatinabuylug sa pagpanglákaw niíning pit-us nga dálan,</i> We can not walk <tr>abreast</tr> on this narrow path.

<p id=17817><form>tabyáyung</form> <xr>= <sc>balantíyung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17818><form>tabyug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB456; a1]</itype> swing s.t. suspended. <i>Mitabyug ang písing ákung gikumbibátan,</i> The rope I was clinging to swung. <i>Kinsay nagtabyug sa dúyan?</i> Who swung the hammock? <pb n=955><i>Tabyúga ang butùbútù sa kampána,</i> Swing the clapper of the big bell. <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to swing a hammock, such as a string.

<p id=17819><form>tabyun</form> <xr>= <sc>kulabyun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17820><form>tabyus</form> <xr>= <sc>kadyus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17821><form>tád</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small, slippery <tr>fishes</tr> of various colors, with large scales, found in seaweeds.

<p id=17822><form>tadhan</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>tahud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17823><form>tadiyà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> throw a knife such that the point sticks in at impact. <i>Hingígù ka giyud ug makatadiyà ka ánang irung nagdagan,</i> You&apos;re really a marksman if you can sink a knife into that running dog. <pos>n</pos> <tr>knife throwing</tr>.

<p id=17824><form>tadiyaw</form> <pos>n</pos> large earthen jar to hold liquids. <form>{-in-|tinadiyaw}</form> <pos>a</pos> shaped like a <ix>tadiyaw</ix>. <i>Ang íyang kasing tinadiyaw,</i> His top is <tr>egg-shaped</tr>.

<p id=17825><form>tadlas</form> <tr>across</tr> an area. <i>Midágan siya tadlas sa uma,</i> He ran across the farm. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>go across</tr> a broad area. <i>Tadlásun ku ang kadagátan pagpangítà nímu,</i> I&apos;ll <tr>cross</tr> the oceans searching for you. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|tadlasan}</form> <pos>n</pos> center player of the defensive team in <ix>tubigtúbig</ix>.

<p id=17826><form>tadlip</form> <xr>= <sc>adlip</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17827><form>tadluk</form> <pos>n</pos> coconut seedling. <i>Pilía ang tambuk nga tadluk,</i> Choose a healthy seedling. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> let coconuts sprout for seedlings. <i>Mutadluk (magtadluk) tag pila ka buuk,</i> We will let a few coconuts sprout into seedlings.

<p id=17828><form>tadlung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; a12]</itype> go or walk straight to a place. <i>Tadlúnga lang tung kahúya kay hilabyan mu ang tábay,</i> Just walk straight to that tree and you will pass the well.

<p id=17829><form>tadlungan</form> <pos>n</pos> black-finned <tr>shark</tr>: <bio>Carcharias melanopterus</bio>.

<p id=17830><form>tadluy</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> small <tr>funnel</tr> for solids, used to get rice out of sacks to see what the contents are. <number>2</number> a k.o. <tr>fish</tr> with a round, tapered body growing about <measure reg="13 cm">5&Prime;</measure> or <measure reg="15 cm">6&Prime;</measure> in length, about an inch in diameter, white belly and darker back, with fine scales. a straight, in line with. <i>Syárug dílì ka kapasulud sa numiru dyís nga tadluy man ni kaáyu ngadtus bangag,</i> Surely you can get the number ten ball in because it is directly in line with the hole.

<p id=17831><form>tadtad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>chop</tr> into bits. <i>Nagtadtad siyag tinái arun himúung dugùdugù,</i> He is chopping entrails into bits for the blood stew. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> have <tr>sexual intercourse</tr> (slang). <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> action of <tr>cutting</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>sexual intercourse</tr>. <form>maáyu lang tayáda way {&mdash;|tadtad}</form> all talk and no action. <form>tadtaran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chopping board</tr>. <form>{-in-|tinadtad}</form> <pos>n</pos> dish consisting primarily of chopped entrails and blood.

<p id=17832><form>tadyak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>kick</tr> hard with the foot. <i>Tadyáki ang irung náa sa iláwum sa lamísa,</i> Kick that dog under the table.

<p id=17833><form>tadyaw</form> <xr>= <sc>tadiyaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17834><form>tadyus</form> <xr>= <sc>kadyus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17835><form>tadyùtù</form> <xr>= <sc>tayùtù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17836><form>tág</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tag</tr>, a piece of paper identifying s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6(1)]</itype> put a <tr>tag</tr> on s.t.

<p id=17837><form>tag-<sub>1</sub></form> affix forming nouns which refer to the agent of a particular action or to the particular person concerned. <i>Si Risal ang tagsúlat (tagsulat) sa Núli Mi Tanghiri,</i> Rizal was the author of Noli Me Tangere. <i>Ang tagsalà,</i> The one who committed the sin. <i>Tagbalay (tagbálay),</i> Owner of the house.

<p id=17838><form>tag-<sub>2</sub></form> <number>1</number> prefix added to numbers and numerals to form numerals which mean [so-and-so] many apiece. <i>Tag singku ang pan disal,</i> Rolls cost five cents each. <i>Tagsa ka sáku, tagurha ka sáku ang palitun káda palit níya,</i> He buys a sack, two sacks at a time. <number>2</number> <ix>added to other parts of speech:</ix> [such-and-such] <tr>each time</tr>. <i>Tagdugay siyang mupaúlì,</i> He comes home late each time. <i>Taglagyù siyag byáhi,</i> He travels long distances each time.

<p id=17839><form>tagà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fishhook</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a3b2]</itype> caught, snagged on a fishhook. <i>Hitag-an na bayà apan nakabuhì,</i> It was already caught on the hook, but it broke free. <form>{pa&N;-|panagà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> catch with a hook and line.

<p id=17840><form>tagà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>cut down</tr> trees. <i>Siyay nagtaga sa ímung tanum,</i> He cut your plant down. <i>Tagaa ang punúan sa ságing,</i> Cut the trunk of the banana tree down. <pos>n</pos> action of <tr>felling</tr> trees. <form>{ma&N;-r-(&larr;)|mananágà}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>woodcutter</tr>.

<p id=17841><form>*tágà</form> suppletive form for <ix>hátag</ix> used optionally for suffixed forms.<i> Tagáan (hatágan) ta ka ug dulsi,</i> I will give you candy. <i>Pagbinuutan kay básig hitagaan kag gása,</i> Be good because you might get a present. <form>{-l-an(&rarr;)|talagaan}, {-anan|tagaanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. one is obliged to give. <number>2</number> person to whom given. <form>{-in-an|tinagáan}</form> <pos>n</pos> one to whom s.t. is given. <form>{-in-an(&rarr;)|tinagaan}</form> <pos>n</pos> manner of giving. <form>{ka-un|katagáun}</form> <pos>a</pos> on the verge of giving. <form>{ma-in-un|matinagáun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>generous</tr>, liking to give. <form>{-l-un|talagáun}, {-unun(&rarr;)|tagaunun}</form> <xr>= <sc>tagaanan</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p id=17842><form>taga-</form> prefix added to words that refer to a place to form nouns which mean: <number>1</number> one who is from [such-and-such] a place. <i>Tagamanílà diay ka,</i> So, you are from Manila. <i>Tagaámù,</i> One who is from my hometown. <number>2</number> one who is associated with a certain group. <i>Tagakustum,</i> People in the <tr>Customs</tr>. <i>Tagakíim,</i> One of the members of the K.M.&apos;s (<ix>Kabatáang Makabáyan</ix>, Patriotic Youth).

<p id=17843><form>taga-(&rarr;)</form> prefix added to words referring to parts of the body to form words meaning &lsquo;up to [so-and-so]&rsquo;. <i>Tagaliug ku sa útang,</i> I&apos;m up to my neck in debts.

<p id=17844><form>tagábung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> strands of hair formed into a <pb n=956><tr>wig</tr> to reinforce a chignon. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> make into a hairpiece of this sort.

<p id=17845><form>tagábung<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tugábung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17846><form>tagad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>give attention to</tr>, <tr>mind</tr>. <i>Wà na siya magtagad sa íyang pangláwas,</i> She stopped paying attention to her health. <i>Wà ku makatagad nímu dáyun,</i> I wasn&apos;t able to <tr>attend to</tr> you at once. <i>Walà ni Li tagda ang ákung pakilúuy,</i> Lee did not heed my pleading. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>pay attention to</tr> s.o. showing warmth, concern. <i>Mutagad lang siya kun unáhan,</i> He is friendly to others only when they speak to him first. <i>Nagtagad pa giyud kag andam dà,</i> You shouldn&apos;t have bothered fixing anything to eat. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>wait for</tr>. <i>Ása ta magtagad ug sakyanan?</i> Where shall we wait for the bus? <pos>n</pos> action of <tr>caring</tr>. <i>Wà siyay tagad sa íyang pagkáun,</i> He is not particular about his food. <form>{(&larr;)|tágad}</form> <xr>= <sc>tagad</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr> <form>tagdanay, tinagdanay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2]</itype> be on friendly terms with each other. <form>{-in-|tinagad}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>looked up to</tr>, <tr>respected</tr>, considered important. <i>Usa siya sa mga tinagad nga táwu sa lungsud,</i> He is one of the respected people in the town. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13N]</itype> treat s.o. as worthy of attention. <i>Magtinagad (maninagad) ka man niánang bastus,</i> Why do you mind those rowdy fellows? <form>{-anan|tagadanan}, tagaranan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>waiting place</tr>. <form>tinagdan</form> <pos>n</pos> manner of attending to s.t. <i>Lahì ang íyang tinagdan (pagtagad) kanákù karun sa kaniadtu,</i> She treats me differently from the way she used to. <form>matinagdánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>attentive</tr>. <form>{pag-|pagtagad}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>attention</tr>. <i>Ang íyang líhuk nakadani sa ákung pagtagad,</i> The way she acted caught my attention. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>tinagdan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17847><form>tagadtad</form> <pos>a</pos> for the meat of fleshy fruits and tubers to have hardened parts. <i>Tagadtad kaáyu ang kamúti nga guwang,</i> Matured sweet potatoes have hardened portions. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> get to have hardened portions. <i>Sakit ang nakatagadtad (nakapatagadtad) sa ságing,</i> A blight caused the bananas to develop hardened lumps.

<p id=17848><form>tagak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> join strands of abaca at the ends to make a long thread. <form>{-an|tagákan}, {-an(&larr;)|tagakan}</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>basket</tr>, cylindrical in shape and with a large mouth, used to hold joined strands of abaca. <form>{-in-|tinagak}</form> <pos>n</pos> joined abaca fibers.

<p id=17849><form>tágak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; ac]</itype> cause s.t. to fall straight down. <i>Matágak ang mga dáhun,</i> The leaves will fall. <i>Tagákun ku nang langgam sa usa ka tíru,</i> I&apos;ll knock that bird down in one shot. <i>Namatay siya kay hitagakan sa lubi,</i> He died because a coconut fell on his head. <i>Itágak nang sapátus kay naglisud ka pagsaka,</i> Kick off your shoes because you&apos;re having trouble climbing. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>fail</tr> in school. <i>Tagáka siya kay absiníru,</i> Fail him because he&apos;s always absent. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> for coconuts to yield. <i>Kanang kalubihána mutágak ug usa ka líbu,</i> That coconut plantation yields one thousand nuts. <number>4</number> <itype>[B1267; b8]</itype> suffer a <tr>miscarriage</tr>. <i>Natagákag makaduha,</i> She has had two miscarriages. <number>5</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> for the curtain to fall signifying the end of a presentation (metaphorical). <i>Ug dinhi natágak ang tabil sa átung sugilánun,</i> And so, here our story ends. <number>6</number> <formx>{&mdash;|tágak} ang kwarta</formx> <itype>[a3]</itype> spend money. <i>Natágak ang kwarta sa way hinungdan,</i> The money was just wasted. <pos>n</pos> <tr>yield</tr> of coconuts. <form>{(&rarr;)|tagak}<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fallen leaves of fruits. <number>2</number> fallen pieces, pieces which fell or spilled out of a container. <i>Tagak sa kupras, mais,</i> Extra pieces of copra, corn grain. <form>tagaktagak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B6; c16]</itype> drop down in spurts or drips. <i>Nagtagaktagak ang tái sa bátang nagkalíbang,</i> The child with the diarrhea kept having his BM&apos;s in spurts. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> drop things around, <tr>mess</tr>. <i>Mauy musilhig sa sawug ang nagtagaktagak ug kan-un,</i> Whoever throws rice all over the floor is going to have to pick it up. <number>3</number> <itype>[B145; c1]</itype> fail to do s.t. in unison. <i>Dungána pagrisayit. Ayaw tagaktagaka (itagaktagak),</i> Recite it together in unison, not raggedly. <pos>a</pos> not in unison. <form>{-in-(&rarr;)|tinágak}</form> <xr>= <sc>tagaktagak</sc>, <i>3.</i></xr>

<p id=17850><form>tagaktak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>clacking</tr> or <tr>banging</tr> sound, but not resounding, e.g. that of slapping s.t. with wood. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> make such a sound. <i>Mitagaktak ang sín pagbundak sa ulan,</i> The metal roof made a banging noise when the rain came down hard. <i>Ayawg itagaktak ang bakyà sa simintu,</i> Don&apos;t bang your wooden slippers on the concrete.

<p id=17851><form>tagaktak<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. crunchy <tr>sweet</tr> made of a thick dough of ground rice or sweet potatoes and sugar passed through a sieve to form fine threads, fashioned into triangles or other shapes, and fried brown. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make <ix>tagaktak</ix>.

<p id=17852><form>tagal</form> <pos>n</pos> stipulated length or <tr>period</tr> of time to do s.t. <i>Ang tagal sa pagbáyad sa útang tulu ka búlan,</i> The stipulated period for paying the debt is three months. <i>Ugmà ang íyang tagal nga mubálik,</i> He set tomorrow as the day he&apos;ll be back. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> stipulate a period of time within which or at which s.t. is to be done. <i>Gitagalan ang masakitun ug lima ka adlaw,</i> The patient was given five days to live. <i>Daghang burúka ang gikatagal niánang adláwa,</i> Many cases had been set for that day.

<p id=17853><form>tagála</form> <pos>n</pos> a woman from the Tagalog region.

<p id=17854><form>tagalubi</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>lubi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17855><form>Tagálug</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Tagalog</tr> language, people. <form>{-in-(&rarr;)|Tinagálug}</form> <pb n=957><pos>n</pos> Tagalog language, way. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>speak Tagalog</tr>.

<p id=17856><form>tagalúla</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>rattan</tr> used in tying bamboo floor slats.

<p id=17857><form>tagam</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B25; b2]</itype> <tr>refrain</tr> from repeating an act as a result of an unpleasant experience previously undergone. <i>Mitagam (natagam) siyag pangáwat human maprísu,</i> He didn&apos;t steal again after he was put in prison once. <i>Balikbálik, ayaw pagtagam,</i> Come see us again (lit. don&apos;t learn a lesson). <i>Hitagman kag bisíta kun dì ka mutagad,</i> People will not come to visit you again if you don&apos;t entertain them. <form>káun ug {&mdash;|tagam}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> experience s.t. bad so as to feel that one doesn&apos;t ever want to repeat it. <i>Nakakaun ka bag tagam nga dì na ka muadtu sa ámù?</i> Did s.t. bad happen to you that you don&apos;t want to come back to our place? <form>katalagman</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>calamity</tr>. <i>Nahiágum sa katalagman ang Pilipínas paggúbat,</i> The Philippines experienced great calamities during the war.

<p id=17858><form>tagamtam</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12b2]</itype> have a taste, <tr>experience</tr>, feel of s.t., usually s.t. abstract. <i>Nakatagamtam kug lángit uban nímu,</i> I have tasted heaven with you. <i>Tagamtáma ang ákung panimalus,</i> Get a taste of my revenge.

<p id=17859><form>tag-an</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>guess</tr>. <i>Akuy tag-an sa sulud sa bangà,</i> I&apos;ll guess what&apos;s inside the jar. <i>Hitag-anan nákung ikaw tung nagmaskara,</i> I guessed right that you were the one wearing a mask. <number>2</number> <tr>foretell</tr>. <i>Tag-ánun níya ang ímung kapaláran,</i> He will tell your fortune. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>guess</tr>. <number>2</number> fortune told. <form>tag-antag-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> any k.o. guessing game. <number>2</number> <tr>guesswork</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C]</itype> play a guessing game. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>conjecture</tr>, <tr>guess</tr>. <i>Wà ku makasigúru sa íyang panuígun. Átù lang tag-antag-ánun,</i> I can&apos;t be sure of her age. Let&apos;s just guess it. <form>{hi&N;-|hinag-an}</form> <pos>a</pos> good guesser. <form>{ma&N;-r-|mananag-an}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fortune-teller</tr>.

<p id=17860><form>tagána</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> set s.t. aside for future use, prepare s.t. beforehand for s.t. <i>Nagtagána kug aslúnun pára sa pista,</i> I reserved a pig to be roasted for the fiesta. <i>Itagána ku ang kwarta sa inyung pagtuun,</i> I am setting this money aside for your studies. <i>Ulì na kay gitagan-an kag latus ni Tátay,</i> Come home because Father is preparing a whipping for you. <pos>a</pos> <tr>prepared</tr>. <i>Andam ug tagána na síya sa iksámin,</i> He is ready and prepared for the examination. <form>{(&rarr;)|tagana}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. prepared for s.o. esp. for a special occasion. <i>Dakung bábuy ang ákung tagana sa pista,</i> I prepared a huge pig for the fiesta. <form>{pa&N;-|panagána}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b3c]</itype> do s.t. as a precaution just in case. <i>Pagdág pistúla. Maáyu nang managána,</i> Bring a gun. It&apos;s a good precaution. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2S3; b3]</itype> <tr>hesitate</tr> to do s.t., have reservations about doing s.t. <i>Nagpanagana kung mamisíta níya kay istrikta,</i> I hesitate to visit her because she&apos;s a difficult person. <form>mapanagan-un</form> <pos>a</pos> characterized with cautious hesitation.

<p id=17861><form>taganas</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small <tr>waterfall</tr> where the water glides along a sloping stone cliff, or the smooth, stone slope the water glides over.

<p id=17862><form>tágas</form> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>tágak</sc>.</xr> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>tágak</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <number>2</number> egg accidentally laid by a hen while walking.

<p id=17863><form>tagasak, tagásak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make the sound of cascading water hitting s.t. <i>Nagtagasak ang ulan gíkan sa sandayung,</i> The rain made a splashing sound as it poured from the gutter. <form>{-in-|tinagasak}</form> <pos>n</pos> splashing sound.

<p id=17864><form>tagasanta, tagasantu</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> *<sc>istígi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17865><form>tagáuk</form> <xr>= <sc>tuktugáuk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17866><form>tagaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>wander</tr>, <tr>roam</tr>. <i>Nakatagaw na siya sa íyang mga saup,</i> He has already made the rounds of his tenants. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; c6]</itype> <tr>deviate from</tr>, <tr>go separately</tr>. <i>Sa pag-ikskursiyun námù mitagaw silang duha,</i> During our excursion the two of them got separated from us. <i>Mangulitáwu gánì nà siya, itagaw ang sulti,</i> If he begins talking about love, change the subject. <number>3</number> <itype>[B]</itype> be <tr>boorish</tr>, <tr>ignorant</tr> in one&apos;s ways. <i>Makatagaw man diay ning subra ra sa paghigpit,</i> I found out that being too strict with a child makes him develop into a shy, socially poor sort. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b3c]</itype> <tr>talk</tr>, <tr>speak</tr> out loudly. <i>Mitagaw siya sa mikrupunu,</i> He spoke loud over the microphone. <pos>a</pos> ignorant and boorish. <i>Giinum sa tagaw nga dakù ang patis, ábi níyag kukakúla,</i> The oaf drank the soy sauce thinking it was coca-cola. <pos>n</pos> <tr>vagabond</tr>, <tr>wanderer</tr>. <i>Dì ku mamánag tagaw,</i> I won&apos;t marry a vagabond. <form>{(&larr;)|tágaw}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> be in confusion. <i>Mutágaw (matágaw) ang panagsulti ug muintra na siya,</i> If he takes part, the conversation will get utterly confused. <i>Tagáwun ku ang ílang panimuyù,</i> I&apos;ll cause confusion in their home. <form>{la-|latagaw}</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>latagaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17867><form>tagawtaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; c6]</itype> talk nonsense to oneself. <i>Kabuangun nà siya kay síging magtagawtaw,</i> He is going crazy because he keeps talking nonsense to himself. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>nag</tr> and <tr>scold</tr> in a long rambling way. <i>Nagtagawtaw ang asáwa kay nahubug siya,</i> His wife kept nagging him because he was drunk. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>nonsense</tr> one speaks. <number>2</number> uninterrupted nagging talk. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|tagawtawan}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>nagger</tr>.

<p id=17868><form>tágay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>pour</tr> alcoholic drinks into a drinking vessel. <i>Ikay tágay kay ímu ning silibrasiyun,</i> You pour the drinks because it&apos;s your celebration. <number>2</number> <itype>[C2; c3]</itype> <tr>drink together</tr>. <i>Makigtágay aku níya,</i> I will drink together with him. <number>2a</number> indulge in sensual pleasure together. <i>Nagtágay sila sa kinawatkawat <pb n=958>nga kalípay,</i> They shared stolen moments of joy. <number>3</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> be <corr sic=proferred>proffered</corr> s.t. <i>Gitagáyan siyag madaníhun nga pahíyum,</i> He was <corr sic=proferred>proffered</corr> a winsome smile. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> drink poured. <number>2</number> drinking party. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|tagayan}</form> <pos>n</pos> vessel one drinks liquor from.

<p id=17869><form>tagaylu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC]</itype> <tr>barter</tr>, exchange one commodity for another. <i>Nakatagaylu kug humay ug rilip,</i> I bartered some relief clothes for rice. <pos>n</pos> act of bartering.

<p id=17870><form>tagaytay</form> (from <ix>taytay</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>mountain ridge</tr>. <form>{pa&N;-|panagaytay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> go along the mountain ridges. <i>Managaytay lang ta kay gibahaan ang ubus,</i> Let&apos;s travel along the ridge because the valleys are flooded.

<p id=17871><form>tagbagu</form> <xr>= <sc>talagbagu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17872><form>tagbak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>herring</tr>: <bio>Ilisha hoevenii</bio>.

<p id=17873><form>tagbak<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. herbaceous plant of cool, damp places, with lanceolate leaves, similar to banana, growing to 1&frac12;&ndash;2 meters: <bio>Kolowratia elegans</bio>.

<p id=17874><form>tagbaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP1B16; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>satisfy</tr> to the point of satiety. <i>Didtu siya sa Rílis, nagtagbaw (nagpatagbaw) sa kaugalíngun,</i> He was in the red light district, satisfying his sexual needs. <i>Manggáwas ta kay natagbaw na kug tíbi,</i> Let&apos;s go out. I&apos;ve had enough TV. <number>2</number> get enough of s.t. to make one tired of it. <i>Ang nawung ni Imilda dílì makatagbaw,</i> One can&apos;t get tired of looking at Imelda&apos;s face. <form>{ka-|katagbaw}</form> <pos>n</pos> state of being satisfied, having had enough. <form>{ka-an|katagbáwan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> satisfaction at s.t. done. <i>Pagsirbisyu nga makahátag dakung katagbáwan,</i> Service that can give great satisfaction. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>ka-un(&rarr;)</sc>.</xr> <form>{ka-un(&rarr;)|katagbawun}</form> <pos>n</pos> satisfaction reached. <i>Way katagbawung bayhána,</i> An insatiable woman.

<p id=17875><form>tagbaya<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> ulcer in the corners of the mouth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> have a mouth ulcer. <i>Gitagbaya siya kay way kalígù,</i> He has sores in the corner of his mouth because he hasn&apos;t bathed. <form>tagbayahun</form> <pos>a</pos> having ulcers in the corners of the mouth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> develop this condition.

<p id=17876><form>tagbaya<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. bird, the Philippine bulbul: <bio>Hypsipetes philippinus</bio>.

<p id=17877><form>tagbù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>work bee</tr> on a community project. <i>Tagbù sa pagpúu sa ilagà,</i> A work bee to exterminate mice. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>súgat</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> hold a work bee. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>tábù</sc>, <i>v1, 2.</i></xr> <form>{hi&N;-|hinagbù}</form> <xr>= <sc>hinabù</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tábù</sc>.</xr> <form>tagbùtagbù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12C2; c1]</itype> <tr>meet</tr> in a clandestine manner. <i>Dì na sila makatagbùtagbù kay nasakpan na ang ílang rilasiyun sa bána,</i> They can no longer continue with their trysting because the woman&apos;s husband found out about it. <number>2</number> <itype>[C3]</itype> keep passing by one another. <i>Magtagbùtagbù lang ang nagkalainláing mga sakyanan sa kadalánan,</i> All different vehicles keep passing each other on the streets. <form>{-anan|tagbuanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> trysting place. <form>{-in-an|tinagbuan}</form> s.t. s.o. brings when arriving from a trip.

<p id=17878><form>tagduk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A46; c]</itype> <number>1</number> for s.t. pointed to pierce and stick into s.t. <i>Gitagduk níya sa punúan sa káhuy ang bára,</i> He stuck the iron bar into the trunk of the tree. <i>Tagdúki ang yútà ug kahiktan sa báka,</i> Plant a stake into the ground to tie the cow to. <number>2</number> <tr>prick</tr>, make a small hole like a dot. <i>Siyay mitagduk sa pabúrut,</i> He punctured the balloon. <pos>n</pos> <tr>puncture</tr>, prick. <i>Pilía ang síng walay mga tagduk,</i> Choose iron sheets that have no punctures.

<p id=17879><form>tagduy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> for s.t. pointed to pierce and stick into s.t. <i>Mitagduy ang panà sa íyang dughan,</i> The arrow pierced and stuck in his breast. <i>Gitagdúyan sa tunuk ang íyang lapalapa,</i> He got a thorn stuck in his sole.

<p id=17880><form>tagdyaw</form> <xr>= <sc>tadiyaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17881><form>taghap</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> <tr>guess</tr>. <i>Taghápa ang ákung ngálan,</i> Guess my name. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> hit on the right thing accidentally. <i>Unsay kahibáwu! Hitaghapan ku lang,</i> I didn&apos;t know! I just guessed it. <pos>n</pos> <tr>guess</tr>. <form>{pa&N;-|panaghap}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> do s.t. in a guessing way. <i>Gipanaghapan níyag áyu ang radiyu,</i> He took a stab at fixing the radio. <pos>n</pos> <tr>guess</tr>, wild try. <form>taghaptaghap</form> <pos>n</pos> hit and miss procedure. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b8]</itype> do s.t. by a hit and miss procedure.

<p id=17882><form>taghud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> throw s.t. bulky s.w. with the intent of keeping others from finding out about it. <i>Diin nímu itaghud ang nangkà nga ímung gikáwat?</i> Where did you dump the jackfruit that you stole?

<p id=17883><form>taghuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; ac]</itype> <tr>whistle</tr>, whistle at s.o. <i>Taghúya ang túnu ánang kantáha,</i> Whistle the tune of that song. <i>Nasukù siya kay gitaghúyan,</i> She got angry because s.o. whistled at her. <pos>n</pos> <tr>whistling</tr>.

<p id=17884><form>tagibanwa</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>banwa</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17885><form>tagidiyut</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>diyut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17886><form>tágik</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac1]</itype> tie things together carefully in construction. <i>Nagtágik siya sa mga nípà didtu sa katsaw,</i> He was tying the nipa strips to the rafters. <i>Gitágik níya ang duha ka bulus kawáyan,</i> He tied two bamboo poles together. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> create s.t. literary or musical.<i> Maáyu siyang mutágik ug sugilánun nga kulbà hínam,</i> He is good in composing suspenseful stories. <number>2a</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> organize or arrange words or ideas. <i>Tagíka (itágik) únà pag-áyu ang ímung mga púlung nga igsusulti,</i> Compose what you are going to say carefully. <form>{(&rarr;)|tagik}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to tie things together. <form>{-in-|tinábik}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. constructed by tying. <form>{mag-r-(&rarr;)|magtatagik}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>composer</tr> of poems or songs.

<p id=17887><form>tagiktik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ticking</tr>, clicking. <i>Tinagiktik sa rilu,</i> <pb n=959>Ticking of the clock. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make the sound of tick-tick, pink-pink, or click-click. <i>Mitagiktik ang bildu nga nahúgan sa lansang,</i> The glass went pink-pink when the nails fell on it. <i>Hastang nakatagiktik sa íyang makinilya,</i> My! Her typewriter went <corr sic="clickity-clack">clickety-clack</corr>.

<p id=17888><form>tagilhus</form> <xr>= <sc>tagulhus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17889><form>tagilhaw</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>hilaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17890><form>tagilma</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>lima</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17891><form>tagilpù</form> <xr>= <sc>takilpù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17892><form>tagiltil</form> <pos>n</pos> short, high-pitched somewhat resonant sounds: clink-clink. <i>Tinagiltil sa kutsára,</i> Clinking of spoons. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a clinking sound. <i>Mitagiltil ang tigib nga gimartilyu,</i> The chisel went clink-clink when he hit it with a hammer.

<p id=17893><form>tagilumbuy</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tree of the second growth forest: <bio>Eugenia sp</bio>.

<p id=17894><form>tagiluyluy</form> <xr>= <sc>byatilis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17895><form>tagíma</form> <xr>= <sc>tagilma</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17896><form>tagimata</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>mata</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17897><form>tagimtim<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> discoloration of teeth or surface roughness on metals, concrete, stone, due to exposure to the elements. <number>2</number> very tiny seashells found attached to stones or the bottoms of logs that have lain in the sand for a long time. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> be discolored and dirtied by the elements. <i>Munyumintu nga gitagimtiman na,</i> A monument that has been discolored by the elements. <number>2</number> <itype>[a4b4]</itype> stay long s.w. (as if long enough to develop <ix>tagimtim</ix>). <i>Gitagimtim (gitagimtiman) na lang ang lubut ug paninda, apan wà giyud muirug,</i> He has been in business for a long time, but he has never prospered.

<p id=17898><form>tagimtim<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tiny oyster found adhering in clumps on rocks along the shore, similar in flavor to <ix>sisi</ix>.

<p id=17899><form>tagingting</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> jingling or clanging sound. <number>2</number> <tr>resounding</tr>, ringing of voice. <i>Tagingting ang mandù sa sultan,</i> The sultan&apos;s command resounded. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> go ting-ting or clang-clang. <i>Nabátì níya ang tinagingting sa panagsingkì sa duha ka kris,</i> She heard the cling-clang of the two swords. <i>Tagingtínga (itagingting) ang kwarta kun minì ba,</i> Make the coin jingle to see if it&apos;s fake. <form>{pa&N;-|panagingting}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> for harsh words to ring in one&apos;s ears. <i>Nanagingting sa íyang dalunggan ang kasábà sa amahan,</i> Her father&apos;s scolding rang in her ears.

<p id=17900><form>taginhus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> go away from or arrive at a place, one by one or in small numbers. <i>Nagtaginhus pag-abut ang mga mananagat sa baybáyun,</i> The fishermen arrived at the shore one by one. <form>{Culu-|tulutaginhus}</form> <xr>= <sc>taginhus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17901><form>tagiptip</form> <pos>n</pos> dirt, grime that is stuck hard on s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> have dirt sticking hard on s.t. <i>Gitagiptipan ang labábu,</i> The sink was covered with grime. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|tagiptipun}</form> <pos>a</pos> dirty, grimy with dirt stuck to it.

<p id=17902><form>tagitági</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> do s.t. little by little. <i>Madúgayng tagitági ug búhat ánà, mahuman ra man nà,</i> That work will get done if you do it little at a time. <i>Tagitagíhun nákù pagbáyad ang útang,</i> I&apos;ll pay the debt off a little at a time.

<p id=17903><form>tagìtì</form> <pos>n</pos> tartar that sticks on the teeth or tobacco tars formed from smoking. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6N; a4b4]</itype> be incrusted with tartar or tobacco tars. <i>Nanagìtì ang hunsuy sa hinabákù,</i> He smokes constantly so his pipe is incrusted with tars.

<p id=17904><form>tagiwálu</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>walu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17905><form>tag-íya</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>íya</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17906><form>tagkus</form> <xr>= <sc>takgus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17907><form>tagmaya</form> <xr>= <sc>tagbaya<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=17908><form>tagming</form> <xr>= <sc>tagning</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17909><form>tagmuk</form> <xr>= <sc>tagnuk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17910><form>tagnà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>predict</tr>, <tr>prophesy</tr>. <i>Si Amus nagtagnà nga mahúlug ang Samarya,</i> Amos prophesied that Samaria would fall. <i>Hitagnaan níya nga patyun si Kinidi,</i> She predicted that Kennedy would be killed. <number>2</number> <tr>guess</tr>. <i>Tagnáag unsay ákung surprísa,</i> Guess what my surprise is. <pos>n</pos> <tr>guess</tr>, <tr>prediction</tr>, <tr>prophecy</tr>. <form>{ma&N;-r-|mananagnà}/{l-|manalagnà}</form> <pos>n</pos> one who has power to predict, <tr>prophet</tr>. <form>{pa&N;-|panagnà}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>guesswork</tr>. <i>Púlus lang panagnà ang íyang panambal,</i> His treatment was pure guesswork. <form>{pa&N;-l-|panalagnà}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prophecy</tr>.

<p id=17911><form>tagning</form> <pos>a</pos> resonant and high-pitched quality of voice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become resonant and high-pitched. <i>Nagkatagning ang íyang tíngug kay síging praktis,</i> Her voice is getting resonant and high-pitched because she constantly practices.

<p id=17912><form>tagnipà</form> <xr>= <sc>sirbilyíta<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=17913><form>tagnípis</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>nipis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17914><form>tagnuk</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. gnat, tiny swarming insects of rice fields that bite. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infested with this k.o. gnat.

<p id=17915><form>tagpas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> <tr>permeate</tr>, penetrate through material. <i>Mitagpas ang ulan sa tulda,</i> The rain permeated through the tent. <number>2</number> <itype>[b1]</itype> be splotched with menstrual blood from menstruation. <i>Wà mutindug ang babáyi kay gitagpasan diay,</i> The woman didn&apos;t want to get up because her menstrual blood had seeped through her skirt.

<p id=17916><form>tagpilaw</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>pilaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17917><form>tagpis</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; c1P]</itype> slice s.t. thinly. <i>Tagpísun (itagpis) nákug hiwà ang kasahusun nga karni,</i> I&apos;ll slice the meat thin to make it into jerked meat. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be skinny <pb n=960>and slim. <i>Natagpis nà siya kay masakitun,</i> He is skinny because he is sickly.

<p id=17918><form>tagpud</form> <pos>a</pos> crisp, brittle and easily breaking into small pieces like glass or like dry and mealy sweet potatoes. <i>Ang tagpud nga kamúti kun lútù, uga ug unud nga húmuk mapulpug,</i> A powdery sweet potato is dry when it is cooked and has meat that crumbles readily. <i>Ang biskwit nga bag-ung lútù tagpud,</i> Newly baked biscuits are crisp. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> become crisp or brittle. <i>Nagtagpud ang íyang ngípun,</i> His teeth are crumbling.

<p id=17919><form>tagsa</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>usa</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17920><form>tagsaun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. thick rattan used as a rope.

<p id=17921><form>tagsikan</form> <pos>n</pos> coconuts that are beginning to turn brown, but not completely matured.

<p id=17922><form>tagsip</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab7]</itype> cut s.t. off of s.t., cut in thin, long pieces (narrow or broad). <i>Halus makatagsip sa pánit sa káhuy ning sundánga,</i> This machete can hardly cut the bark off a tree. <i>Tagsípa ang kamúti,</i> Slice the yams into thin pieces. <form>{-in-|tinagsip}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> only a few of a large number. <i>Tinagsip lang ang makapasar sa bár,</i> Only a small percentage passes the bar. <number>2</number> thin chippings or slices.

<p id=17923><form>tagsuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB16; ac]</itype> pack elongated things tightly in an upright position using every bit of space. <i>Nagtagsuk ang mga táwu sa trak dikarga,</i> People were jampacked into the truck. <i>Tagsukun níya ang butilya sa sáku,</i> He will pack the bottles tightly into the sack. <i>Itagsuk ang putput sa alat,</i> Pack the sticks tightly in an upright position into the basket. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>pierce</tr>, plant into but not through. <i>Kinsay nagtagsuk ning sundang sa báni?</i> Who stuck the bolo into the banana trunk?

<p id=17924><form>tagù</form> <pos>a</pos> for fibrous materials to be weak, not strong and durable. <form>{&mdash;|tagù} ug kasingkásing, balatían</form> <pos>a</pos> easily moved emotionally. <i>Tagù ug kasingkásing (balatían) ang mga babáyi. Dalì da kaáyung madala sa pakilúuy,</i> Women are soft-hearted. They easily get carried away with pity. <form>{&mdash;|tagù} ug mata</form> <pos>a</pos> shedding tears easily.<i> Tagù siyag mata. Bísan diyútay lang kaguul, muhílak dáyun,</i> She cries at the slightest provocation. Let anything go wrong and she bursts into tears. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> for fibrous materials to become weak. <i>Mutagù (matagù) ang sinínà kun sigíhag klúruks,</i> Clothes become weak if you keep washing them with chlorox. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|taguun}</form> <pos>a</pos> of a weak sort.

<p id=17925><form>tágù</form> <pos>a</pos> hidden from view. <i>Tágù kaáyu ílang balay gíkan sa karsáda,</i> Their house is well hidden from view from the road. <form>sa {&mdash;|tágù}</form> in secret. <i>Nahigugma siya nímu sa tágù,</i> She loves you in secret. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be hidden from view. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB3; b5c2]</itype> <tr>hide</tr>, keep away from view or knowledge. <i>Didtu siya mutágù luyu sa kamálig,</i> He hid behind the barn. <i>Makatágù ka bag sikrítu?</i> Can you keep a secret? <i>Walà ku tagúa (tagúi, itágù) ang sulat,</i> I did not hide the letter. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b5c2]</itype> put away in a safe place for future use. <i>Nagtágù ka ug sud-an pára ugmà?</i> Did you put away some food for tomorrow? <form>tagùtagù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> hide away in fear, do in secret. <i>Nagtagùtagù silag panagtagbù kay minyù man ang babáyi,</i> They have their meetings secretly because the woman is married. <form>tagùtágù, tagùtaguay</form> <pos>n</pos> game of <tr>hide-and-seek</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> play hide-and-seek. <form>{-anan|taguanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> hiding place; hideout. <form>{-in-|tinágù}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. hidden. <form>Kristung {-in-|Tinágù}</form> a religious sect, the ceremonies of which are strictly private. <form>{-in-an|tinagúan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <corr> <number>1</number> </corr><tr>secret</tr>. <i>Nasáyud na ku sa ímung tinagúan,</i> I know your secret. <number>2</number> s.t. kept from being lost or used up. <i>Gastúha na lang ang ímung tinagúan,</i> Just spend your savings. <form>{ma-in-un|matinagúun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>secretive</tr>. <form>{ka-un(&rarr;)|kataguun}</form> <pos>a</pos> feel very much like hiding oneself. <form>{-um-r-|tumatágù}, {-um-l-|tumalágù}</form> <pos>n</pos> be about to hide.

<p id=17926><form>taguangkan</form> (from <ix>tágù</ix> and <ix>anak</ix>) <pos>n</pos> womb, esp. of animals.

<p id=17927><form>tagubtub</form> <pos>n</pos> deep, resonant, thumping sound produced by pounding. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> emit a boomp boomp sound. <i>Mitagubtub ang íyang likud nga gisumbag,</i> His back went thump when it was struck. <form>Bul-ánung {&mdash;|tagubtub}</form> <pos>n</pos> pure Boholano (humorous). <i>Bul-ánung tagubtub, pakisabaw, pakibahug, usa ka buuk itlug, sabwag pitu ka sag-ub,</i> A pure Boholano is so fond of soup and food mixed with soup that he uses seven bamboo containers full of water to boil one egg.

<p id=17928><form>tágud<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> plant in a seedbed, esp. rice, but also other plants. <i>Magtágud na ta pára pangulílang,</i> Let&apos;s plant the seedbed now for the second crop. <i>Itágud sa kahun ang kamátis,</i> Plant the tomatoes in the box. <number>1a</number> <itype>[B2456]</itype> for a rice field to have a certain capacity. <i>Mutágud ning basáka ug usa ka bákid,</i> This rice field is big enough to have one cavan planted on it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> drop in several numbers. <i>Nagtágud siyag lima ka pasul,</i> He dropped four hooks and lines. <i>Gitágud ang mga bumba sa syudad,</i> The bombs were dropped on the city. <number>3</number> <itype>[B125]</itype> be covered with wounds, sores. <i>Natágud sa núka ang makililímus,</i> The beggar is covered with sores. <pos>n</pos> rice seedlings. <form>taguran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>seedbed</tr>.&dagger;

<p id=17929><form>tágud<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cut or slice into small, but not fine, pieces. <i>Gitágud ang kamúti nga giságul sa kan-un,</i> The potatoes that were boiled with the rice were sliced into small pieces. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB125; a]</itype> tear into pieces. <i>Bátà ang mitágud sa piryudiku,</i> It was the child <pb n=961>who tore the newspaper into pieces. <i>Nagkatagud ang tualya,</i> The towel is being reduced to tatters. <form>tagudtagud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>cut</tr> s.t. small into many pieces. <number>2</number> cut s.t. with short, fast chopping strokes. <i>Tagudtagurun ta ka rung tikasána ka!</i> I will chop you to bits, you cheat, you!

<p id=17930><form>tagudtud</form> <pos>a</pos> having the quality of being <tr>rubbery</tr> when bitten by the teeth but yielding when subjected to increased pressure. <i>Ang unud sa budyung tagudtud apan lamì,</i> The meat of the conch shell is rubbery but delicious. <i>Tagudtud kan-un ang hilawhílaw nga linung-ag,</i> Inadequately cooked rice is not soft enough. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be rubbery in consistency.

<p id=17931><form>taguk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sticky</tr> sap of plants and fruits. <number>2</number> sticky, thin, membranous substance that sticks on the body of a newly-delivered child. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b8]</itype> give off sap. <i>Mutaguk ang kapáyas ug tigbásun,</i> The papaya will give off sap if it is cut. <i>Hingtagukan ang ákung sinínà,</i> My shirt got smeared with sap. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> for s.t. to be sticky with sap. <i>Dì na nà makataguk kay uga na,</i> That sap won&apos;t stick because it is dry. <number>1b</number> <itype>[B]</itype> for sap to get sticky. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> catch s.t. with a sticky substance, esp. the sap of a plant. <i>Tagukun ku nang langgáma,</i> I&apos;ll catch that bird with sticky sap. <number>3</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> remove, gather the sticky sap. <i>Ákung tagukan ning púsù úsà utánun,</i> I&apos;ll remove the sap from this banana blossom before I cook it. <form>{ka-(&larr;)|katáguk}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> have sticky substance all over it. <i>Nagkatáguk ang bátà nga bag-ung natáwu,</i> The newborn baby had sticky substance all over it. <form>{-un|tagúkun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> a child having thin sticky substance on him at birth. <number>2</number> producing plenty of sticky sap. <i>Tagukun kaáyung gumáha,</i> Rubber tree producing lots of latex. <number>3</number> having lots of sticky sap on it.

<p id=17932><form>taguktuk</form> (from <ix>tuktuk</ix>) <pos>n</pos> knocking, thumping sound. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make a knocking sound. <i>Mitaguktuk ku sa pultahan apan way miabli,</i> I knocked at the door, but nobody opened. <i>Ayawg itaguktuk ang sapátus,</i> Don&apos;t let your shoes thump.

<p id=17933><form>taguláki</form> <xr>= <sc>taguraláki</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17934><form>tagulhus</form> (from <ix>ulhus</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> do s.t., come out <tr>in turns</tr> or <tr>alternately</tr>. <i>Nagtagulhus ang háguk sa duha ka táwu,</i> The two men were snoring alternately with each other. <i>Itagulhus (tagulhusun) sila pagpabantay sa masakitun,</i> They will be assigned to watch the sick man in turns.

<p id=17935><form>tagulílung</form> (from <ix>tágù</ix> and <ix>lílung</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. <tr>charm</tr> which enables a person to appear and disappear at will, said to be the egg of a k.o. bird (the <ix>tuktur</ix>) which flies only after dusk when he can be heard but not seen. The egg is also invisible but obtainable through magical procedures. <number>2</number> person who possesses this charm. <number>2a</number> one who disappears as suddenly as he appeared. <i>Mabáwu man tag pangítà nímu. Mu ra man kag tagulílung,</i> I&apos;ve been going crazy looking for you. You are harder to find than a <ix>tagulílung</ix>. <number>3</number> name also given to the <ix>tuktur</ix> bird.

<p id=17936><form>tagultul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a signalling device made of a nodule of bamboo having the nodes covering both ends and a slit on the side. <number>2</number> thonking sound. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> beat this <tr>bamboo resounder</tr> or produce a similar sound. <i>Mutagultul siya arun pagtawag sa mga silíngan,</i> He sounds the bamboo resounder to call the neighbors.<i> Mutagultul ang likiun nga kawáyan kun dukdúkun sa káhuy,</i> A cracked bamboo tube will make the sound of thonk-thonk if you beat it with a stick.

<p id=17937><form>tagultul<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tagawtaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17938><form>tagul-ul</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. bird.

<p id=17939><form>tágum</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>indigo</tr>: <bio>Indigofera suffruticosa</bio>. <form>panimáhung {&mdash;|tágum}</form> for leafy vegetables to develop a fetid smell when they wither. <i>Ngánung nagpalit ka ánang kamunggay nga nanimáhù nang tágum?</i> Why did you buy <ix>kamunggay</ix> that isn&apos;t fresh? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>dye</tr> s.t. dark or <tr>stain</tr> s.t. <i>Ang nayabung tintà mitágum sa mantil,</i> The ink spilled and blackened the tablecloth. <i>Gitágum níya ang pughaw níyang sinínà,</i> She dyed her faded dress black. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> become dark, black. <i>Mutágum ka kun magpúnay kag kalígù sa dágat,</i> You will become dark if you keep going swimming. <i>Nagtágum ang lángit, muulan tingáli,</i> The sky is getting dark. Maybe it is going to rain. <form>{-un|tagumun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having the smell of indigo leaves (not fresh). <number>2</number> <tr>dark</tr>, <tr>gloomy</tr>, <tr>dirty-looking</tr>.

<p id=17940><form>tagumbul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)46; a12]</itype> produce a deep, thudding sound. <i>Mitagumbul ang bungbung nga naigù sa lamísa nga gitulud,</i> The wall made a <tr>thud</tr> when the table was pushed against it.

<p id=17941><form>tágun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>patient</tr>, <tr>long-suffering</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> endure with patience. <i>Mitágun giyud siyag bantay bísag gikapuy siya,</i> He endured the long hours of the vigil even though he was very tired. <i>Tagúna lang ang kasakit, kadalì ra lagi,</i> Just endure the pain. It won&apos;t last, I assure you. <form>{ka-|katágun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>patience</tr>, <tr>endurance</tr>.

<p id=17942><form>tagungtung</form> <pos>n</pos> short, vibrant, low-pitched sound, such as that produced by a small closed gong. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a <ix>tung-tung</ix> sound. <i>Tagungtúngun (itagungtung) ni pára sa sáyawng Muslim,</i> This gong will be clanged <pb n=962>during the Moslem dance.

<p id=17943><form>taguntun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> half the value of a domestic animal. <i>Bayinti písus mauy taguntun sa ákung bábuy nga íyang gibatunan,</i> He took care of my pig for which I gave him half the value, twenty pesos<corr>.</corr> <i>Baktin mauy ákung taguntun sa katungà sa litsun níya,</i> I exchanged a piglet for one-half of his roast pig. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> give one-half the value of a domestic animal. <i>Ákù na ning bábuy kay nakataguntun na ku,</i> I&apos;ve given for half the value of this pig for raising it, so it is all mine now.

<p id=17944><form>taguntun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>swellings</tr> around the legs or swollen glands in the joints, groin, axilla. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b4N]</itype> suffer this sort of swelling.

<p id=17945><form>taguraláki</form> (from <ix>laki</ix>) <pos>n</pos> male <tr>papaya</tr> (that bears no fruit, but bears male flowers).

<p id=17946><form>tagurha</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>duha</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17947><form>tag-usà</form> <xr>= <sc>talagsa</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>usa</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17948><form>tagustus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> for rope to <tr>unwind</tr>, get undone. <i>Usba pagbúbud ang písì kay nagtagustus na,</i> Wind the rope again because it is <tr>unreeling</tr>. <i>Itagustus (tagustúsa) ang mga lánut nga gibugkus,</i> Undo the abaca fibers that had been tied in place. <number>2</number> <itype>[AP; c1P]</itype> pay out a line slowly. <i>Ikay tagustus (patagustus) sa láyag inigkusug sa hángin,</i> Lower the sails slowly when the wind begins to blow hard. <i>Tagustúsi ang tabánug. Taas bítaw ang lambu,</i> Give the kite more line. Anyway it has a long line.

<p id=17949><form>tagùtù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>chop</tr> rapidly with short strokes so that the result comes out finely minced. <i>Átung tagùtúun ang dabung nga iságul sa kinílaw,</i> Let&apos;s chop the young bamboo shoots into fine pieces to mix them with the salad. <form>{-in-|tinagùtù}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>minced</tr> finely.

<p id=17950><form>tagùtù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> clicking of the tongue. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>talùtù</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> click the tongue. <i>Kahibáwu kang mutagùtù?</i> Do you know how to click your tongue? <form>{pa&N;-|panagùtù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> click the tongue in exasperation, dejection, anger. <i>Nagpanagùtù siya kay napildi,</i> He kept clicking his tongue in dejection because he lost. <pos>n</pos> action of clicking the tongue.

<p id=17951><form>tagùtù<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>talùtù<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=17952><form>tagutungan</form> <xr>= <sc>dutù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17953><form>tagyaw</form> <xr>= <sc>tadiyaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17954><form>tagyum</form> <xr>= <sc>lalum</sc></xr> <i>1, 3, 4</i> (dialectal).

<p id=17955><form>tahà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b3(1)]</itype> feel shyness or inhibition in the presence of s.o. who commands distant respect. <i>Matahà siyang mudúul ug dagkung táwu,</i> He is afraid to approach big shots. <i>Paríhu ra nátù nang ímung gikatahaan,</i> You feel shy in his presence, but he is just like us. <form>panahàtáhà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> hesitate to do s.t. due to reservation, tact, or shyness. <i>Manahàtáhà pa giyud nà siyag sampit sa ákung ng&amacracu;n,</i> Why does he hesitate to address me by name? <form>{ka-|katahà}</form> <pos>n</pos> shyness due to respect. <form>{ka-an|katahaan}, {ka-an(&larr;)|kataháan}</form> <pos>a</pos> worthy of distant respect. <form>{ma-un(&larr;)|mataháan}</form> <pos>a</pos> shy due to respect.

<p id=17956><form>tahal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> sharpen a pencil. <i>Talhi <corr sic="(ta "></corr>(tahali) ang lápis,</i> Sharpen the pencil. <pos>n</pos> <tr>pencil sharpener</tr>. <form>talhanan</form> <pos>n</pos> pencil or s.t. which needs sharpening.

<p id=17957><form>tahan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <number>1</number> offer part of the body in anticipation. <i>Íyang gitahan ang náwung níya arun hagkan,</i> She put her face forward to be kissed. <number>2</number> <tr>offer</tr>, <tr>render up</tr>, <tr>offer up</tr> in trust. <i>Itahan ku kining kinabúhì sa kahitas-an,</i> I&apos;ll <tr>entrust</tr> my life to the Almighty. <number>3</number> offer without reservation. <i>Itahan sa kaáway ang pagpasaylu,</i> Offer forgiveness to the enemy. <number>4</number> for bets to be placed or handed over usually before the start of the game. <i>Itahan nang ímung pusta arun sugdan ang dúlà,</i> Place your bets so that the game may start. <number>5</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> offer a <tr>bond</tr>, <tr>security</tr>. <i>Itahan ku ang ákung yútà sa salapì nga hulaman ku nímu,</i> I will put up my land as security for the money that I will borrow from you. <pos>n</pos> <tr>bond</tr>, <tr>guarantee</tr>. <i>Ímu na kining singsing silbing tahan sa ákung pagmahal nímu,</i> Take this ring as a guarantee of my love for you<corr>.</corr>

<p id=17958><form>táhap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256N; b3(1]</itype> be <tr>suspicious</tr>. <i>Nanagána siya kay natáhap sa ákung túyù,</i> She hesitated because she was suspicious of my motives. <i>Siya ang gikatahápang tulisan,</i> He is the <tr>suspected</tr> robber. <form>{pa&N;-|panáhap}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> assume s.o. to be guilty without good evidence. <i>Kung manáhap ka, tinúa únà,</i> If you presume s.o. guilty, be sure to ascertain the facts first. <pos>n</pos> <tr>suspicion</tr>. <i>Ang ákung panáhap nga minyù tung tawhána natinúud giyud,</i> My suspicion that that man was married came out true. <form>{ka-an|katahápan}</form> <xr>= <sc>{pa&N;-|panáhap}</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <form>{ma-un|matahápun}, {manggi-un|manggitahápun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>suspicious</tr>.

<p id=17959><form>táhas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> task or duty one must fulfill prior to acquiring possession of supernatural powers. <i>Dúnay táhas únà makahuput ug urasiyun,</i> You must perform a task before you may acquire a magic formula. <number>2</number> <tr>mission</tr> one is bound by vow or otherwise to accomplish. <i>Matag táwu adúnay táhas sa kalibútan,</i> Each man has a mission on this earth. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; c5]</itype> make a vow to accomplish s.t. <i>Tahásun ku ang pagtúman sa íyang túgun,</i> I will make it my mission to fulfill her commands. <number>2</number> <itype>[c]</itype> assign as a mission. <i>Akuy gitahásan pagpatay nímu,</i> I was entrusted with a mission to kill you. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> able to be in some place alone without fear. <i>Makatáhas ka bag mintiryu?</i> Do you dare go to the cemetery alone?

<p id=17960><form>tahì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>sew</tr>, <tr>stitch</tr>. <i>Kinahanglang tahiun <pb n=963>ning samad,</i> This wound requires stitches. <i>Gitahian ku níyag birmúda,</i> He sewed a pair of bermuda shorts for me. <pos>n</pos> <tr>stitches</tr>. <form>{-anan(&larr;)|tahiánan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dress</tr>, <tr>tailor shop</tr>. <form>{ma&N;-r-(&larr;)|mananáhì}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>seamstress</tr>, <tr>dressmaker</tr>. <form>{-unun(&larr;)|tahiúnun}</form> <pos>n</pos> pieces of cloth to be made into s.t.

<p id=17961><form>tahirig</form> (from <ix>hirig</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <tr>lean</tr>, <tr>tilt</tr> to one side. <i>Nagtahirig ang lubi padúlung sa karsáda,</i> The coconut tree is leaning towards the road. <i>Tahiriga (itahirig) pagtanum ang páka sa tubu,</i> Plant the cuttings of sugar cane stalks in a leaning position.

<p id=17962><form>tahisyan, tahisyan bird</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>dance</tr> wherein the buttocks wiggle like the tail of a bird. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> perform this dance.

<p id=17963><form>tahu, tahù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ginger tea</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> have ginger tea.

<p id=17964><form>tahù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>notify</tr>, <tr>inform</tr>. <i>Itahù kini níya arun siya mahibáwu,</i> Inform him of this so that he will know. <pos>n</pos> <tr>reports</tr> about an event. <form>tahùtáhù</form> <pos>n</pos> idle <tr>gossip</tr>, <tr>reports</tr> passed around to instigate a quarrel. <i>Nagpalákat silag tahùtáhù arun magkadisgustu ta,</i> They are spreading idle gossip to make us quarrel.

<p id=17965><form>tahud</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>spur</tr> of fowls and birds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> <number>1</number> get one&apos;s spurs. <i>Walà pa tadhi ang sunuy,</i> The rooster hasn&apos;t gotten his spurs yet. <number>2</number> become <tr>experienced</tr>. <form>tadhan</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>experienced</tr> and <tr>authoritative</tr> in one&apos;s line of work. <i>Tadhan siyang kusiníru,</i> He is an experienced cook. <form>tahudtahud</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> growths on the body, usually near the joints, which look like the spurs of the rooster. <number>2</number> small boils on small children&apos;s heads.

<p id=17966><form>táhud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23; a12]</itype> <tr>obey</tr>. <i>Tahúra úsà ang ákung gipabúhat úsà magdúwà,</i> Do what I tell you to before you play. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>respect</tr>. <i>Tahúra ang ímung ginikánan,</i> Respect your parents. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A3; c6]</itype> use an address of respect to an elder. <i>Nagtáhud siya nákug Tiyù,</i> He <tr>addresses</tr> me as Uncle. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>respect</tr>. <number>2</number> address of respect. <i>Púpuy ang ámung táhud níya,</i> We addressed him as Grandpa. <form>{pa-(&rarr;)|patahud}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> be <tr>arrogant</tr>, demanding of more respect than one has the right to. <i>À, mu pay muhangyù mau pay mupatáhud!</i> Hm, here you go acting as if you want me to kiss your feet when you are asking me for a favor! <form>tahuray</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> respect each other. <i>Ángay magtahuray ang managsúun,</i> Brothers must respect each other. <form>katahúran, pangatahúran</form> <pos>n</pos> words of greeting. <i>Nangáyù mig pangatahúran (katahúran) apan way mitubag nga tagbalay,</i> We called out <tr>greetings</tr> but no one in the house answered. <form>pangatahúran</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> say words of respect or greetings. <i>Nangatahúran sila paglabay sa párì,</i> When the priest passed by they <tr>greeted</tr> him. <form>matinahúrun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>respectful</tr>. <number>2</number> <ix>short for</ix> <form>kanímu matinahúrun</form> <ix>in the complimentary closing of a letter:</ix> &lsquo;<tr>Respectfully yours</tr>&rsquo;. <form>talahúrun</form> <pos>n</pos> term of address to a person of distinction. <i>Duha sila ka táwu, talahúrun,</i> There were two of them, <tr>sire</tr>.

<p id=17967><form>tahum</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>beautiful</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B24; a12]</itype> be beautiful. <i>Mutahum ka pa kun mangarmin,</i> You&apos;ll be more beautiful if you wear make-up. <i>Nagkatahum ang kalibútan sukad ku ikaw makítà,</i> The world has become a more beautiful place since I met you. <form>{pa-|patahum}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make oneself up. <form>{pa-|patahum}, {pangpa-|pangpatahum}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>beauty products</tr>. <form>{ka-|katahum}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>beauty</tr>, <tr>loveliness</tr>. <form>{ka-an|katahúman}</form> <pos>n</pos> great <tr>beauty</tr> (literary). <form>{ma-|matahum}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>beautiful</tr>, <tr>lovely</tr>.

<p id=17968><form>tàhung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put s.t. over and around s.t. else or hang it over. <i>Akuy nagtàhung ug kawit dihà sa palwa,</i> I was the one that hung a toddy container over the palm frond. <i>Gitàhúngan níya ang kingki,</i> He put a shade over the kerosene lamp. <i>Láta ang itàhung sa pusti arun dílì dáyun magabuk sa ulan,</i> Slip paint cans over the posts so they will not rot in the rain.

<p id=17969><form>tahup</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chaff</tr> of cereals. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> separate the <tr>husk</tr> from husked grains. <i>Taphi nang linubuk,</i> <tr>Winnow</tr> the pounded rice. <form>{-un|tahupun}</form> <pos>a</pos> full of chaff, <tr>chaffy</tr>. <i>Ayúha paglimpiyu ang bugas kay tahupun,</i> Clean the rice well. It&apos;s still full of chaff. <form>taphanan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> ground cereals to be winnowed. <number>2</number> place where winnowing is done.

<p id=17970><form>tahur</form> <pos>a</pos> having the <tr>imposing</tr> posture of s.o. rich or of high rank. <i>Tahur kaáyu siyang tan-áwun, apan nanghulam ra diayg bisti,</i> He looks very imposing, but in reality he&apos;s wearing borrowed clothes. <pos>n</pos> big-time, professional gambler. <form>sugarul nga {&mdash;|tahur}</form> <xr>= <sc>tahur</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <form>{pa-|patahur}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> make oneself look imposing so as to appear rich or of high rank.

<p id=17971><form>tahuri, tahúri, tahurì, tahúris</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible <tr>bean</tr> slightly bigger than the mung and rusty brown in color, growing wild and cultivated: <bio>Phaseolus calcaratus</bio>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> have <ix>tahuri</ix>.

<p id=17972><form>tahusyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>soy beans</tr> preserved in soy sauce. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> cook with preserved soy beans. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> have <ix>tahusyu</ix> as the only food to eat with the staple.

<p id=17973><form>tahuy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make a clay pot nonporous by heating it and then putting shredded coconut or vinegar in it. <i>Kinahanglan tahuyun úsà ang kúlun únà gawía,</i> You must treat the pot before you use it.

<p id=17974><form>tahuy<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>soup</tr> made of sweet potatoes cut into small pieces boiled in water with nothing else. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> fix this soup.

<p id=17975><form>tái</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>feces</tr> of people and animals. <number>2</number> in the <pb n=964>game of <ix>bíku</ix>, the act of stepping on the line. <number>3</number> <tr>dross</tr> from molten metal. <i>Tigúma ang tái sa kalbúru kay ipintal ta sa batu,</i> Keep the dross of melted carbide because we can use it to paint the stones. <form>dakung {&mdash;|tái}</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>dakù</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4(1)]</itype> get feces on it. <i>Mataíhan (mataihan) nang hapin ug iságul sa taíhun,</i> That diaper will get feces on it if you put it with the dirty ones. <form>taitai</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B145S; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. with difficulty and turn out poor results. <i>Nagtaitai kus iksámin. Hagbung ku adtu,</i> I found the examination hard. I&apos;ll probably fail it. <number>1a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|tái} ang búhat</formx> do one piece of work after another and leave most everything unfinished. <i>Dì ku gustung magtaitai ang ákung búhat,</i> I don&apos;t want to begin another job before I finish the work at hand. <number>2</number> for a pen not to function well, resulting in dirty penmanship. <number>3</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for plants to be growing at different heights in one field or bed. <i>Init ang nakataitai (nakapataitai) pagtúbu sa mga mais,</i> The heat of the sun caused the corn plants to grow at different heights. <form>{hi&N;-|hinái}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> take out entrails of animals. <number>2</number> clean the entrails of feces. <i>Paghinái nákù sa bábuy, napisà ang apdu,</i> When I took the pig&apos;s entrails, I squashed the gall bladder. <number>3</number> have a woman for sexual intercourse. <form>{ka-|katái}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> get feces all over it. <form>taíhun</form> <pos>a</pos> dirty with feces. <form>{-in-|tinái}</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>tinái</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17976><form>taka</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> get tired of doing s.t. and thus cease. <i>Mitaka na siya, wà na maghilak,</i> He got sick of crying so he stopped. <i>Gitak-an kug hinuwat nímu, maung mipaúlì lang ku,</i> I got tired waiting for you so I just went home. <number>2</number> <itype>[c5]</itype> not like to do s.t. <i>Kun dì mu ikataka palíhug buháta kini,</i> If you don&apos;t <tr>mind</tr>, please do this for me. <form>{ka-|kataka}</form> <pos>n</pos> feeling of <tr>boredom</tr> or of being <tr>fed up</tr>. <form>{ma-|mataka}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>boring</tr>, <tr>tiresome</tr>, <form>tak-ánun, matak-ánun, matalak-un</form> <pos>a</pos> easily bored, tending to lose interest.

<p id=17977><form>*takà, *tákà</form> <form>{pa-|patákà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> do s.t. without really knowing how to do it, without regards as to how he is doing it. <i>Maghibús ka kun magpatákà (magpatakà) kag káun,</i> You will have diarrhea if you eat indiscriminately. <i>Patakai lag ansir. Sambahan lagi,</i> Just answer them at random. You&apos;ll guess some right. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> tell s.t. untrue, inaccurate. <i>Nagpatákà lang bisag siyay nánguna,</i> He&apos;s <tr>lying</tr>. He started the fight.

<p id=17978><form>takaba, takabà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> wrap a piece of cloth or the like around the body, esp. the torso. <i>Human kag kalígù magtakaba kag tualya kay musihag ang sinínà,</i> After you swim, you should put a towel around you because you can see through your dress. <number>2</number> use as a shield or cover for any part of the body. <i>Nagtakaba siyag papil tungud sa ínit,</i> She put a piece of paper over her head to protect her from the heat of the sun. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> carry s.t. on the back or shoulders by tying it. <number>3a</number> carry s.o. on the back or shoulders not tied. <i>Gitakaba ni Mulit ang íyang manghud,</i> Mulit carried his little brother <tr>pick-a-back</tr>. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; aP]</itype> for animals to <tr>mate</tr>. <number>4a</number> have <tr>intercourse</tr> (derogatory). <i>Mitakaba ka uruy ánang mubug lupad,</i> You went to bed with that pig of a woman. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> wrap-around cloth. <number>2</number> s.t. to cover one&apos;s head or shoulders.

<p id=17979><form>takad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> step on a line or specific area. <i>Dì ka mutakad sa bágis kay páwul ka,</i> If you step on the line, you are foul. <i>Kining batúha ímung takaran (takdan) arun makaabut ka sa búnga,</i> Step on this stone so that you can reach the fruit. <form>takdanan</form> <pos>n</pos> in games, the line on which one steps at the start or any phase of the game.

<p id=17980><form>tákal<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>volume</tr>, <tr>contents</tr>. <i>Ang garapun dakug tákal kay sa básu,</i> A jar holds more than a glass. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>measure</tr> out in a certain volume. <i>Gitákal níla sa bukag ang kamúti,</i> They measured the sweet potatoes by baskets. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB; c]</itype> for a measure to become full, cause it to do so. <i>Lainláing butang ang nagtákal sa íyang pitáka,</i> Her bag was <tr>filled</tr> with all different things. <i>Nagkatakal ang baldi sa hinayhínayng túlù sa túbig,</i> The pail is slowly <tr>filling up</tr> with water dripping into it. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|patakal}</form> <pos>n</pos> a measuring box, basket, or can of any convenient size.

<p id=17981><form>tákal<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC2; b(1)]</itype> for male pigs to <tr>mount</tr> another animal; by extension, for humans to do so (derogatory). <i>Kaduha takáling anáya únà mumabdus,</i> This sow was mounted twice before it got pregnant. <form>{bu-(&rarr;)|butakal}</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>butakal</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17982><form>tak-al</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c16]</itype> for a cover not to be closed tight, door to be <tr>ajar</tr>. <i>Ang kaban nga labihang kapunù mitak-al,</i> The trunk was part open because it was too full.

<p id=17983><form>takam, tákam</form> <pos>a</pos> ravenous. <i>Ang táwung takam mukáun bísan unsa,</i> A ravenous person will eat anything. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B]</itype> be <tr>hungry</tr>, ravenous. <i>Kinsay dílì mutakam (matakam) nga tulu ka adlaw wà miy káun gawas sa prútas,</i> Who wouldn&apos;t become ravenous when for three days we did not have anything to eat except fruits. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> take a large bite, <tr>chew</tr>. <i>May nagtakam sa kík kay gamay na lang ang nahibilin,</i> S.o. took a big bite from the cake because only a small portion of it is left. <i>Itakam (takama) ug maáyu ang <pb n=965>kan-un únà tunla,</i> Chew the food well before you swallow it. <form>takamtakam</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; c16]</itype> <tr>smack the lips</tr>. <i>Nagtakamtakam ang bátà kay miángay sa lamì sa gátas,</i> The child is smacking his lips because he likes the milk. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> await eagerly. <i>Nagtakamtakam na ku sa lamì sa mga sud-an,</i> I am eagerly <tr>anticipating</tr> the delicious food.

<p id=17984><form>takandal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P]</itype> for vehicles to run with a jouncing, bouncing motion. <i>Mutakandal na pud ang trák kun mulabang sa kabatuan,</i> The truck will bounce again when it crosses the stony area. <number>2</number> <itype>[B46; c1]</itype> make a <tr>clacking</tr>, banging sound. <i>Mitakandal ang bakyà sa simintádung dálan,</i> The wooden slippers went clickety clack over the cemented walk. <i>Ang táru nga way sulud mitakandal kay ákung hipatiran,</i> The empty can <tr>rattled</tr> when I kicked it.

<p id=17985><form>tákang</form> <xr>= <sc>lákang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17986><form>tak-ang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put a pot or kettle on the stove. <i>Itak-ang na ang lung-agúnun,</i> Put the rice on the stove. <form>tak-angánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>stove</tr>. <number>2</number> pot or kettle rest.

<p id=17987><form>tákas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; ac]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>go up</tr> an incline. <i>Takásun pa nátù ang pitu ka bungtud úsà muabut sa píkas baybay,</i> We still have to <tr>ascend</tr> seven hills before we get to the other side of the island. <i>Kining bakilíra dílì katakásan ug gamayng awtu,</i> A small car cannot negotiate this slope. <number>2</number> go <tr>ashore</tr>. <i>Ang pawíkan mutákas arun mangitlug,</i> The sea turtles <tr>go ashore</tr> to lay their eggs. <i>Dì ta makatákas kay balud kaáyu,</i> We can&apos;t go ashore because the sea is very rough. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> land from a sea attack. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> escape from prison. <i>Tulu na ka prisuhan ang ílang gitakásan,</i> They have already escaped from three prisons.

<p id=17988><form>takba</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> lean forward on s.t. or s.o. and cling to it. <i>Mitakba siya sa bukubuku sa íyang bána nga nagkaun,</i> She <tr>leaned on</tr> her husband&apos;s back while he was eating. <i>Maáyu kay nakatakba siyag bátang pagkalúnud sa barku,</i> Luckily he was able to cling to a log for support when the boat sunk. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> carry a child closely in one&apos;s arms with the child facing one. <i>Takbáha ang bátà kun butdan sa tiyan,</i> Carry the child with his stomach pressed against you if he has gas in the stomach. <number>3</number> <itype>[AC; b(1)]</itype> <tr>mount</tr> for copulation, as if for copulation. <i>Mitakba na ang butù apan dì gustu ang bayi,</i> The male mounted, but the female did not like it. <number>3a</number> for humans to <tr>have intercourse</tr> (coarse). <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> wrap a part of the body with s.t. <i>Gitakbahan níyag dyákit ang bukubuku sa dalága,</i> He covered the girl&apos;s back with a jacket.

<p id=17989><form>takbas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> swing a bolo or a similar bladed instrument. <i>Mitakbas siyag bálus apan lúya na siya,</i> He swung a bolo to retaliate but he was already too weak. <number>2</number> sever with a swing of the bolo. <i>Si Simyun ang mitakbas sa gamayng punúan sa ságing,</i> Simeon cut down the small banana trunk in one stroke.

<p id=17990><form>takbuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>hug</tr>, <tr>cling</tr> closely in order not to fall. <i>Mitakbuy ang tikì sa bukubuku sa manananggut,</i> The gecko clung tightly to the toddy gatherer&apos;s back. <i>Nakatakbuy ang anak sa láwas sa inahan dihang midugdug,</i> The child clung to his mother when it thundered. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> <tr>infect</tr> with a disease. <i>Tíbi ang mitakbuy níya,</i> He <tr>contracted</tr> T.B. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23P; b(1)]</itype> stay with s.o., usually as a dependent. <i>Siyay ákung gitakbúyan ug dúgay kay kwartáhan man,</i> I stayed long at her house because she was wealthy.

<p id=17991><form>takdà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>schedule</tr>, set a date. <i>Átung itakdà ang sunud nátung tígum,</i> We will set the date for our next meeting. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>sign</tr>, put a <tr>mark</tr> on. <i>Siyay mitakdà (nagtakdà) sa sulat,</i> He signed the letter. <i>Takdái ug íkis ang punúan sa lubi,</i> Mark the trunks of the coconut trees with an X. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>signature</tr>, <tr>mark</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>reminder</tr>; s.t. that is used as a reminder. <i>Ang anínu sa pusti mauy ákung takdà sa úras,</i> The shadow of the post is my reminder of the time. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|takdaan}</form> <xr>= <sc>takdà</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=17992><form>takdang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <number>1</number> hack or lodge a blade laterally into s.t. <i>Ang amul wà makatakdang sa punúan sa káhuy,</i> The dull bolo did not cut the trunk of the tree. <number>2</number> make <tr>notches</tr>, <tr>nick</tr>. <i>Ang bátà mauy mitakdang sa tiil sa silya,</i> The child made notches on the legs of the chair. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> strike the forehead with s.t. heavy. <i>Akuy mutakdang ug puthaw sa ímung agtang,</i> I&apos;ll strike your forehead with an iron rod.

<p id=17993><form>takdù</form> <tr>exactly</tr>, no more and no less. <i>Takdù karung diyis anyus ang átung kaminyúun,</i> We have been married for exactly ten years today. <i>Takdù sa gikasabútan,</i> In exact accordance with their agreement. <i>Takdù giyud sa nahitabù ang íyang tahù,</i> His report turned out to be exactly in agreement with what had happened. <form>{&mdash;|takdù} ang búwan</form> for the moon to be full. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB256C3; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> for things that are joined to fit exactly at their point of junction, make s.t. fit. <i>Walà mutakdù ang takub sa kaban,</i> The cover of the trunk doesn&apos;t fit squarely. <i>Takdúa (itakdù) ang duha ka iskína arun tíkup,</i> Have the corners meet and fit to make it tight. <number>2</number> <tr>coincide</tr>, be in agreement with each other; <pb n=966>make things be in agreement. <i>Ang íyang kamatáyun ug ang ímung damgu nagkatakdù lang,</i> His death and your dream were just a <tr>coincidence</tr>. <i>Itakdù ang ímung bakak sa akúa arun katuúhan,</i> Make your lie be in <tr>accordance</tr> with mine so they will be plausible. <number>3</number> be <tr>appropriate</tr>. <i>Kinahanglang mutakdù ang ímung isul-ub sa ukasiyun,</i> Your attire must <tr>fit</tr> the occasion. <number>3a</number> <itype>[C3]</itype> be on compatible terms with each other. <i>Nagkatakdù ang duha ka buringug,</i> The two fools <tr>hit it off</tr> nicely. <form>{-in-an|tinakduan}</form> <pos>n</pos> point of junction, place s.t. meets.

<p id=17994><form>takdul<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>daktul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17995><form>takduy</form> <xr>= <sc>tagduy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=17996><form>takgus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>fasten</tr> s.t. to s.t. with a knotted cord. <i>Palíhug rag takgus sa ríbun sa ákung buhuk,</i> Please tie my hair up for me with a ribbon. <i>Takgúsun na silang duha sa talikálà sa kaminyúun,</i> They are going to be <tr>bound</tr> together in wedlock. <i>Ang salug nga kawáyan takgúsan ug uway ngadtu sa busaug,</i> The bamboo flooring is <tr>tied</tr> to the joists with rattan. <number>2</number> tie into a loop that easily gets undone. <i>Takgúsa ang list&ucaron;n sa ákung sapátus,</i> Tie my shoelace. <number>3</number> tie s.t. around s.t. <i>Nagtakgus siyag sundang sa háwak,</i> He strapped a bolo around his waist. <i>Itakgus ang tarì sa tiil sa hiniktan,</i> Tie the gaff around the cock&apos;s leg. <pos>n</pos> s.t. that is fastened to s.t. else by entwining or the like. <form>{-in-an(&rarr;)|tinakgusan}</form> <pos>n</pos> the knotted part of s.t. tied. <i>Tan-áwa nga dílì mailhan ang tinakgusan,</i> See to it that the knotted part does not show.

<p id=17997><form>takiang</form> (from <ix>kiang</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> walk limpingly. <i>Nagtakiang siya kay nalisa ang tiil,</i> He is <tr>limping</tr> because he sprained his foot.

<p id=17998><form>tákig</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>malaria</tr>. <number>2</number> any disease characterized by chills and shaking. <number>2a</number> fit of shivering due to illness. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; b4]</itype> <number>1</number> be afflicted with malaria. <number>2</number> have the <tr>chills</tr>. <i>Gitakígan ang masakitun,</i> The patient had the chills. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|takigun}</form> <pos>n</pos> one afflicted with malaria.

<p id=17999><form>takigrapíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stenography</tr>, <tr>shorthand</tr>.

<p id=18000><form>takigrapu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stenographer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> be, become a stenographer.

<p id=18001><form>takihud, takíhud</form> (from <ix>kihud</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> <tr>limp</tr>. <i>Nagtakihud siya tungud sa pulyu,</i> He limps because he had polio.

<p id=18002><form>takílid</form> (from <ix>kílid</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>tilt</tr>, <tr>turn over</tr> on the side. <i>Nilísù siya kay mutakílid siya paghigdà,</i> He turned over to lie on his side. <i>Ang agúkuy magtakilid nga maglakaw,</i> The fiddler crab walks <tr>sideways</tr>. <i>Ayaw itakílid (takilíra, takilda), mayabu,</i> Don&apos;t tilt it. It might spill. <number>2</number> <tr>veer</tr>, change directions. <i>Mitakílid ang barku sa tuu,</i> The ship veered off to the right. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> get money from one&apos;s pocket (lit. lean over to stick the hands in the pocket). <i>Mutakílid siya dáyun ug pangayúag kwarta,</i> He immediately reaches in his pocket if anyone asks him for money.

<p id=18003><form>takilpù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> for one&apos;s foot to slip to its side, ankles to give way. <i>Natakilpù siya sa íyang bag-ung hayhil,</i> Her foot slipped on its side on her new high heels.

<p id=18004><form>takilya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>box office</tr>, a place where admission tickets are sold. <i>Si Klint Istwud gihugúpan pag-áyu sa takilya,</i> Clint Eastwood is very popular at the box office. <form>takilyíra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ticket seller</tr> (female). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> be a <tr>ticket vendor</tr>. <form>takilyíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ticket seller</tr> (male).

<p id=18005><form>takin</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> strap s.t. around the waist. <i>Nagtakin siya ug sundang kay mangáhuy,</i> He&apos;s strapping a bolo on his waist to gather firewood. <i>Itakin ang baskit kun mangáni,</i> Strap the basket around the waist when you harvest rice. <pos>n</pos> basket fastened to the waist, used in harvesting rice.

<p id=18006><form>tak-in</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>tuck-in</tr> one&apos;s shirt. <i>Angayan kang magtak-in kay dì sapyut,</i> You look nice with your shirt <tr>tucked in</tr> because your buttocks are not flat.

<p id=18007><form>takinding</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> roll with a clatter. <i>Pagkahúlug níya ang plátung íyang gidala mitakinding sa ubus,</i> When he fell, the plates he was carrying rolled with a clatter.

<p id=18008><form>takingking</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>hop</tr> on one leg. <i>Takingkínga kútub ngadtu,</i> Hop up to there on one leg.

<p id=18009><form>takinhud</form> <xr>= <sc>tangkihud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18010><form>takip</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>include</tr> along with, do to s.t. at the same time as one does it to s.t. else. <i>Kinsay nagtakip sa ákung ngálan sa lista?</i> Who included my name in the list? <i>Nagtakip kug ritrátu sa ákung sulat,</i> I <tr>enclosed</tr> a picture in my letter. <i>Gikatakip nákug gastu ang ímung kwarta,</i> I spent your money <tr>along with</tr> mine. <form>{(&larr;)|tákip}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1c]</itype> join flat things one on top of the other or at their edges. <i>Takípa nang duha ka papil arun madakù (mabagà),</i> Join those two sheets of paper to make them bigger (or Paste them on top of one another to make them thicker).

<p id=18011><form>taklà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make a clicking, clacking noise with the tongue. <i>Taklái siya kay mau nay ámung sinyas,</i> Clack your tongue at him because that&apos;s our signal. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> clacking of the tongue. <number>2</number> a k.o. small, dark-hued <tr>shrimp</tr> 2&ndash;3 cm. long which emits a loud clicking sound similar to tongue clacking. <form>{pa&N;-|panaklà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> make a clacking noise with the tongue in exasperation, dejection, or admiration. <i>Nanaklà siya kay hibyaan sa <pb n=967>bus,</i> He clacked his tongue because he missed the bus.

<p id=18012><form>taklap</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>spread</tr>, <tr>lay</tr> s.t. flat over s.t. so as to cover it. <i>Itaklap ring hábul sa lamísa,</i> Spread this blanket over the table. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2456]</itype> <tr>cover</tr> as if enveloping. <i>Mitaklap ang kangitngit sa kalibútan,</i> Darkness covered the world. <pos>n</pos> s.t. spread over s.t. to cover it.

<p id=18013><form>taklas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for dogs to jump all over s.o. <i>Nabuling ang ákung sinínà kay gitaklásan ku sa irù,</i> My clothes got dirty because the dog jumped all over me. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> climb, clamber up on s.t. not affording a good foothold. <i>Hipaakan tà ku sa irù ug wà pa ku makataklas sa kináma nga mga kahun,</i> I would have been bitten by the dog had I not clambered on the stacked boxes.

<p id=18014><form>taklay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> hang s.t. loose around the neck. <i>Dílì maáyu nga magsuruysúruy sa kalying magtaklay ug tualya,</i> It is not good to go around the streets having a towel draped around one&apos;s neck.

<p id=18015><form>taklì</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> draw one&apos;s attention away from where it should be focused. <i>Ang nakataklì (nakapataklì) sa íyang intiris sa panulat mau ang súgal,</i> Gambling drew away his interest from writing. <i>Nataklì ang atinsiyun ni Míla ngadtu sa íyang katúpad,</i> Mila&apos;s attention was drawn away from me towards her seatmate. <number>2</number> <itype>[c]</itype> transfer temporary ownership of land from one mortgage-holder to another. <i>Ang pinirindang yútà gitaklì pagprinda diri kanákù,</i> The mortgaged lot was transferred to me.

<p id=18016><form>taklíad</form> (from <ix>liad</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> bend the body backward to the extent that the head is at the same level as the chest or lower. <i>Bantáyi nga dì mataklíad ang bátà,</i> Watch out that the baby doesn&apos;t throw himself backwards. <i>Ákung itaklíad (takliárun) ug maáyu ang ákung láwas sa sáyawng limburak,</i> I bend way back when I dance the limbo rock.

<p id=18017><form>taklid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> pin, tie s.o.&apos;s hands behind his back. <i>Gitaklid ang mga dinakpan,</i> The prisoners had their hands tied behind their backs. <form>{hi&N;-|hinaklid}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN]</itype> fold one&apos;s hands behind the back. <i>Mihinaklid siyang nagdiskursu,</i> He folded his hands behind his back while speaking. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; bN]</itype> do s.t. difficult with ease. <i>Panghinaklíran (hinaklíran) lang níya nang bungtúra,</i> He will climb that mountain with ease.

<p id=18018><form>taklíma</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> wrench the ankle or the foot. <i>Nataklíma ang ákung tiil sa danglug nga batu,</i> I wrenched my foot on a slippery stone.

<p id=18019><form>taklub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> cover s.t. over with s.t. enclosing it. <i>Akuy mutaklub sa basurahan,</i> I&apos;ll put the lid on the garbage can. <i>Ingun kug nawálà ang ituy apan natakluban diay sa kahun,</i> I thought the puppy got lost, but actually it had just gotten under the box. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lid</tr>. <number>2</number> basket-like pen for fowl.

<p id=18020><form>taklúbu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>giant clams</tr>, esteemed for food, large specimens of which furnish shells for baptismal fonts.

<p id=18021><form>taklung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b8]</itype> be caught by being covered by s.t. which falls. <i>Ang iring nataklungan sa kahun,</i> The cat was caught by a box that fell on it.

<p id=18022><form>taklus</form> <xr>= <sc>takgus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18023><form>takmag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> for a male animal to <tr>mount</tr> on the female. <i>Basta mangúlag ang anay, mutakmag giyud ang butù,</i> If the sow is in heat, the male will mount her.

<!-- TODO: where is takmù_2? -->

<p id=18024><form>takmù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a3b8]</itype> hit one&apos;s chin on s.t. <i>Natakmù ku sa kurdísu pagkatumba nákù,</i> I hit my chin on the window sill when I fell down.

<p id=18025><form>takmul</form> <pos>a</pos> drawing the lips in or biting the lower lip in defiance, anger, or when making an effort. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> for the lips to <tr>purse</tr>. <i>Nagtakmul ang íyang simud,</i> He drew in his mouth. <form>{pa&N;-|panakmul}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> draw in the lips, bite the lower lip. <i>Nanakmul siyang nag-alsa sa kahun,</i> He bit his lower lip while heaving the box.

<p id=18026><form>takna</form> <xr>= <sc>taknà</sc>, <i>n2, 2a.</i></xr>

<p id=18027><form>taknà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>identifying mark</tr>. <i>Ang sáku nga may taknà átù,</i> The sack that has an identifying mark on it is ours. <number>1a</number> notch as an identifying mark. <number>2</number> <tr>hour</tr>. <number>2a</number> <tr>moment</tr>. <i>Sa taknang pul-an ka, byái siya,</i> The moment you get tired of her, leave her. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> put an identifying sign or label. <i>Kinahanglang taknáan ang mga garápa sa tambal,</i> We should <tr>label</tr> bottles containing medicine. <number>2</number> put a notch as an identifying mark. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|taknaan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>timepiece</tr>, <tr>watch</tr>.

<p id=18028><form>taksay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fishing <tr>net</tr>, cast in shallow water and dragged by four people towards the shore. <form>{pa&N;-|panaksay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[N]</itype> go fishing with the <ix>taksay</ix> net.

<p id=18029><form>taksi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>taxi</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> take a taxi. <i>Mataksi ang pantalan gíkan dinhi,</i> We can take a taxi to the wharf from here. <number>2</number> make into a taxi.

<p id=18030><form>taksì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a game in which objects placed inside a circle are knocked out of the area. The ones displaced from the circle belong to the player that hit them. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> play <ix>taksì</ix>.

<p id=18031><form>taksì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> strip abaca, buri palm leaves, and the like of vegetable matter to get the fiber. <pos>n</pos> instrument for stripping. <form>{-an|taksian}</form> <pos>n</pos> abaca <pb n=968>stripper. <form>{-in-|tinaksì}</form> <pos>n</pos> stripped stalks.

<p id=18032><form>taksikab</form> <xr>= <sc>taksi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18033><form>taksinilya</form> <pos>n</pos> humorous word for <ix>tartanilya</ix>, used in contexts where one says he doesn&apos;t have money to take the taxi. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> take the <ix>tartanilya</ix>. <i>Taksinilya lang ta,</i> Let&apos;s just take the <ix>tartanilya</ix> brand of taxi.

<p id=18034><form>taktak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB26; ac]</itype> for small things or s.t. fastened or stuck to s.t. to detach and drop; cause to drop. <i>Kinsay nagtaktak ug ágiw sa sawug?</i> Who knocked cigarette ashes on the floor? <i>Nataktak ang íyang pilukpíluk sa sawug,</i> Her false eyelashes fell to the floor. <i>Taktáka ang mga tambis,</i> Knock the fruits off the tree. <i>Wà kataktákig balhíbu,</i> It was unharmed. (Lit. Not a feather was knocked off of it.) <number>2</number> <itype>[b4(1)]</itype> have a <tr>miscarriage</tr>. <i>Nataktakan siya sa dihang nadakin-as,</i> She had a miscarriage after she slipped and fell. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> cast a fishing net. <i>Itaktak ang púkut kay dúnay duut,</i> Cast the net because there&apos;s a school of fish. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> drop from a list. <i>Taktáka (itaktak) sa listahan ang mining bitiránu,</i> Drop the fake veterans from the list. <number>4a</number> <tr>fire</tr> from a position. <i>Mutaktak nà siyag impliyádung tapulan,</i> He fires lazy employees. <number>4b</number> drop a charge. <i>Ang sumbung gitaktak sa huwis,</i> The accusation was dropped by the judge. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. which has been detached and dropped. <number>2</number> action of casting a fishing net. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|taktakan}</form> <pos>n</pos> designated place where the fishing net is emptied of catch. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|taktakun}</form> <pos>a</pos> for coconuts to be mature enough for harvesting. <i>Hustu na sak-un nang mga lubíha kay taktakun na,</i> Now is the time to gather the coconuts because they are mature.&dagger;

<p id=18035><form>taktakun</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. edible starshell having a thin dark brown operculum.

<p id=18036><form>taktika</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>strategy</tr>, <tr>tactics</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>scheme</tr>, <tr>ruse</tr>. <i>Taktika lang tu nákù arun malipat siya,</i> It was just a ruse to deceive him. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make a clever plan. <i>Taktikaha giyug maáyu nga makumbins&icaron;r siya,</i> Make a clever plan to convince him.

<p id=18037><form>taktikal</form> <pos>n</pos> examination given by military officers to cadets. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> have a <tr>tactical inspection</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|taktikal} inspiksiyun</form> <xr>= <sc>taktikal</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18038><form>táku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>billiard cue</tr>.

<p id=18039><form>takúan</form> <xr>= <sc>takúgan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18040><form>takub</form> <pos>n</pos> a cover or lid of s.t. which has a different shape from the thing it is put over and is not attached. <i>Ang takub sa pawuntin pin,</i> The fountain pen cover. <form>{(&larr;)|tákub}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> put a cover on. <i>Kinsay nagtákub sa kahun?</i> Who put the lid on the box? <form>{-an|takuban}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pseudonym</tr>, <tr>alias</tr>. <i>Ang <r>&lsquo;O. Henry&rsquo;</r> takuban ni Wilyam Sidni Purtir,</i> &lsquo;O. Henry&rsquo; is the <tr>pen name</tr> of William Sidney Porter. <number>2</number> <tr>disguise</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c6]</itype> <number>1</number> use an assumed or pen name. <number>2</number> wear a disguise. <i>Nagtakuban nga makililímus ang ditiktib,</i> The detective disguised himself as a beggar. <form>{-an(&larr;)|takúban}</form> <xr>= <sc>{-an|takuban}</sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr>

<p id=18041><form>takúb</form> <xr>= <sc>takúgan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18042><form>takubu</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to cover the roof ridge. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put a cover over a roof ridge. <i>Sín itakubu,</i> Use galvanized iron sheets to cover the ridge of the roof.

<p id=18043><form>takúbu</form> <xr>= <sc>taklúbu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18044><form>takubù</form> <xr>= <sc>tikubù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18045><form>takud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> <tr>attach</tr> s.t. to s.t. else, put it right next to s.t. so that it touches. <i>Nagtákud ang duha ka daplin sa lamísa,</i> The two edges of the table <tr>are</tr> touching each other. <i>Takúra ang duha ka daplin sa panaptung himúung hábul,</i> Attach the two pieces of cloth at the ends to make them into a blanket. <i>Itakud ang kwadru sa bungbung,</i> Attach the picture to the wall. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>harness</tr> an animal, <tr>hitch</tr> it for work. <i>Ayaw takdi nang bakáha ug balsa kay gamay pa nà,</i> Don&apos;t harness the cow to a sled because it is still too small. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b4(1)]</itype> <tr>infect</tr> with disease. <i>Makatakud nang hanggà,</i> Chicken pox is <tr>contagious</tr>. <i>Hitakdan kag mudúul sa tibíhun,</i> You&apos;ll get infected if you go near a tubercular person. <number>3a</number> <itype>[C3]</itype> contaminate each other. <i>Nag-úsa lang mug unlan magtákud giyud nang inyung mga kútu,</i> You&apos;re both lying on the same pillow, so you&apos;ll get each other&apos;s lice. <number>3b</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> arouse or <tr>spread</tr> to s.o. else as if a contagious disease. <i>Nahimuut siyang namínaw sa makatakud nga katáwa ni Rúsi,</i> He was amused listening to Rosie&apos;s contagious laughter. <number>3c</number> <itype>[A12; b4(1)]</itype> influence so as to become like one. <i>Natakdan ku sa kahinúun níya,</i> I was influenced by his diligence in study. <form>{pa-|patakud}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b4]</itype> pass a supernatural attribute on to another person upon death. <i>Úngù na siya kay gipatakdan sa tigúlang úngù,</i> He is a vampire now because the old man passed his supernatural power on to him. <form>takdanan</form> <pos>n</pos> an animal trained to take the harness. <form>{ma&N;-r-(&larr;)|mananákud}, matakdánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>contagious</tr>, tending to spread from person to person.

<p id=18046><form>tákud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> <tr>manage</tr> to do s.t. that requires strength or money. <i>Dì na siya makatákud ug alsa ug bug-at,</i> She can&apos;t manage to lift heavy things. <i>Makatákud kahà kag patunghà sa ímung anak?</i> Can you manage to send your child to school?

<p id=18047><form>takúg</form> <xr>= <sc>takúgan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18048><form>takúgan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>chiton</tr> of rocks in tidal flats.

<p id=18049><form>takúkung</form> <xr>= <sc>saruk</sc>, <i>n1, v.</i></xr>

<p id=18050><form>tákul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> for the chin to tremble causing <pb n=969>the teeth to chatter. <i>Nagtákul ang ákung suwang sa katugnaw,</i> My chin is chattering with cold.

<p id=18051><form>takuláhaw</form> <number>1</number> <tr>all of a sudden</tr>. <i>Sa takuláhaw lamang siya natumba,</i> <tr>Suddenly</tr> he collapsed. <number>2</number> not very long, just a few minutes ago. <i>Takuláhaw pa tu siyang milakaw. Maapsan pa tingáli nímu kun ímung sundan,</i> He left just a few minutes ago. You might still catch up with him if you go after him.

<p id=18052><form>takuling<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. stout <tr>vine</tr> commonly found on coconut trees, with glossy, deep green, runcinate leaves and dark brown roots that anchor the plant to the tree: <bio>Rhaphidophora merrillii</bio>.

<p id=18053><form>takuling<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> burned food particles sticking to the insides of cooking utensils. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> have burnt food particles. <i>Ug sigáhan nímu ug kusug, takulingun ang kaldíru,</i> If you turn the fire high, the pot will have burnt particles. <form>{-un|takulingun}</form> <pos>a</pos> encrusted with burnt food particles.

<p id=18054><form>tak-um</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; a12]</itype> close the mouth or lips. <i>Gihagkan ku ang nagtak-um níyang ngábil,</i> I kissed her tightly pursed lips. <number>2</number> <tr>keep silent</tr>. <i>Kwarta ray makatak-um (makapatak-um) sa íyang bàbà,</i> Only money can keep his mouth shut. <pos>a</pos> closed mouth or lips.

<p id=18055><form>takumba</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lean-to</tr>, <tr>hut</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>roof</tr> of a single pitch. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>pitch</tr> s.t. as a protection. <i>Nagtakumba silag hábul ug didtu sila mangatúlug,</i> They pitched a blanket and slept under it. <i>Gitakumbáhan níyag playwud ang irù arun dì mahumud sa ulan,</i> He set up a piece of plywood for the dog to get under to keep out of the rain. <form>{-in-|tinakumba}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lean-to</tr> or s.t. set up with a single-pitched roof.

<p id=18056><form>takun</form> <pos>n</pos> heel of shoes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put a heel on shoes.

<p id=18057><form>tákung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sheath of coconut fruits. <number>2</number> sheath-like covering similar to that of coconuts. <form>takungtákung</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>tákung</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr> <number>2</number> the sheath-like covering on the back of grasshoppers and similar insects or the wing sheath of coleopterous insects.

<p id=18058><form>takup</form> <xr>= <sc>tak-up</sc>.</xr> <form>talakpun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shutters</tr>.

<p id=18059><form>tak-up</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB26; b]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>close</tr>, be <tr>closed</tr>. <i>Kinsay nagtak-up sa pultahan nga mipákà man?</i> Who closed the door banging it? <i>Tak-úpi ang bintánà kay tugnaw,</i> Close the window because it&apos;s cold. <number>2</number> for schools or business establishments to <tr>close</tr>. <i>Mutak-up ang klási karung Abril,</i> Classes will close in April. <pos>n</pos> lid that fits flat over or a shutter. <pos>a</pos> <tr>closed</tr>.

<p id=18060><form>takúpis</form> <pos>n</pos> an oval-shaped, large but not tall <tr>basket</tr> with a cover, made of pieces of bamboo and rattan or <ix>nítù</ix> vine, used as a container for clothing.

<p id=18061><form>takurì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>kettle</tr>.

<p id=18062><form>takus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>measure</tr> with a measuring vessel. <i>Taksa ang bugas arun hibaw-an pílay gibaylu,</i> Measure the rice so we&apos;ll know how much they borrowed. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> measure s.o.&apos;s capability. <i>Gitakus níya ang ákung kahibalu kun madáwat ba,</i> He tested my knowledge to see if I was qualified. <form>{(&larr;)|tákus}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c3]</itype> <tr>vie</tr> with one another, <tr>fight</tr> it out in a test of strength. <i>Makigtákus ku nímu kun kinsay hárì dinhi,</i> Let&apos;s fight it out to see who&apos;s the king here. <pos>n</pos> a <tr>measureful</tr>. <i>Gái kug duha ka takus kámay,</i> Give me two <tr>measures</tr> of sugar. <pos>a</pos> <tr>worthy</tr>. <i>Dì ku takus sa ímung gugma,</i> I&apos;m not worthy of your love. <form>{paka-|pakatakus}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> claim to be, consider worthy. <i>Nagpakatakus aku sa pagdápit kanímu,</i> May I invite you? (Lit. I presume to consider myself worthy of inviting you.) <form>{ka-|katakus}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>capability</tr>. <form>panaksan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bowl</tr>. <form>talaksan, taksanan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>measuring vessel</tr>. <form>tinaksánay</form> <pos>n</pos> test of strength. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> <xr>= <sc>tákus</sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr>

<p id=18063><form>tákut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>coral reefs</tr>. <form>{-un|takutun}</form> <pos>a</pos> full of coral reefs.

<p id=18064><form>takuyan, takúyan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a seed container used to hold corn when planting, usually from a short length of bamboo, and worn around the waist. <number>2</number> round-mouthed cylindrical container for farm products woven from buri strips. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make into a <ix>takuyan</ix>.

<p id=18065><form>takwáhaw</form> <xr>= <sc>takuláhaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18066><form>takwal, takwar</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>money</tr> (word play on <ix>kwarta, kwalta</ix>).

<p id=18067><form>takway</form> <xr>= <sc>bukway</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr>

<p id=18068><form>takyab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> cast a small fishing net into the sea, usually in the shallows. <i>Dakung duut sa isdà ang íyang gitakyában sa láya,</i> He cast the net on a big school of fish. <number>2</number> throw s.t. on and over s.t. as if casting a small net or throw s.t. with a similar motion. <i>Ákung gitakyában ug hábul ang káma,</i> I spread a blanket over the bed. <i>Ákù ta kang takyában sa tahup ug anhà ka lingkud dihà,</i> The chaff will fall off on you as I winnow it, if you sit there. <number>3</number> flap s.t. to shake s.t. off it. <i>Gitakyab níya ang sinínà kay abugun kaáyu,</i> She flapped her dress because it was so dusty.

<p id=18069><form>takyan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> toy which is similar to a shuttlecock in badminton and kicked with the instep of the foot. <number>2</number> game played with this shuttlecock which involves kicking it with the instep of the foot. A server is chosen by kicking the <ix>takyan</ix> a required number of times without missing. The one who misses is the server. The other player (or team) has to kick the <ix>takyan</ix> when it is served. If the server catches it, he serves the next player, and so forth, until all the players have been served, at which point the game starts again. <pb n=970>If he fails to catch it he must serve the same player again. If he is able to return the <ix>takyan</ix> kicking it, the person whom he returned it to must take his place. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> play <ix>takyan</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> kick as one would a <ix>takyan</ix>.

<p id=18070><form>takyap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2456; c]</itype> spread over so as to <tr>cover</tr>. <i>Mitakyap ang kangitngit sa kalibútan,</i> Darkness covered the earth. <i>Wà ka bisag tualyang ikatakyap sa ímung láwas?</i> Don&apos;t you even have a towel to cover your body?

<p id=18071><form>tál</form> <tr>full-fledged</tr>, <tr>genuine</tr>, <tr>through and through</tr>. <i>Tál nà siyang abugádu kay nakapasar sa bar,</i> He is a full-fledged lawyer because he passed the bar. <i>Tál nà siyang Árab,</i> He is a <tr>full-blooded</tr> Arab. <i>Mau nay tál nga amígu, muúnung,</i> That&apos;s what I call a real friend. He stands by you.

<p id=18072><form>tala<sub>1</sub></form> <tr>let&apos;s go</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|tala} na</form> <ix>short forms:</ix> <form>tána, tana</form> let&apos;s go now. <i>Tala na (tana) kay malít ta,</i> Let&apos;s go now. We&apos;ll be late.

<p id=18073><form>tala<sub>2</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>a</pos> out of one&apos;s right senses. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be <tr>crazy</tr>. <i>Natala ka. Ngánung asin may ímung giságuls kapi?</i> Are you crazy? Why did you put salt in the coffee?

<p id=18074><form>talà</form> <pos>n</pos> a small surface depression on a toy top made by the nail tip of another top, pit mark. <i>Way kaláki ang ímung kasing kay daghan ug talà,</i> Your top is no good because it has lots of pit marks. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b8]</itype> for a top to get a pit mark in it.

<p id=18075><form>tálà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b4(1)]</itype> <tr>set foot</tr> in a place. <i>Nakatálà na ba ka ánang bukíra?</i> Have you set foot on that mountain? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>step</tr>, <tr>tread</tr> on. <i>Dì ka mutálà sa lápuk, ha?</i> Do not step on the mud puddle, O.K.?

<p id=18076><form>tálà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>list down</tr>. <i>Itálà ang mga ngálan sa aplikanti,</i> <tr>List</tr> the names of the applicants. <form>{pa-|patálà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> <tr>enroll</tr>. <i>Ása man kang iskuylahána magpatálà?</i> In what school will you enroll? <form>{-an|talaan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>list</tr>. <form>talaadláwan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>diary</tr>.

<p id=18077><form>tálab</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pen shells</tr>.

<p id=18078><form>talaba</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>oyster</tr>.

<p id=18079><form>talában</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> for a force to carry s.t. along with it. <i>Nalumus siya kay natában sa sulug,</i> He drowned because he got carried away by the current. <xr><ix>see also</ix> <sc>tában</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18080><form>talabánug</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>banug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18081><form>talábun, talábung</form> <xr>= <sc>tulábung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18082><form>tálad</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>table</tr>. <number>2</number> table in parliamentary usage. <i>Si Husi P. Lawril mauy nangúlu sa tálad,</i> José P. Laurel was the presiding officer.

<p id=18083><form>taladru</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. <tr>drill</tr> with grooves along which a handle is pushed up and down, causing the bit to turn. <number>2</number> a wooden <tr>eggbeater</tr> made like the <ix>taladru</ix> drill. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> use a <ix>taladru</ix> drill or eggbeater.

<p id=18084><form>talagabung</form> <xr>= <sc>tugábung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18085><form>talagbagu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. delicious salt-water <tr>fish</tr>, yellowish-brown in color. It is flat-shaped and is as big as a palm, similar in appearance and taste to the <ix>kítung</ix>.

<p id=18086><form>talagsa</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>usa</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18087><form>talaguy</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> one who keeps going out and neglects the chores at home. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become fond of going out. <i>Natalaguy siya tungud sa barkáda,</i> He started going out and neglected his duties because of his gang.

<p id=18088><form>taláhib</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> coarse, erect perennial <tr>grass</tr> with snowy white panicles which, like cogon, takes over lands denuded of forest cover: <bio>Saccharum spontaneum</bio>.

<p id=18089><form>taláid</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> do s.t. in an <tr>orderly</tr> manner covering progressively the area worked on. <i>Talaíra ug sanggì ang mais arun walay hisayluan,</i> Harvest the corn <tr>methodically</tr>, covering it square by square, so that you miss nothing.

<p id=18090><form>talakítuk</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>fish</tr>, name given to <tr>jacks</tr> and other good-sized carangoid fish.

<p id=18091><form>talalak</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>bird</tr>: the white-billed hornbill: <bio>Aceros leucocephalus</bio>.

<p id=18092><form>talampad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; a1]</itype> place things in a row across s.t. <i>Magtalampad tag butilya sa paril kay magpunta blangku ta,</i> Let us arrange bottles in a row because we will have target practice. <i>Italampad ning mga batu sa yanang arun náay átung katumban,</i> Arrange these rocks in a row across the mud puddle so we have s.t. to step on. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>compare</tr>. <i>Tampárun nátù sila ug kinsay kinagwapahan,</i> Let us compare them and see who is the prettiest. <i>Ayawg itampad ang ákung pinintal sa kang Amursúlu,</i> Don&apos;t compare my paintings with those of Amorsolo. <form>tamparay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c3]</itype> compare with each other. <i>Makigtamparay siya sa ákung núts,</i> He wanted to compare notes with me.

<p id=18093><form>tálang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <number>1</number> be <tr>embarrassed</tr>. <i>Natálang ku sa ákung tubag kay sayup kaáyu,</i> I was embarrassed because my answer was completely wrong. <number>2</number> <tr>blunder</tr> or lose one&apos;s way into. <i>Natálang siya ngadtu sa iskuylahan sa mga babáyi,</i> He blundered into a girl&apos;s school. <form>{pa&N;-|panálang}</form> <pos>n</pos> trick coin with two heads. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a trick coin.

<p id=18094><form>talangígù</form> <xr>= <sc>hingígù</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ígù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18095><form>talantar</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <xr>= <sc>tarant&acaron;r</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18096><form>talantun</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>talent</tr>, the unit of weight (Biblical).

<p id=18097><form>talapya</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <xr>= <sc>tilapya</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18098><form>tálas</form> <xr>= <sc>patálas</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=971>

<p id=18099><form>talatala</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <tr>foolish</tr>, slightly crazy. <i>Talatala, ngánung giusíkan nímu,</i> <tr>Stupid</tr>! Why are you wasting it? <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. small <tr>frog</tr> about <measure reg="5.1 cm">2&Prime;</measure>, of marshy areas, often seen in trees. <number>2</number> one who is constantly chattering about unimportant things sounding like the <ix>talatala</ix> frog. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become <tr>crazy</tr>. <i>Natalatala siya human bulagi,</i> He became crazy when his girl left him.

<p id=18100><form>taláuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>crow</tr>. <i>Sayu pa tu; nagtaláuk pa ang mga manuk,</i> It was still early; the cocks were still crowing. <pos>n</pos> the sound of <tr>crowing</tr>. <i>Ang taláuk sa manuk timailhan nga saylu na sa tungang gabíi,</i> The cock&apos;s crow means that it is past midnight.

<p id=18101><form>tálaw</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B456]</itype> <tr>back off</tr>, be afraid to do s.t. for lacking nerve. <i>Mitálaw siya maung wà musúkul,</i> He was afraid, so he didn&apos;t fight back. <form>{pa&N;-|panálaw}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> be <tr>cowardly</tr>. <i>Dì siya mangamural ni Biyay kay nanálaw siya,</i> He can&apos;t bring himself to propose to Biyay because he is a <tr>coward</tr>. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|talawan}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>cowardly</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be, become cowardly.

<p id=18102><form>talay</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put or sit next to. <i>Kinsa man tu nga nagtalay nímu?</i> Who was that who sat beside you? <i>Italay ni sa baril,</i> Put this beside the drum. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a loaf of bread made of easily separable sections baked together in a row in one mold. <number>2</number> one <tr>beside</tr> s.o. else. <i>Kinsa man tung ímung talay sa sini?</i> Who was it you were sitting next to in the movies? <form>{(&larr;)|tálay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C; a]</itype> sit, set next to each other. <i>Nagtálay mi ug lingkud sa bátang,</i> We sat beside each other on the log. <i>Taláyun ta ning duha ka lamísa,</i> Let&apos;s put these two tables next to each other. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> fall, put in line. <i>Nagtálay ang mamalítay ug arsii,</i> Buyers of RCA rice are forming a line. <i>Gwápa siya kun itálay sa mga maksut,</i> She&apos;s pretty if you put her next to the ugly ones. <pos>n</pos> <tr>line</tr>, <tr>row</tr> of people or things. <form>{hi-|hitalay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> belong to a distinct group. <i>Nahitálay siya sa hataas nga katilingban,</i> She belongs to the upper class.

<p id=18103><form>tálay</form> <pos>n</pos> in hopscotch or basketball, the violation of stepping on the line. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> step on the line.

<p id=18104><form>talaytay</form> (from <ix>taytay</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> arrange things in a <tr>row</tr>. <i>Talaytáyun (italaytay) ta ning mga batu sa daplin,</i> Let&apos;s arrange the stones in a row along the edges.

<p id=18105><form>talayung</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> a length of tubing used to convey water from a spring that flows out from a slope. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> attach, make into a tube spout for a spring.

<p id=18106><form>talhà</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> splitting easily due to its parallel grain. <number>2</number> root crops that are dry and crumble easily in the mouth.

<p id=18107><form>talhung</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>shady</tr>, so as to retard the growth of trees. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13P; b4(1)]</itype> <tr>shade</tr> s.t. over. <i>Ang mangga mutalhung (mupatalhung) sa kamaisan,</i> The mango tree will shade the cornfield. <i>Natalhungan ang ákung sibuyasan sa mga ságing,</i> My onion bed is in the <tr>shadow</tr> of the banana plants.

<p id=18108><form>tali</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; a12]</itype> for fowl to wean their chicks, letting them go off on their own. <i>Ug sayu nga mutali ang mungáan sa pisù, dalì pud nga mangitlug,</i> If a hen lets her chicks get independent early, she will also lay eggs sooner. <pos>n</pos> chick that has gotten independent of the mother.&dagger;

<p id=18109><form>táli<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for root crops and the flesh of fish to be soft and moist. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> get to be soft and moist. <i>Mutáli (matáli) ang kamúti basta itanum sa yútà nga basà,</i> Sweet potatoes become soft and watery if they are planted in wet ground.

<p id=18110><form>táli<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tálì<sub>2</sub></sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr>

<p id=18111><form>táli<sub>3</sub>, tálì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>tally</tr>, <tr>mark</tr>. <i>Dì ku makatáli kay kandidátu ku,</i> I can&apos;t do the <tr>tallying</tr> because I&apos;m a candidate. <i>Gitálì ku ang ímung palta,</i> I have <tr>recorded</tr> your absences. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a3]</itype> have a note of a certain emotion. <i>Ang íyang pagtubag daw sa nagtálì ug kasukù,</i> His reply seemed to have a note of anger.

<p id=18112><form>tálì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>tie</tr>, <tr>bind</tr>. <i>Mga kawatan ang mitálì kaníla sa halígi,</i> The robbers tied them to the post. <i>Nakatálì na siya sa mga putus,</i> She has bound the packages. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> between, concerning two people or groups. <i>Tandugun ang rilasiyun tálì sa Amirika ug Pilipínas,</i> The relations between the U.S. and the Philippines are touchy. <number>2</number> <tr>concerning</tr>, <tr>with regards to</tr>. <i>Gisukutsukut siya níla talì sa nahitabù,</i> They interrogated him <tr>about</tr> the incident. <form>{(&rarr;)|talì}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bond</tr>, <tr>tie</tr>.

<p id=18113><form>tali-</form> prefix to a verb forming adjectives meaning &lsquo;<tr>about to</tr> [do]&rsquo;. <i>Talilarga na ku sa Amirika,</i> I&apos;m ready to leave for America. <i>Taliának,</i> About to give birth.

<p id=18114><form>taliadlaw</form> (from <ix>adlaw</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>hot season</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56]</itype> be the hot season.

<p id=18115><form>tálib</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> trim off or smooth around the end or the mouth of a container. <i>Talíbi ang bàbà sa plastik nga sudlanan,</i> Trim the mouth of the plastic container to make it even. <form>{(&rarr;)|talib}</form> <pos>n</pos> <form>walay {&mdash;|talib}</form> untrimmed around the mouth or at the ends.

<p id=18116><form>talibud</form> (from <ix>líbud</ix>) a fond of going about the neighborhood. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be fond of going about the neighborhood. <i>Ang pagkatabian mauy nakatalibud (nakapatalibud) níya,</i> She is fond of going about because she <pb n=972>likes to spread gossip.

<p id=18117><form>talibugsuk</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>bugsuk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18118><form>talibwag</form> (from <ix>bulag</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13P]</itype> <tr>disperse</tr>, run in different directions. <i>Nagtalibwag pagdágan ang kabatáan kay nahadluk sa búang,</i> The kids ran in all directions because they were afraid of the mad man.

<p id=18119><form>talidhay</form> <pos>n</pos> loud, prolonged, high-pitched <tr>laughter</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3c]</itype> laugh in a loud, high-pitched way. <i>Mitalidhay ang mga babáyi sa kataw-anan níyang isturya,</i> The ladies laughed at his funny stories.

<p id=18120><form>talidngan</form> <xr>= <sc>talirúngan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18121><form>talidúngan</form> <xr>= <sc>talirúngan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18122><form>taligamà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b8]</itype> <tr>overlook</tr>. <i>Dúnay mga sayup sa íyang tím nga ákung hitaligam-an,</i> There were lots of mistakes in his theme that I overlooked.

<p id=18123><form>taligátus</form> (from <ix>gatus</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. small <tr>mouse</tr> with a long snout. <number>2</number> k.o. roundish <tr>sweet potatoes</tr> with light pink skin and yellowish, sweet meat (so called because it produces an abundance of tubers).

<p id=18124><form>taligmata</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hallucination</tr> or <tr>vision</tr> where one sees s.t. not actually present. <i>Nakit-an nákù si Pidru apan walà man siya dinhi. Taligmata diay tu,</i> I saw Pedro, but he is not here. So it was just a hallucination. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b5]</itype> have a vision or hallucination.

<p id=18125><form>taligngan</form> <xr>= <sc>talirúngan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18126><form>taligráma</form> <xr>= <sc>tiligráma</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18127><form>taligsik</form> <pos>n</pos> large raindrops which fall in a scattered way, usually before or after a tropical rainstorm. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b4]</itype> rain in large scattered drops. <i>Bukasa ang hinayhay kay mitaligsik na,</i> Bring in the laundry because it is <tr>raining</tr>. <form>{pa&N;-|panaligsik}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> fall in large scattered drops. <i>Manaligsik íyang láway kun musulti,</i> He sprays saliva when he speaks.

<p id=18128><form>taligsuy</form> <pos>a</pos> long and tapering. <i>Taligsuy kaáyu ka ug ilung,</i> You have a long, tapering nose. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3; b6]</itype> be, become long and tapering. <i>Mutaligsuy ang pálu ug usa ka tumuy ra ang sipilyáhan,</i> The mast will come out long and tapering if only one end is planed.

<p id=18129><form>talíis</form> <xr>= <sc>tilíis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18130><form>talikála, talikalà, talikálà</form> (from <ix>tálì</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>chain</tr>, <tr>fetter</tr>. <i>Hugut ang talikalà sa ámung pagminahalay,</i> Our love is held together by a strong bond.

<p id=18131><form>talikìtikì</form> (from <ix>tikì</ix>) <xr>= <sc>tabili sa dágat</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18132><form>talikud<sub>1</sub></form> (from <ix>likud</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[aP1]</itype> turn the back, turn s.o. around. <i>Gwápa siyag magtalikud, pirug mag-atubang pastilan,</i> She&apos;s pretty when she turns her back, but when she&apos;s facing you, ouch! <i>Italikud (ipatalikud, talikda) nang ispíkir kay mabúngul ta,</i> Turn that speaker around or it will deafen us. <number>1a</number> <formx>{(&larr;)|talíkud}</formx> <itype>[C2; c6]</itype> stay, put two things with the backs against each other. <i>Nagtalíkud silag lingkud arun isig sandig sila,</i> They are sitting with their backs against each other so they can lean on each other. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>go away</tr> from. <i>Bag-u pa siyang mitalikud pag-abut níla,</i> She had just <tr>left</tr> when they arrived. <number>2a</number> <tr>pass away</tr>, <tr>die</tr>. <i>Maanyag nga bálu ang íyang gitalikdan,</i> He left behind a beautiful widow. <number>2b</number> <tr>abandon</tr>, turn one&apos;s back on. <i>Talikdan ku ang bisyu,</i> I will abandon my vices. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>decline</tr> a good opportunity. <i>Ug mutalikud ka ánang trabahúa dì ka na makakità ug láin,</i> If you do not take that job, you will not find another one like it. <form>{(&larr;)|talíkud}</form> <pos>n</pos> eye of a fish hook to which the leader or line is attached, facing in a direction opposite to the barb.

<p id=18133><form>talikud<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a variety of <tr>banana</tr>, smooth-skinned, similar in form to the <ix>alitundan</ix> but bigger, consumed uncooked and particularly tasty.

<p id=18134><form>talimughat</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>bughat</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18135><form>talínga</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ear</tr> (dialectal). <form>{(&rarr;)|talinga}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>notice</tr>, pay <tr>heed</tr>. <i>Gisampit ku níya piru wà ku mutalinga,</i> He called me but I didn&apos;t pay him any mind. <i>Nakatalinga ku nga dinhay táwu sa ákung luyu,</i> I noticed there was s.o. in back of me. <number>2</number> <tr>look after</tr>, <tr>pay attention</tr> to. <i>Kinsay mutalinga sa mga manuk kun wà ka,</i> Who will <tr>take care of</tr> the chickens while you&apos;re away?

<p id=18136><form>talinggab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> cut, chip or saw off s.t. long at an angle so that the end is pointed. <i>Talinggába pagsapsap ang káhuy arun mutalínis ang tumuy,</i> Cut the piece of wood at an angle so the end will come out pointed. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a cut made so that the result is pointed. <number>2</number> s.t. cut at a diagonal with a pointed tip.

<p id=18137><form>*talinghug</form> <form>{pa-|patalinghug}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>listen</tr>, <tr>heed</tr>. <i>Patalinghúgi ang púlung sa tigúlang,</i> Listen to the words of your elders.

<p id=18138><form>talingting</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> separate the very fine corn starch (<ix>tiktik</ix>) from the grits by shaking in a winnower, or separate the very fine grains from coarser ones. <i>Nagtalingting pa ku sa ginaling,</i> I&apos;m still separating the corn starch from the grits. <pos>n</pos> the very fine corn starch that sticks to the winnower.

<p id=18139><form>talingtíngun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> long-legged, medium-sized <tr>bird</tr> frequently found in tidal flats. It feeds on small fish.

<p id=18140><form>talingtíngun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. stinging <tr>fish</tr> of shallow waters.

<p id=18141><form>talínis</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sharp-pointed</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>shrill</tr> in voice or sound. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|talínis} ug luyug luyu</formx> one who reports whatever <tr>gossip</tr> he hears from one person and then relays it to others (lit. sharp at <pb n=973>both ends). <i>Ayawg kumpiyansahi nang bayhána kay talínis nà ug luyugluyu,</i> Don&apos;t trust that woman because she&apos;s a snake. <form>{&mdash;|talínis} maglúyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>two-faced</tr>, <tr>double-dealing</tr>. <pos>n</pos> pointed portion of s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> make s.t. sharp pointed. <i>Talinsi nang lagduk únà itagsuk,</i> <tr>Sharpen</tr> the peg before sticking it into the ground. <form>{-un|talinisun}</form> <pos>a</pos> of a <tr>pointed</tr> type.

<p id=18142><form>talintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>talent</tr>, <tr>ability</tr>.

<p id=18143><form>talinugù</form> (from <ix>dugù</ix>) <pos>n</pos> uterine hemorrhage. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> suffer a uterine hemorrhage. <i>Talinug-an giyud ka basta mangusug ka human ug anak,</i> You&apos;ll suffer a uterine hemorrhage if you exert effort too soon after delivery.

<p id=18144><form>talínum</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small <tr>shrub</tr> with thick, lanceolate, pale-green leaves, planted as an ornamental and for its leaves which are used as a vegetable: <bio>Talinum triangulare</bio>.

<p id=18145><form>talinupsan</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>tupus<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p id=18146><form>talinùtinù</form> <xr>= <sc>alundris<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=18147><form>tálip</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> slice root crops into thin strips to dry them under the sun. <i>Talípa ang kamúti arun ibulad,</i> Slice the sweet potatoes to be dried in the sun.

<p id=18148><form>talipsay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B356; b4]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>glance off</tr>. <i>Mitalipsay ang bála nga mitámà sa puthaw,</i> The bullet glanced off when it hit the metal. <i>Hitalipsayan ku sa pákul pagbughà nákù,</i> The hatchet glanced off on me while I was chopping firewood. <number>2</number> slip in talking. <i>Mitalipsay giyud sa íyang bàbà ang matúud nga kantidad,</i> He let the actual price slip out of his mouth.

<p id=18149><form>talipsay<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tulipsay<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=18150><form>taliptip</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> tip or peak of a roof or mountain. <number>2</number> <tr>tip</tr> of s.t. pointed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>sharpen</tr> s.t. to make it pointed. <i>Way mitaliptip sa mga káhuy nga himúung bagduk,</i> Nobody sharpened the wooden sticks to make into pegs. <i>Taliptípun ku ang mga tumuy,</i> I will make the tips pointed.

<p id=18151><form>talirúngan</form> (from <ix>dúngan</ix>) <pos>n</pos> people of the same age. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C23]</itype> be of the same age. <form>{ka-|katalirúngan}</form> <pos>n</pos> one who is the same age as s.o. else.

<p id=18152><form>talis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>maggots</tr>, larvae of housefly. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infested with maggots. <i>Gitalis ang patay nga irù,</i> The dead dog has maggots crawling over it.

<p id=18153><form>talísay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large <tr>tree</tr> similar to an almond tree, growing by the seashore, bearing edible nuts: <bio>Terminalia catappa</bio>. <form>{-un|talisayun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rooster</tr> with black, dark green, and dirty white splotches.

<p id=18154><form>talisik</form> <xr>= <sc>taligsik</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18155><form>talithi, talithì</form> <pos>n</pos> very fine <tr>drizzle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; b4]</itype> <tr>drizzle</tr>. <i>Tána, nagtalithi ra bítaw,</i> Let&apos;s go, it&apos;s just drizzling. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> <tr>spit</tr> with force, usually in derision. <i>Gitalithian (gitalithían, gipanalithían) lang ku níya pag-abla nákù,</i> She just spat derisively at me when I proposed to her.

<p id=18156><form>taliti</form> <xr>= <sc>talithi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18157><form>talìtì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>encrustation</tr> of sediments, <tr>tartar</tr> sticking to a surface. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a4b4]</itype> be <tr>encrusted</tr> with sediments. <i>Gitalìtian (gitalìtì) ang takurì tungud kay gisigíhag gámit nga way hugashúgas,</i> The kettle is encrusted with sediment because they kept using it without washing it. <i>Ngípun nga nagkatalìtì sa tantung tinabakù,</i> Teeth covered with tartar from smoking so much. <form>{-un|talìtiun}</form> <pos>a</pos> encrusted with tartar and tobacco tars.

<p id=18158><form>taliunduk</form> (from <ix>unduk</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); c1]</itype> be <tr>heaped</tr> up. <i>Nagtaliunduk ang labhanan,</i> The soiled clothes are <tr>piled</tr> up high. <i>Ayawg italiunduk (taliundúka) ang kan-un sa ímung kutsára,</i> Don&apos;t put so much food on your spoon at one time. <i>Akuy nataliundukan sa tanang búhat sa balay,</i> All the housework was heaped on me. <pos>n</pos> <tr>heap</tr> of s.t.

<p id=18159><form>taliwálà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>middle</tr>, <tr>center</tr> part. <i>Ig-a ang taliw&amacrcir; sa targit,</i> Hit the center of the target. <i>Taliwálà sa kakuyaw nangaliyúpù siya,</i> In the <tr>midst</tr> of her danger, she prayed. <form>{&mdash;|taliwálà} sa kámay</form> in the height of excitement or <corr sic=ecstacy>ecstasy</corr>, esp. sexual intercourse. <i>Bahálà nang mamatay basta taliwálà sa kámay,</i> I don&apos;t care if I die as long as it&apos;s at the height of sexual excitement. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> be situated <tr>in between</tr>, the middle of. <i>Gitaliwad-an kug lingkud sa ákung mga badigard,</i> I was seated in <tr>between</tr> my bodyguards. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> do s.t. to s.t. at its center, in its middle part. <i>Taliwáa (taliwad-a) ug bángag ang kwarta,</i> Make a hole in the coin at the center. <form>{pa-|pataliwálà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> go, stay at the center or middle. <i>Mipataliwálà sila sa baylihan ug nagsáyaw,</i> They went to the center of the floor and danced. <i>Ipataliw&amacrcir; siya paglingkud arun way makatupad,</i> Seat her in between us so that no one else can sit beside her. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> put oneself between people fighting. <i>Mipataliw&amacrcir; ang amahan paghúnung sa áway,</i> The father cut in to stop the fight. <form>kinataliwad-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>very middle</tr> of s.t.

<p id=18160><form>talíwan</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> for work to be disposed of or finished. <i>Ayaw ug súgud ug láin ug dì pa matalíwan kanang ímu rung gitrabáhu,</i> Don&apos;t start anything else as long as you haven&apos;t finished what you started there. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> for feelings to vanish (literary). <i>Mitalíwan kanákù ang kalípay pagtalikud nímu,</i> When you left, all the joys of life departed with you. <number>3</number> <itype>[B2346]</itype> for a person to <tr>pass away</tr>. <i>Mitalíwan na ang ákung mga ginikánan,</i> My parents have passed away. <form>{-um-r-|tumatalíwan}</form> <pos>a</pos> about to disappear or vanish. <i>Tumatalíwan <pb n=974>nga kaháyag sa kahapúnun,</i> A <tr>fading</tr> afternoon sunlight.

<p id=18161><form>taliwtiw</form> <pos>a</pos> elongated and <tr>pointed</tr> with tapering sides. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> become pointed with tapering sides. <i>Mutaliwtiw (mataliwtiw) ang tumuy sa wating mag-aginud,</i> The end of the earthworm becomes pointed and tapering when it stretches forward. <form>{-un|taliwtiwun}</form> <pos>a</pos> pointed and <tr>tapering</tr>. <form>{pa&N;-|panaliwtiw}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> for the nose to become narrower and pointed. <i>Manaliwtiw ang ilung sa táwung himatyun,</i> The nose of a dying person gets narrow and pointed.

<p id=18162><form>taliyir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>repair shop</tr>. <number>2</number> tailor, <tr>dressmaking shop</tr>.

<p id=18163><form>taliyuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> turn the body around. <i>Taliyuk kunu. Átung tan-áwun ug haum ba nímu ang amirkana,</i> <tr>Turn around</tr>. Let&apos;s see if your jacket fits you.

<p id=18164><form>talyir</form> <xr>= <sc>taliyir</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18165><form>talku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>talc</tr>.

<p id=18166><form>taltag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> set out, forth several things in order, one at a time. <number>2</number> deduct a debt from one&apos;s wages. <i>Bayinti ang italtag sa ákung swildu,</i> Deduct twenty pesos from my salary. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> tap s.t. off, esp. the ashes. <i>Aku ray mutaltag sa bága sa agipu,</i> I&apos;ll tap off the embers from the firebrand myself. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|taltagan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>raddle</tr>, a rod with pegs used to separate the warp threads and guide them into the desired position around the warp beam. <number>2</number> <tr>ash tray</tr>.

<p id=18167><form>taltal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> knock off s.t. that is attached or set. <i>Taltáli ang ligid sa karitun sa yapak nga nakakápal niánà,</i> Scrape off the mud from the wheels of your pushcart. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> deduct from one&apos;s wages to pay for a debt. <i>Taltálig diyis ang íyang swildu arun siya kabayad,</i> Deduct ten pesos from his salary so that he can pay his debt. <number>3</number> <itype>[c]</itype> divide land, property informally among prospective heirs without legal papers. <i>Ang tibuuk datag tampi sa subà mauy báhin nga gitaltal álang kanákù,</i> All the level land along the riverbank was my share of the inheritance.

<p id=18168><form>*talu</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>), <form>talutalu, talúun</form> <pos>a</pos> having or showing little sense or <corr sic=judgement>judgment</corr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become <tr>stupid</tr>.

<p id=18169><form>tálu</form> (not without l) <pos>n</pos> <tr>tallow</tr>, the hard fat in animals or the wax from beehives, used for making candles, soap, et al. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> gather or obtain tallow. <form>talúun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sticky</tr>, like tallow. <i>Yútang talúun,</i> <tr>Clay soil</tr>.

<p id=18170><form>talù</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>scratch</tr>, dot, impression made by scratching lightly. <number>2</number> marks made to keep a record of petty purchases on credit. <i>Tan-áwa sa listahan ug pilay ákung talù,</i> Look it up to see how much I owe. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> <number>1</number> make scratches, dots. <i>Kinsang kasing nakatalù niíni?</i> Whose top made the impressions on this one? <number>2</number> make small purchases on credit. <i>Nakatalù ku sa tindáhan gabíi,</i> I bought s.t. on credit at the store last night. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|taluun}</form> <pos>a</pos> marked with dents all over.

<p id=18171><form>talubig</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>&mdash;from <ix>túbig</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> small yellowish pustules appearing individually on the skin. <number>2</number> other watery and itchy eruptions on the skin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> have a pustule of this sort. <i>Dílì ku makasulat kay gitalubigan ang ákung tudlù,</i> I cannot write because my finger has a pustule on it.

<p id=18172><form>taludtud</form> <pos>n</pos> the lower portion of the human spinal column. <i>Sakit ákung taludtud kay nahapalingkud ku sa asíras,</i> The bottom part of my spine hurts because I fell down on my buttocks on the sidewalk.

<p id=18173><form>talukbuy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> hand s.t. to s.o. <i>Italukbuy ra ning suwat níya,</i> Please hand this letter to her.

<p id=18174><form>talukbuy<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>baluybuy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18175><form>taluktuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>peg</tr>, <tr>stake</tr>. <i>Gilibutan níyag taluktuk ang bag-ung turuk nga lísu,</i> He put stakes all around the bed of the newly sprouted seedlings. <number>2</number> bar for gathering sweet potatoes. <number>3</number> in dugout boats, reinforcing studs stuck into the sides to which additional planking is nailed to make the hull higher. <number>4</number> top of a hill, cliff. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b6(1)]</itype> enclose stakes. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> make a peg or stake. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> attach studs into the sides of a dugout. <number>4</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be, become <tr>steep</tr>. <i>Ug mutaluktuk ang dálan, dílì na makaági ang dyíp,</i> If the road gets too steep, the jeep won&apos;t go any further. <pos>a</pos> <tr>steep</tr>. <i>Taluktuk nga pangpang,</i> A steep cliff. <form>{-an|taluktukan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>summit</tr>.

<p id=18176><form>*talulu</form> <xr>= <sc>*talu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18177><form>talumbang</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> a length of bamboo with holes at both ends used to keep a pig from getting his tether rope hopelessly entwined. One end of the bamboo is attached to a short piece of the rope tied to the feet, and the other end of the bamboo is attached to a rope tied to the stake. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> put, make into a <ix>talumbang</ix>.

<p id=18178><form>talumtum</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>mildew</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>freckle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> get <tr>mildewed</tr>. <i>Gitalumtuman ang hinamugan kay wà tiwasag utaw,</i> The moistened clothes got mildewed because they were left unironed. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|talumtumun}</form> <pos>a</pos> mildewed, freckled.

<p id=18179><form>talumus</form> (from <ix>lumus</ix>&mdash;not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> anything used to cover the body when bathing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put on s.t. during bath. <i>Dílì magtalumus ang mga bátang mangalígù,</i> Children don&apos;t put on anything when they swim.

<pb n=975>

<p id=18180><form>talun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> pad of paper. <number>2</number> <tr>booklet</tr> of s.t. <i>Gihurut kug palit ang usa ka talun nga tíkit sa swipstik,</i> I bought a whole booklet of sweepstake tickets.

<p id=18181><form>talung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>eggplant</tr>: <bio>Solanum melongena</bio>. <form>{-an|talungan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>eggplant patch</tr>. <form>talungtalung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>shrub</tr> planted for its ornamental orange or yellow fruit: <bio>Solanum mammosum</bio>. <form>{-un|talúngun}</form> <pos>n</pos> wild <tr>shrub</tr> similar to eggplant, producing a spiked inedible fruit, used as a protection around the trunk of the coconut tree (<ix>hulud</ix>): <bio>Solanum sp</bio>. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|talungun}</form> <xr>= <sc>katyubung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18182><form>talungan</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>pipe stem</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a pipe stem. <i>Makatalungun ka sa bukug nga may lungag sa tungà,</i> You can make a pipe stem out of a bone that has a hole in its center.

<p id=18183><form>talúnung</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b3]</itype> momentarily stop from one&apos;s work to give close thought or attention to s.t. <i>Usa ka manánuyng sunáta ang gitalunúngan sa mga trabahanti,</i> The workers stopped to listen to the sweet music. <form>{hi-|hitalúnung}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BP1256]</itype> stop, pause when taken back. <i>Nahitalúnung (nahipatalúnung) aku pagkakità sa abling kaha,</i> I was <tr>taken aback</tr> when I saw the open safe.

<p id=18184><form>tal-up</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> cover or block the opening of a tube-like structure. <i>Lápuk ang nagtal-up sa imburnal,</i> Mud is blocking the end of the culvert. <i>Tal-úpi ang íyang ilung arun malumus,</i> Cover his nose so he&apos;ll suffocate. <pos>n</pos> <tr>trumpet mute</tr>.

<p id=18185><form>talupì</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <xr>= <sc>tubigtúbig</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18186><form>talusì</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>hornbill</tr>: <bio>Penelopides panini</bio>.

<p id=18187><form>talùtalù</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b(1)]</itype> <tr>flatter</tr> s.o. to get him to do s.t. for one. <i>Dì ka makatalùtalù (makapanalùtalù) ánang tigulánga sa íyang kwarta,</i> You can&apos;t flatter money out of that old man. <i>Kahibáwu kung mutrabáhu nag talùtaluan,</i> I know he will work if you give him <tr>sweet talk</tr>. <pos>a</pos> <tr>mentally weak</tr>, <tr>stupid</tr>.

<p id=18188><form>taluthu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>spit out</tr> what one has in the mouth in an explosive manner. <i>Ayaw nag italuthu nang ímung gikaun dihà sa salug,</i> Don&apos;t spit what you&apos;re eating out on the floor. <number>2</number> shoot with a pellet from a blowgun. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> cure s.o. with <ix>taluthu</ix>. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> treatment for skin ailments or swellings of natural or supernatural origins whereby a sorcerer chews ingredients and spits them out on the afflicted area as he utters magical prayers. <number>2</number> pellet from a blowgun. <form>{ma&N;-|manaluthu}</form> <pos>n</pos> sorcerer who can cure with <ix>taluthu</ix>.

<p id=18189><form>talùtù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. house <tr>lizard</tr>.

<p id=18190><form>talùtù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large <tr>tree</tr> of secondary forests.

<p id=18191><form>taluut</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large spreading ficus <tr>tree</tr>.

<p id=18192><form>talyáda</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> putting on a lot and highly made up. <number>2</number> <tr>effeminate</tr>, <tr>homosexual</tr>. <i>Ang mga talyáda dinaugdáug sa katilingban,</i> Society treats <tr>fairies</tr> with contempt.

<p id=18193><form>tama</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; b4]</itype> be, become tired, sick or <tr>fed up</tr> with. <i>Natamhan (hitamhan) na tingáli sa íyang pagkaulitáwu maung nagminyù,</i> He must have become <tr>tired of</tr> being single so he finally got married. <i>Gitamhan na kug kináug inasal,</i> I&apos;m <tr>sick of</tr> eating roast pig all the time.

<p id=18194><form>tamà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>imprint</tr> or <tr>mark</tr> left on. <i>Kining uwáta ang tamà sa ímung pagkatampásan,</i> This scar is a mark of your cruelty. <number>2</number> identifying <tr>sign</tr> or mark. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>tamlà</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> leave a mark on. <i>Mitamà ang latigu níya sa ákung láwas,</i> His whip left a mark on my body. <form>{(&larr;)|támà}<sub>1</sub></form> <number>1</number> put an identifying mark on. <i>Akuy mitámà sa ámung kargamintu,</i> I <tr>marked</tr> our cargoes. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>tamlà</sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr> <form>{-an|tamaan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>marker</tr> or identifying sign.

<p id=18195><form>támà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23; c1]</itype> for s.t. to hit squarely on s.t. <i>Mitámà ang suntuk sa apapángig sa buksiyadur,</i> The fist hit the boxer squarely on the jaw. <i>Tamáa (itámà) pagdukduk ang martilyu sa lansang,</i> Hit the nail squarely on the head. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23C3; c1]</itype> be just exactly on time. <i>Mitámà ang pyista sa ámung lungsud sa ákung adlaw,</i> The fiesta of our town fell exactly on my birthday. <number>3</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> make s.t. <tr>fit</tr>. <i>Tamáa (itámà) pag-áyu ang sinínà sa ákung sukud arun dì ku magyàyà,</i> Fit my dress according to my measurements so that it won&apos;t hang loosely on me. <number>4</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> stop doing s.t. bad. <i>Tamáa (itámà) na nang ímung pagpamabáyi,</i> Put a stop to your romantic exploits. <pos>a</pos> squarely hit, <tr>on time</tr>, <tr>fitting</tr> perfectly. <form>{&mdash;|támà} na</form> <tr>that&apos;s enough</tr>. <i>Támà na ánang ímung binúang,</i> That&apos;s enough of your foolishness.

<p id=18196><form>tamâ</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>tamalà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18197><form>tamad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> feel too lazy to do s.t. <i>Gitamaran kung muadtu sa dawuntáwun kay ínit,</i> I don&apos;t feel like going downtown because it is too hot. <form>tamaran</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lazy</tr>. <i>Tamaran, gustu lag síging katúlug,</i> He is lazy. All he likes to do is sleep. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become lazy and <tr>indolent</tr>.

<p id=18198><form>tamáing</form> <xr>= <sc>ligwan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18199><form>támak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3S; b]</itype> <tr>step on</tr> s.t. <i>Aruy! Ímung gitamákan ang ákung kalyu,</i> Ouch! You stepped on my corn. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23S; a12]</itype> <tr>come to</tr>, <tr>set foot on</tr> a place. <i>Wà matámak sa mga Katsílà ang kamurúsan,</i> The Spaniards never set foot on Muslim soil. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>trample</tr> down by abuse of position or authority. <i>Tamákan ka kun magpaubus ka,</i> People will step on you if you don&apos;t assert your rights. <form>{&mdash;|támak} sa dungug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>dishonor</tr>, <pb n=976><tr>insult</tr>. <i>Ang ímung pagkadisgrasya nagtámak sa átung dungug,</i> Your pregnancy has brought dishonor to us. <form>{pa-|patámak}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> place s.t. beneath a religious image in the belief that the saint will do to the owner of the object whatever the person who put the object there prayed for him to do (good or bad). <form>{-in-an|tinamakan}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. placed beneath a saint&apos;s image in this belief. <form>{-l-an(&rarr;)|talamakan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>doormat</tr>.

<p id=18200><form>tam-ak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>dump</tr>, throw a large quantity of s.t. in a heap s.w. <i>Dì ka makatam-ak ug sagbut sa agiánan,</i> You can&apos;t dump the rubbish in the street. <number>2</number> fill up a hole in the ground. <i>Íyang gitam-ákan ang atábay ug mga sagbut,</i> He filled the well with trash. <number>3</number> heap work, blame, abuse on s.o. <i>Akuy natam-akan sa tanang kasábà,</i> All the abuse was heaped on me.

<p id=18201><form>tam-ak<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b5]</itype> <tr>wind up</tr> s.w. one would not expect to be. <i>Ngánung mitam-ak ka ning dapíta?</i> How come you wound up in this place? <i>Sa panahun sa kampanya gitam-ak (gitam-ákan) níla ang kinahilitang baryu,</i> During the campaign they penetrated to the remotest villages. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> <tr>come across</tr> by chance. <i>Nakatam-ak siyag bahandì pagkálut níyag lubung,</i> He <tr>discovered</tr> a treasure while digging a grave. <i>Hitam-akan námù ang duut sa isdà,</i> We came across a school of fish.

<p id=18202><form>tamalà</form> <pos>n</pos> very small <tr>octopus</tr> the head of which is less than an inch in diameter. <form>{pa&N;-|panamalà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> go catch <ix>tamalà</ix>.

<p id=18203><form>tamális</form> <pos>n</pos> dish of ground roasted rice and peanuts mixed with coconut milk, meat, eggs, and other ingredients, wrapped in a banana leaf and boiled. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, have <ix>tamális</ix>.

<p id=18204><form>táman</form> <number>1</number> <tr>until</tr>, <tr>up to</tr> a certain part. <i>Lakaw táman sa kural,</i> Walk up to the fence. <i>Butangi ug túbig táman sa pagkapunù,</i> Fill it up with water until it is full. <form>{&mdash;|táman} sa ginháwa, kusug</form> to the limit of one&apos;s capacity. <i>Dágan táman sa ginháwa,</i> Run as fast as you can (lit. your breath allows). <number>2</number> be only up to doing s.t. less than one wants to. <i>Táman ra ka sa tan-aw ug dì ka mudíga,</i> You&apos;ll only get to look if you don&apos;t propose. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|táman} na</formx> it is <tr>enough</tr>. <i>Táman na ang usa ka bukag,</i> One basket is enough. <i>Táman na sa paghílak,</i> That&apos;s enough crying. <number>4</number> [verb] <form>ug {&mdash;|táman}</form> [do] <tr>exceedingly</tr>. <i>Mikáun ug táman sa útan,</i> He ate <tr>lots</tr> and lots of vegetables. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> do more than what is usually necessary. <i>Íyang gitamánan ug kálut íyang buktun,</i> He scratched his arm <tr>too much</tr>.

<p id=18205><form>tamaraw</form> <pos>n</pos> tamaraw, a k.o. wild <tr>water buffalo</tr>.

<p id=18206><form>tamarindu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tamarind preserves</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> make tamarind preserves. <form>tamarinduhun</form> <pos>n</pos> tamarinds good for making into preserves.

<p id=18207><form>tamarung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. carangoid <tr>fish</tr> with a tuna-shaped body, green dorsal and white ventral portion.

<p id=18208><form>*támas</form> <form>panamastámas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>despise</tr>, <tr>insult</tr>. <i>Daghang nanamastámas sa bag-u níyang tinuúhan,</i> Many people heap insults on him for his new faith. <number>2</number> <tr>molest</tr> physically. <i>Naghíkug ang babáying gipanamastamásan,</i> The girl that was <tr>raped</tr> committed suicide. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>slander</tr>, <tr>insult</tr>. <number>2</number> physical <tr>molestation</tr>. <form>mapanamastamásun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>slandering</tr>, <tr>molesting</tr>.

<p id=18209><form>tamasak</form> <xr>= <sc>tambasákan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18210><form>tamásuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> rot affecting jackfruit caused by insect larvae. <number>2</number> k.o. <tr>worm</tr> that infests the wooden parts of ships. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infested with <tr>rot</tr> or <tr>shipworm</tr>. <pos>a</pos> infested with this sort of rot.

<p id=18211><form>tamátis</form> <xr>= <sc>kamátis</sc>.</xr> <form>{(&rarr;)|tamatis}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> for a baby&apos;s feces to be like squashed tomatoes. <i>Mutamatis ang tái sa bátà ug magngipun,</i> The baby&apos;s <xr><sc>b.m</sc>.</xr> is like tomato juice when it teethes.

<p id=18212><form>támay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3S; a12]</itype> <tr>despise</tr>, <tr>look down on</tr>, usually with derision. <i>Gitámay siyang pubri,</i> He was despised because of his poverty. <form>{-l-un|talamáyun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>contemptible</tr>. <i>Talamáyun ang ímung pagpanápaw,</i> Your adulterous affair is <tr>shameful</tr>. <form>{ma-un|matamáyun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>scornful</tr>, <tr>contemptuous</tr>.

<p id=18213><form>tamba</form> <xr>= <sc>tangba</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18214><form>tambag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>advise</tr>. <i>Mitambag ang duktur nga mupahúlay siya,</i> The doctor advised him to rest. <pos>n</pos> <tr>advice</tr>, <tr>counsel</tr>. <form>{paki-|pakitambag}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> ask for advice. <i>Nagpakitambag siya báhin sa íyang suliran,</i> He asked for advice about his problem. <form>{-l-un|talambagun}, {pa&N;-un|panambagun}</form> <pos>n</pos> piece of <tr>advice</tr>. <form>{mag-r-|magtatambag}</form> <pos>n</pos> giver of advice.

<p id=18215><form>tambagísa, tambagísà</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>shrub</tr> of waste places, the leaves of which are used as a poultice: <bio>Cassia sp</bio>.

<p id=18216><form>tambak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>dump</tr> a large number of things in or over s.t. <i>Siyay nagtambak sa basúra sa ámung duwaánan,</i> She dumped garbage over our playground. <i>Gitambakan ug yútà ang atábay,</i> The well was filled with soil. <i>Itambak ku ning mga kartun nganhà nímu,</i> I&apos;ll push this pile of cardboard boxes over on you. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|tambakan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dumping ground</tr>. <i>Ang Hungkung mau ang tambakan sa mga upyum,</i> Hong Kong is the dumping ground of opium. <number>2</number> <tr>gathering place</tr>. <i>Ang bwangan mauy tambakan sa mga táwu matag Duminggu,</i> The cockpit is where the people gather on Sundays.

<p id=18217><form>tambal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>treat</tr> an illness, wound. <i>Tambáli (tambali) nang ímung samad,</i> <tr>Dress</tr> your wound. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b2]</itype> <tr>reform</tr>, <tr>correct</tr> s.o. <pb n=977><i>Unsay itambal ning íyang katapulan,</i> What <tr>remedy</tr> is there for his laziness? <number>2a</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> get punished as a cure for being naughty. <i>Hingtambalan ka lagi human ka latiguhi,</i> Your whipping was just what the doctor ordered. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>medicine</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>remedial measures</tr>. <form>{pa&N;-|panambal}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>practice medicine</tr>. <form>{ma&N;-r-|mananambal}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> medical <tr>doctor</tr>. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>tambálan</sc>.</xr> <form>{-an|tambálan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>folk doctor</tr>, specializing in diseases of supernatural origin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> become a <ix>tambálan</ix>. <form>{-anan|tambalanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hospital</tr>, <tr>clinic</tr>. <form>{ma-un|matambálun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>medicinal</tr>.

<p id=18218><form>tambalígay</form> <xr>= <sc>balantíyung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18219><form>tambaliyug</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>blenny</tr>, greyish in color with large eyes, which jumps about.

<p id=18220><form>tambalíyung</form> <pos>n</pos> club-shaped, edible <tr>squash</tr>: <bio>Lagenaria leucantha var</bio>.

<p id=18221><form>tambalùlù, tambaluslus</form> (from <ix>lùlù</ix> and <ix>luslus</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> supernatural being in human form that has lips so large that they turn inside out covering the face when he laughs. <number>2</number> <tr>jerk</tr>, a stupid, contemptible guy. <i>Pagkadakung tambaluslus nímu. Wà nímu syáta,</i> You jerk! You didn&apos;t make the basket.

<p id=18222><form>tamban</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to <tr>sardines</tr> of several species. <form>{-in-|tinamban}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> solve a problem by counting or by looking at and manipulating s.t. representing the thing counted (analogous to the way <ix>tamban</ix> are sold&mdash;by counting out each piece individually). <i>Tinambana (itinamban) pagkwinta,</i> <tr>Reckon</tr> it by tallying or counting on your fingers. <pos>n</pos> method of counting by manipulation of pieces. <form>{pa&N;-|panamban}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> fish for <ix>tamban</ix>. <pos>n</pos> occupation of fishing for <ix>tamban</ix>. <form>panalamban, pangtamban</form> <xr>= <sc>{pa&N;-|panamban}</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=18223><form>tambangúngu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large, fleshy <tr>catfish</tr> living in marine estuaries.

<p id=18224><form>tambasákan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mudskipper</tr>, a k.o. small fish that lives in shallow water, salt or fresh, with protruding eyes and spiny fins. It crawls out of the water, may travel considerable distance over land and is often perched on mangrove branches: <bio>Periophthalmus sp</bio>.

<p id=18225><form>tambaúlì</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. <tr>magic oil</tr> for open wounds which is said to make the wound close instantly. <number>2</number> condition in which a circumcised penis gets covered over again.

<p id=18226><form>tambaw</form> <xr>= <sc>tambal</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18227><form>tambawu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>frog</tr> that thrives on land.

<p id=18228><form>tambayáwan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>spider</tr> found in and inhabiting thickets, <measure reg="7.7&ndash;13 cm">3&Prime;&ndash;5&Prime;</measure> in diameter including the feet, mottled green and black in color.

<p id=18229><form>tambayáyung</form> (from <ix>yáyung</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1C; b(1)]</itype> work together sharing the labor, share in expenses. <i>Dílì siya mutambayáyung sa buluhatun sa balay,</i> He does not <tr>help out</tr> with household chores. <i>Nagtambayáyung mi sa ábang,</i> We each pay a share of the rent. <pos>n</pos> one whom one works together with to accomplish s.t. <form>{ka-|katambayáyung}</form> <xr>= <sc>tambayáyung</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=18230><form>tambid</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC2; c]</itype> lay s.t. long across s.t. else. <i>Nagtambid ang duhang nangatúlug,</i> The two put their legs over each other as they slept. <i>Itambid nang lipak sa láin, kurus na,</i> Lay a stick across another, and you get a cross. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> carry a child astraddle one&apos;s side. <i>Ayawg itambid nang bátà kay mapakaw,</i> Don&apos;t carry the child on your hips. He might become bowlegged. <form>{-in-|tinambid}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> sit with an ankle crossing each other or one on the other knee. <i>Makítà ang gising midiyas ug magtinambid ka,</i> Everyone will be able to see your torn socks if you sit with your ankle on your knee. <form>{-in-|tinambid} ságing</form> <pos>n</pos> fried banana fritters consisting of bananas cut lengthwise and laid across one another. <form>{hi&N;-|hinambid}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> sit with legs crossed at the knees. <form>tambiray</form> <pos>n</pos> game of rubber bands in which one band is flicked with the fingers over another band.

<p id=18231><form>tambilagaw</form> <xr>= <sc>tagilhaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18232><form>tambilágaw</form> <pos>a</pos> for the vision to be blurred. <i>Tambilágaw íyang panan-aw sa lúhà,</i> Her vision is all blurred from the tears. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for the vision to become blurred.

<p id=18233><form>tambis</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fruit tree with bell-shaped, pinkish fruits, about <measure reg="5.1 cm">2&Prime;</measure> long: <bio>Eugenia aquea</bio>. <form>{&mdash;|tambis} nga putì</form> variety with white fruit. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56]</itype> for the external genitalia of a sow that is in the heat to redden like a <ix>tambis</ix> fruit. <form>{-un|tambísun}</form> <pos>n</pos> full and pinkish. <i>Tambísun ang íyang ngábil,</i> She has full and red lips.

<p id=18234><form>tambiyúlu</form> <xr>= <sc>kambiyúlu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18235><form>tambling</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tumbling</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> do tumbling. <i>Maáyu siyang mutambling kúmu sirkadur,</i> He&apos;s good in tumbling being an acrobat. <i>Gitamblíngan lang níya ang íyang pagkahúlug,</i> He broke his fall by tumbling.

<p id=18236><form>tambù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> appear, lean out of a window or s.t. similar. <i>Mitambù (<corr sic=nanambu>nanambù</corr>) siya sa bintánà,</i> He was in the window. <i>Lúhà nga nanambù (mitambù) sa íyang mga mata,</i> Tears that formed in her eyes. <i>Itambù ang bátà sa bintánà,</i> Put the child in the window. <form>{-l-an|talambuan}, {-anan|tambuanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>window</tr>.

<p id=18237><form>tambù<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tangbù<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=18238><form>tambúbu</form> <pos>n</pos> a building used for storing ears of corn. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> construct, make into a <tr>granary</tr>.

<p id=18239><form>tambubúan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large <tr>wasp</tr>.

<p id=18240><form>tambubúkag</form> <xr>= <sc>hambubúkag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18241><form>tambud</form> <xr>= <sc>tabili sa dágat</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tabili</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18242><form>tambug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> throw s.t. heavy or bulky into s.t. deep. <i>Silay mitambug sa gipatay sa <pb n=978>dágat,</i> They threw the murder victim into the sea. <i>Maáyu itambug sa pangpang ning gubaung kutsi,</i> Better throw this rickety car over the cliff. <number>2</number> give animals feed or fodder. <i>Tambúgi lang ug pakpak ang kábaw,</i> Just give corn husks to the carabao. <number>2a</number> drop a coin into a piggy bank. <number>3</number> <itype>[B12; b8]</itype> <tr>fall</tr>. <i>Ubang búnga matambug ug mahinug,</i> Some fruits fall when ripe. <i>Natambug ang bátà sa hagdanan,</i> The child fell down the stairs.

<p id=18243><form>tambuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fat</tr>. <i>Bábuyng tambuk,</i> A fat pig. <i>Paridy&ucaron;s kay tambuk ka ra,</i> Go on a diet because you&apos;re too fat. <i>Tambuk pay dyís, miswa,</i> Thinner than a dime, a <corr sic=noddle>noodle</corr>. <number>2</number> fertile soil. <i>Tambuk ang yútang daplin sa subà,</i> The soil near the riverbank is fertile. <number>3</number> growing vigorously, lush. <i>Tambuk ang tanum inabunúhan,</i> Fertilized plants are vigorous. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[BN; b3(1)]</itype> get fat. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; b3(1)]</itype> become fertile, vigorous in growth. <i>Makahayblad ang pagsingárig káug tambuk,</i> You can get high blood pressure from eating fat all the time. <form>{&mdash;|tambuk} nga nagdág luib</form> <pos>a</pos> fat but sickly person. <form>{&mdash;|tambuk} ug, ang sulti, manulti</form> <pos>a</pos> exaggerating, bragging. <i>Dílì katuúhan nang tawhána kay tambuk nà ug sulti,</i> You can&apos;t believe him because he is a braggart. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> <tr>brag</tr> or <tr>exaggerate</tr>.

<p id=18244><form>tambuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> throw s.t. out. <i>Kinsay nagtambuk ug basúra dinhi?</i> Who disposed of his garbage here?

<p id=18245><form>tambukàkà, tambukákà</form> <pos>n</pos> fat (derisive). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become obese. <i>Nagkatambukàkà siya human maminyù,</i> She turned into a fat slob after she got married.

<p id=18246><form>tambukíkuy</form> <pos>a</pos> plump and chubby. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become plump and chubby.

<p id=18247><form>tambúku</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. grass of waste spaces bearing white tassels: <bio>Kyllinga monocephala</bio>. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>bulubutúnis</sc></xr> <ix>under</ix> <xr><sc>butúnis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18248><form>tambul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bass drum</tr>. <number>2</number> pregnant woman (humorous). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; b6]</itype> become pregnant. <form>{-in-|tinambul}</form> <pos>a</pos> s.t. made in the shape of a bass drum, more or less. <form>{-iru(&larr;)|tambulíru}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>drumbeater</tr>. <number>2</number> one who beats the drums (is an apologist) for a politician. <i>Kanang kumintadúra tambulíru sa administrasiyun,</i> That radio commentator is an apologist for the administration.

<p id=18249><form>tambul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> dam, put s.t. across a stream to stop the flow of water. <i>Ayaw ug tambúli ang sapà kay mawalay túbig sila sa ubus,</i> Don&apos;t dam the brook because they will have no water downstream. <pos>n</pos> <tr>dam</tr>.

<p id=18250><form>tambula</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. play performed during Christmas depicting the Nativity, performed by an all-male cast wearing masks. It is in verse and accompanied by music. <number>2</number> participants of such a play.

<p id=18251><form>tambúli, tambúlì</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>melongena</tr>, k.o. conch. <number>2</number> horn made from the horn of a water buffalo or a conch. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> call with a <ix>tambúlì</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make a <ix>tambúlì</ix> horn.

<p id=18252><form>tambulingaw</form> (from <ix>lingaw</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> overlook s.t. due to preoccupation or distraction. <i>Natambulingaw siyag panuklì tungud sa kadaghan sa mamalítay,</i> She got mixed up in giving change because there were so many customers.

<p id=18253><form>tambúluk</form> <pos>n</pos> the hackles of roosters.

<p id=18254><form>tambun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> cover over, fill up with soil. <i>Ayúhag tambun ang gamut arun sigúrung mutúbù,</i> Cover the roots well so that they will be sure to grow. <i>Tambúni ang písak arun dílì maghítak,</i> Throw sand in the puddle so it will not turn into a mire. <form>{-an|tambunan}</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small bamboo fish trap placed on the sea floor with its top covered with corals and stones. <form>{pa&N;-an|panambunan}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> catch, trap fish using such a fish trap.

<p id=18255><form>tambung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> attend a gathering. <i>Mutambung ta sa íyang lubung,</i> Let&apos;s attend his funeral.

<p id=18256><form>tambur</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>tambul</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> cylinder of a revolver. <form>pistúla nga {di-|ditambur}</form> <tr>revolver</tr>.

<p id=18257><form>tamburábug</form> <xr>= <sc>tambukàkà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18258><form>tamburabuy</form> <xr>= <sc>babuybabuy</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p id=18259><form>tamburábuy</form> <xr>= <sc>tambukàkà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18260><form>tamburin</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tambourine</tr>. <number>2</number> round fancy earrings or necklace in tambourine shape or highly ornate filigree. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> wear earrings of this sort.

<p id=18261><form>tambutsu</form> <pos>n</pos> exhaust pipe of motor vehicles. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> use, attach an exhaust pipe.

<p id=18262><form>tam dyuns</form> <pos>n</pos> men&apos;s long hair style patterned after the singer, Tom Jones. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear one&apos;s hair in the Tom Jones style.

<p id=18263><form>tamhan</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>tama</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18264><form>tamhang</form> <pos>a</pos> carelessly inattentive, <tr>neglectful</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> be careless, neglectful. <i>Labihan nímung nakatamhang sa ímung pamilya!</i> How you have been neglecting your family! <i>Gitamhángan níya ang íyang pagmaníhu maung nadisgrasya,</i> He was careless when he drove so he had an accident. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> damage, destroy maliciously. <i>Gitamhángan sa mga ilagà ang mga libru,</i> The rats destroyed the books. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|tamhangan}</form> <pos>a</pos> bent on destroying, breaking things. <i>Ang dúlun tamhangan sa tanum,</i> Locusts are destructive to plants. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become destructive.

<p id=18265><form>tamhung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b2]</itype> make a plant be in the shade. <i>Dakung káhuy nga nagtamhung sa mga tanum,</i> The tall tree that shades the plants.

<p id=18266><form>támì</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> sticky and moist. <i>Támì nga armirul,</i> Sticky laundry starch. <i>Támì nga panahun,</i> <pb n=979>Humid weather. <number>2</number> dirt-soaked. <i>Támì nga sinínà,</i> Soiled clothing. <number>3</number> wet and muddy. <i>Támì ang ílang tugkaran kun mag-ulan,</i> Their yard becomes wet and muddy when it rains. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b5]</itype> become sticky and moist, dirt-soaked, or muddy. <i>Mutámì (matámì) ang kalámay kun hitun-ugan,</i> Brown sugar becomes moist and sticky when exposed to damp. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for rain to fall. <i>Nagtámì na sad,</i> It&apos;s raining again. <form>{-un|tamiun}</form> <pos>a</pos> moist or partially melted brown sugar.

<p id=18267><form>tamíaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> visit s.o. or a place. <i>Gitamiáwan (gitamíaw) nákù ang ákung apuhan,</i> I visited my grandparents.

<p id=18268><form>tamíhid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> stick out the lower lip in derision. <i>Nahiubus ang nangulitáwu nímu kay ímung gitamihíran,</i> Your suitor was hurt because you stuck out your lower lip at him. <form>matamihírun, matinamihírun</form> <pos>a</pos> characterized with derision. <i>Napikal ku sa íyang matamihírun nga katáwa,</i> I got irked at her derisive laughter.

<p id=18269><form>tamilì</form> <xr>= <sc>himilì</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>pílì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18270><form>tamíluk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>shipworms</tr>, edible marine mollusks that bore into wood. <number>2</number> k.o. edible insect grub, usually found in rotten logs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> be infested with shipworms.

<p id=18271><form>tamíluk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> mucous discharge when one has colds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> have a cold.

<p id=18272><form>taming</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>shield</tr>. <number>2</number> s.t. used as defense. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c6]</itype> use a shield. <i>Naigù siya kay wà magtaming,</i> He was hit because he didn&apos;t use a shield.

<p id=18273><form>tam-is</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sweet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; a2]</itype> become, make sweet. <i>Mutam-is (matam-is) ang prútas kun lihian kinig kámay,</i> Fruits become sweet if sugar is injected into the tree when young. <pos>n</pos> sweets, such as candy, jam, et al. <form>{paka-|pakatam-is}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> consider an unpleasant experience sweet (literary). <i>Pakatam-ísun kung mamatay álang sa bulawánung tingúhà,</i> I would consider it sweet to die for a lofty cause. <form>{ma-un|matam-ísun}</form> <pos>a</pos> sweet in a figurative sense. <i>Matam-ísung yuhum,</i> A sweet smile.

<p id=18274><form>tamislat</form> <pos>n</pos> <corr><number>1</number> </corr>k.o. brachiopod found burrowing in the sand, used in soup. <number>2</number> facetious term for s.o. with a flat nose. <i>Tamislat kaáyu ning ákung palangging,</i> My little darling has a flat nose.

<p id=18275><form>tamlà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fingerprint</tr>, <tr>thumbprint</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> affix the thumbprint. <i>Gawas sa pirma tamláan pa giyud,</i> You have to sign and affix your thumbprint as well.

<p id=18276><form>tampa, tampà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> put a ladle into s.t. that is boiling over to settle it. <i>Way nitampà sa linúgaw pagbúkal,</i> Nobody came to take care of the porridge when it boiled over.

<p id=18277><form>tampà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> cover or patch an opening with a flat sheet. <i>Tampái lang ug kartun ang lungag,</i> Just cover the hole with a piece of cardboard. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> lay s.t. flat over another flat surface. <i>Ang lubut sa aparadur wà mutampà sa salug,</i> The bottom part of the cabinet did not lay flat on the floor. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> flatten or strike with the palm of the hand. <i>Tampáun ta ang íyang dughan kun nagginhawa pa ba,</i> Let us press the palm of our hands to his breast to see if he is still breathing.

<p id=18278><form>tampà<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bride price</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> give, pay the bride price. <i>Gitampáan siya ug usa ka balay ug usa ka lunà nga yútà,</i> They paid a house and a piece of land for her.

<p id=18279><form>tampad</form> <xr>= <sc>talampad</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18280><form>tampak</form> <pos>a</pos> square, straight on the path or focus of. <i>Nahúlug ang butung tampak sa íyang úlu,</i> The coconut fell smack on his head. <i>Tampak sa habágat ang baybáyun sa Talísay,</i> The southwest wind blows squarely across the beach at Talisay.

<p id=18281><form>tampal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> overlay a patch on clothing at places of great wear to add strength. <i>Gitampálan nákù ang samput sa purul,</i> I put a patch on the seat of the short pants.

<p id=18282><form>tampálas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b(1)]</itype> maltreat severely. <i>Mutampálas (manampálas) sa asáwa ang bánang palahúbug,</i> A drunkard husband maltreats his wife. <form>{-an|tampalasan}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> s.o. who maltreats. <number>2</number> <tr>foul-mouthed</tr>, obscene in speech. <i>Tampásan siyang manulti báhig babáyi,</i> He speaks obscenely about women. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> become severely abusive toward s.o. <i>Nagkatampásan ang way uwaw nga inaína,</i> The shameless stepmother is getting more and more abusive. <number>2</number> become foul-mouthed.

<p id=18283><form>tampaling</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> slap the face. <i>Walà kay katungud mutampaling nákù,</i> You had no right to slap me in the face. <i>Kaáyu giyud níyang tampalingun,</i> How nice it would be to slap her in the face. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>slap in the face</tr>. <number>2</number> insult like a slap in the face.

<p id=18284><form>tampalung</form> <xr>= <sc>tampaling</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18285><form>tamparus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; c1]</itype> do s.t. hurriedly and carelessly. <i>Ug tamparusun (itamparus) ninyu pagtáud ang bungbung mangatangtang lang nà dáyun,</i> If you put the wall up hurriedly and carelessly, it will get loose right away. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> slap the face hard. <i>Tamparusun ta kag magtubagtubag ka,</i> I&apos;ll slap you in the face if you talk back. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> hard slap in the face. <number>2</number> <tr>insult</tr>. <i>Tamparus álang kanátù ang íyang pagbalíbad,</i> His refusal is a slap on the face.

<p id=18286><form>tampi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> bank of a body of water. <number>2</number> edge of a surface. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>nearby</tr>, close by. <i>Ang kumbintu <pb n=980>tampi sa simbahan,</i> The convent is near the church. <number>2</number> close to the edge. <i>Tampi ra kaáyung pagbutang mu sa básu sa lamísa. Mah&umacracu;g,</i> You put the glass much too close to the edge of the table. It&apos;s going to fall.

<p id=18287><form>tampì<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tampi</sc>, <i>n1, 2.</i></xr>

<p id=18288><form>tampì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> tuck a piece of cloth into another to hold it in place, e.g. a shirt that sticks out or s.t. wrapped around the waist. <i>Tampía (itampì) ang karsúnis kay luag ang hawakan,</i> Fold your trousers and tuck in the folds because they are loose at the waist.

<p id=18289><form>tampihak</form> (from <ix>pihak</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>temple</tr> of the head. <number>2</number> severe headache on one side of the head. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4b4]</itype> get a headache of this sort.

<p id=18290><form>tampil</form> <pos>n</pos> milled or pounded rice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cook rice. <i>Nakatampil ka nag ipaniudtu?</i> Have you cooked rice for lunch? <i>Dì nátù tampílun ang paniudtu kay dì paígù ang usa ka litru,</i> Let&apos;s not have rice for lunch because a liter isn&apos;t enough.

<p id=18291><form>tamping</form> <pos>n</pos> flat cake made of fine corn flour (<ix>tiktik</ix>) or buri flour (<ix>unaw</ix>) mixed with coconut milk and sugar. It is either fried in coconut oil or wrapped in banana leaves and put over live embers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make this sort of cake.

<p id=18292><form>tampípì</form> <pos>n</pos> a covered wicker suitcase. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> make into a wicker suitcase.

<p id=18293><form>tampiri</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <tr>lean</tr>, <tr>tilt</tr>. <i>Mitampiri (natampiri) ang lubi sa paghángin ug kusug,</i> The coconut tree tilted during the strong wind. <i>Kun magtanum kag kamúting káhuy, tampiriha (itampiri) ang láwas sa yútà,</i> When you plant cassava, plant the stem into the ground at an angle.

<p id=18294><form>tampu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB3C; ac]</itype> join in a group, <tr>put together</tr>. <i>Kinsay nagtampu íning bulingun sa inutaw?</i> Who put this dirty laundry together with the ironed things? <i>Tampúha lang ang tanan arun usa ray sudlanan,</i> Put them all together so there will be just one container. <i>Itampu nang bakláa sa mga babáyi,</i> Put that sissy together with the girls. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give a contribution. <i>Magtampu (magtampuhay) ta pára sa parti,</i> Let&apos;s contribute for the party. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> contribute to a publication. <i>Sugilánun ákung itampu sa sunud gulà,</i> I&apos;ll contribute a short story for the next issue. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> send in an entry to a contest. <i>Gitampu námù ang basíyung káha sa sigarilyu,</i> We sent the empty cigarette packs as entries to the contest. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>contribution</tr>. <number>2</number> entry in a contest. <form>tampuhan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> contribute to s.t. regularly. <i>Magtampuhan siya sa Bisayà,</i> He contributes regularly to Bisaya. <form>tampuhay</form> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>tampu</sc>.</xr>
<pb n=980><form>matampúhun</form> <i>a</i> <tr>generous</tr> in contributing.

<p id=18295><form>tampuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB2456; ac]</itype> stab so as to make the instrument stick, be sticking in. <i>Akuy mitampuk ug lápis sa báni,</i> I stuck a pencil into the banana trunk. <i>Báraw nga mitampuk sa dughan,</i> A knife sticking into the breast. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> beat s.t. with the inside of the fist (as if sticking a dagger into it). <i>Mitagubtub ang ákung likud nga íyang gitampuk,</i> My back resounded when he hit it with his fist. <form>{-in-an|tinampukan}</form> <pos>a</pos> jewelry having precious stones embedded. &dagger;

<p id=18296><form>tampuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> gather and <tr>dump</tr> into s.t. <i>Ang mutsatsa mauy nagtampuk sa mga bulingun sa planggána,</i> The maid put the dirty laundry into the basin. <i>Tampúkun (itampuk) ku ang mga basíyung láta sa dakung kahun,</i> I will dump the empty cans into the big box.

<p id=18297><form>tampulung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B56]</itype> <tr>loom</tr>, <tr>stand out</tr> large. <i>Dúnay dakung batu nga nagtampulung daplin sa likuánan sa dálan,</i> There is a huge rock looming at the side of the road at the bend. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6c1]</itype> pile or heap stones. <i>Magtampulung siyag mga batu líbut sa ílang balay,</i> He will pile stones around their house as a wall. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> large rock or pile of stones that stands prominently in the middle of the sea, protruding or immersed under shallow water. <number>2</number> a dike of piled stones in the sea, constructed to trap fish behind it when the tide goes out.

<p id=18298><form>tampúng</form> <xr>= <sc>tampulung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18299><form>tampuug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> <tr>loom</tr> large, <tr>stand out</tr> prominently. <i>Nagtampuug sa dálan ang buldúsir,</i> The bulldozer is looming large on the road. <number>2</number> <itype>[B6; c1P]</itype> be piled in a large heap. <i>Nagtampuug ang sagbut sa búngun sa ílang balay,</i> There is a huge <tr>pile</tr> of garbage beneath their house. <i>Ngánung gipatampuug (gitampuug) nímu ang makinilyahúnun únà mu buháta?</i> Why did you allow the typing to <tr>pile up</tr> before working on it?

<p id=18300><form>tampuuk</form> <xr>= <sc>tampuug</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr>

<p id=18301><form>tampúung</form> <xr>= <sc>tampulung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18302><form>tampuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> lay s.t. over sores, boils as a compress. <i>Tabákù itampuy sa ímung hubag,</i> Put a tobacco leaf over your boil. <pos>n</pos> <tr>compress</tr>.

<p id=18303><form>tamsi</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small <tr>bird</tr> with yellow plummage and black on the head, wings, and breast, the olive-backed sunbird: <bio>Nectarinia jugularis</bio>. <form>tamsitamsi</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>snapper</tr> with yellowish coloring and a blackish blotch. <form>{-in-|tinamsi}</form> <pos>n</pos> manner of fighting of a gamecock characterized by hovering above the opponent with fluttering wings. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for a gamecock to fight in this way. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> for <pb n=981>the hair on the nape to come to a point. <i>Mutamsi ang buhuk sa tingkuy ug taas na,</i> The hair on the nape comes to a point when it gets long. <form>tamsíhun</form> <pos>a</pos> having hair at the nape coming to a point.

<p id=18304><form>tamstak</form> <xr>= <sc>tamtaks</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18305><form>tamsun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Thompson submachine gun</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> shoot s.o. with a <tr>Thompson</tr> submachine gun.

<p id=18306><form>tamtaks</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>thumb tacks</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> fasten with thumb tacks. <i>Tamtaksi nang kalindaryu sa bungbung,</i> Fasten the calendar on the wall with thumb tacks.

<p id=18307><form>*tamtám</form> <form>{pa&N;-|panamtám}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> do s.t. with <tr>restraint</tr>. <i>Manamtám kug káug bábuy,</i> I&apos;ll <tr>limit</tr> the amount of pork I eat. <i>Dílì manamtám ug gastu,</i> Spend without restraint.

<p id=18308><form>tamud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>obey</tr>; perform s.t. in obedience. <i>Ang Kristiyánus magtamud giyud sa súgù sa Diyus,</i> A Christian must obey the law of God. <i>Tamdun ku ang tanan mung pagmandù,</i> I will obey all your orders. <number>1a</number> abide by one&apos;s word, fulfill one&apos;s promises. <i>Kinahanglang magtamud ka sa átung gikasabútan,</i> You should abide by our agreement. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> give <tr>respect</tr> to s.t. by heeding it. <i>Ángay ka nga magtamud sa pahimangnù sa ímung mga ginikánan,</i> You must respect the advice of your parents. <number>1c</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> observe a custom, feast day. <i>Uban nga mga táwu dílì magtamud sa adlaw nga iglilíhi,</i> Some people do not observe holidays of obligation. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <tr>respect</tr>. <i>Magtinarung ta arun tamdun sa átung isigkatáwu,</i> We must deport ourselves in an honest fashion if we are to be respected by our fellowmen. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> gaze at s.t. with attention or intent. <i>Ug magkupya ka, tamda sígi ang pahina,</i> When you copy, keep looking at the page. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> guide oneself by s.t. <i>Sa mísa karun dílì na kinahanglang mutamud ug misal,</i> Nowadays, it is not necessary to read the missal during the mass. <i>Nagtamud siya sa margáti sistim,</i> He is following the margate system of planting. <i>Tamdi ang libru inigtubag nímu,</i> Refer to the book when you recite. <number>4a</number> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> <tr>copy</tr>, <tr>trace</tr> off from. <i>Ayaw ug tamdi ang libru kay mulamà ang ági,</i> Don&apos;t trace on top of the book because it will leave a mark. <number>4b</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> mark s.t. for easy reference. <i>Sayun ra nga bulúngun ang dápit sa sugilánun kay ákung gitamdan ang pahina,</i> It is easy to locate the part of the story because I marked the page. <number>4c</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> <tr>remember</tr>, make a <tr>note</tr> of. <i>Tamdi ni, Wà pa giyud aku masayup niíning mga butánga,</i> Take note of this: I have never made a mistake in these matters. <form>{-in-|tinamud}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>respectable</tr> person. <i>Tinamud nga mga dinápit,</i> <tr>Respected</tr> guests. <form>talamdan, tamdanan</form> <pos>n</pos> basic <corr sic=buide>guide</corr>, rules, and regulations to follow. <i>Mau niy talamdan ug maggansilyu ka ug bidsprid,</i> This is the instruction sheet to crochet a bedspread by. <form>talamdun</form> <pos>a</pos> worthy of being respected, revered. <form>matinamdánun</form> <pos>a</pos> characterized with faithful and regular observance of customs. <i>Rilihiyúsa siya ug matinamdánun sa mga pista sa simbahan,</i> She is religious and keeps good observance of church holidays.

<p id=18309><form>támug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be <tr>soaking wet</tr>. <i>Natámug ang íyang púlu sa singut,</i> His shirt is <tr>soaking</tr> <tr>wet</tr> with perspiration.

<p id=18310><form>tam-ug</form> <pos>a</pos> paper or cloth that is slightly moist. not very dry. <i>Tam-ug pa ang hinayhay. Dì pa ikasul-ub,</i> The wash is still moist. You can&apos;t put it on yet.

<p id=18311><form>tam-uk</form> <xr>= <sc>tam-ak<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=18312><form>tamulù</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <tr>ugly</tr>, unpleasant to look at. <i>Tamulù ang ímung trabáhu,</i> Your work came out ugly. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become ugly-looking. <i>Dáan pa ku nga matamulù giyud kug samut niíning ákung hirdu,</i> See, didn&apos;t I tell you I&apos;d look uglier in this hairdo?

<p id=18313><form>támus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> ingest s.t. by sucking and licking. <i>Ug mutumar ka áning tambála ayaw ug usápa, tamúsi lang,</i> If you take this medicine, don&apos;t chew it, just suck on it. <form>{&mdash;|támus} sa tudlù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12S]</itype> be <tr>penniless</tr>. <i>Kamu kay gastadur kaáyu magtámus ra giyud mu sa tudlù sa kaulahían,</i> You are such spendthrifts you will end up poor as church mice.

<p id=18314><form>tamuy</form> <xr>= <sc>támus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18315><form>tan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> short for <ix>kapitan</ix>. <number>2</number> an honorary title of address for prominent citizens in former usage. <form>{&mdash;|tan} Birínu</form> a person who assumes financial responsibilities for a group. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> become a <ix>Tan Birínu</ix>. <i>Ipadáyun lang kay akuy mutan birínu sa kumbira,</i> Go ahead with it because I will foot the bills for the feast.

<p id=18316><form>tana, tána</form> short for <xr><sc>tala na</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tala<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=18317><form>tanáman</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>flower garden</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> make a flower garden.

<p id=18318><form>tanan</form> (from <ix>ngatanan</ix>) <number>1</number> <tr>all</tr>, <tr>everyone</tr>. <i>Tanan tsukuláti ang kík,</i> The cake is all chocolate. <number>2</number> <tr>in all</tr>. <i>Dúsi tanan ang ákung anak,</i> I have twelve children in all. <i>Ginadápit ang tanan sa prugráma,</i> Everybody is invited to the program. <form>sa {&mdash;|tanan}</form> most, greatest in degree, magnitude (but less than <ix>sa ngatanan</ix>). <i>Maldítu siya sa tanan,</i> He&apos;s the naughtiest of the naughty. <i>Tabian sa tanang tabian,</i> The most talkative of all talkative ones.

<p id=18319><form>tan-aw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>see</tr>, <tr>look at</tr>. <i>Mutan-aw <pb n=982>kug sini karung gabíi,</i> I&apos;ll go see a movie tonight.<i> Ispisyalista ang nagtan-aw níya,</i> A specialist is examining her. <i>Tan-áwa ang íyang ríkurd kun madáwat ba,</i> Examine his records to see if he&apos;s acceptable. <number>2</number> size up, form an opinion on s.t. <i>Ayawg tan-áwa ang libru sa íyang tabun,</i> Don&apos;t judge a book by its cover. <number>2a</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> see in s.o. <i>Unsay ímung natan-awan ni Piyuks?</i> What do you see in Piux? <number>3</number> look after. <i>Gipítul kamu kay nagtan-aw mi sa inyung kaugmáun,</i> I&apos;m disciplining you because I&apos;m thinking of your future. <number>4</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> wait and see what turns out. <i>Tan-áwun ta lag kinsay mudaug,</i> Let&apos;s wait and see who wins. <pos>n</pos> way one regards s.t. <i>Sa ákung tan-aw (panan-aw) igat nà siya,</i> She is a flirt, the way I look at her. <form>{hi-|hitan-aw}/{ha-|hatan-aw}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256P]</itype> look at s.t. because of outside influence. <i>Nahitan-aw (nahipatan-aw) siya nákù sa kahibúlung,</i> She looked at me in surprise. <form>{hi&N;-|hinan-aw}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ANB156]</itype> stare at, observe s.t as if unable to do anything about it. <i>Naghinan-aw lang ang mga táwu sa naligsan,</i> The people just looked at the traffic victim. <form>{-in-ay|tinan-áway}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c6]</itype> look at one another. <i>Nagkatinan-áway sila,</i> They looked at each other. <form>{ig-r-|igtatan-aw}/{l-|igtalan-aw}</form> <pos>n</pos> eyes. <form>{-in-an(&rarr;)|tinaw-awan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> manner of looking. <i>Ang íyang tinan-awan may kahulúgan,</i> He gives you too meaningful a look. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>{pa&N;-|panan-aw}</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr> <form>{pag-|pagtan-aw}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> opinion one has. <i>Dakù ang ámung pagtan-aw nímu,</i> We have a high opinion of you. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>tan-aw</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <number>3</number> concern, care. <i>Walà siyay pagtan-aw sa íyang amahan,</i> She has no feeling for her father. <number>3a</number> liking, crush. <i>Sugut nà dáyun kay may pagtan-aw nímu,</i> She&apos;ll accept you right away because she has a crush on you. <form>{pa&N;-|panan-aw}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sense of sight. <i>Maáyu pa siyag panan-aw,</i> He has good vision. <number>2</number> gaze. <i>Walà níya ibulag ang íyang panan-aw sa ákung nawung,</i> He did not take his gaze from my face. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>tan-aw</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <form>{pa&N;-un|panan-áwun}</form> <pos>n</pos> vision, s.t. seen in a trance. <i>Nakakità kug panan-áwun sa lángit,</i> I saw a vision of heaven. <form>{-um-r-|tumatan-aw}</form> <pos>n</pos> audience, spectators. <form>{-l-un|talan-aw}</form> <pos>n</pos> scenic attraction or s.t. on display. <i>Makalingaw ang talan-áwun sa karnabal,</i> There&apos;s lots of interesting things to see at the carnival.

<p id=18320><form>tandà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> go to inspect, take a look at s.t. one is taking care of. <i>Tandáa tung linung-ag básig mihubas na,</i> Go take a look at the rice. It must be cooked now. <number>2</number> visit s.o. <i>Mutandà ta níya sa uspital,</i> Let&apos;s visit him in the hospital. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> report s.w. to do work. <i>Nagtandà man tingálig aláyun si Tátay kay wà man diring íyang sanggut,</i> Father is probably at the work bee because his scythe is not here. <form>{pa&N;-|panandà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> go and attend a feast. <i>Didtu ku gíkan nanandà ug kasal,</i> I have just come from a wedding party. <form>{ma&N;-r-|mananandà}</form> <pos>n</pos> party or feast goers.

<p id=18321><form>tandà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sign</tr> or <tr>mark</tr> which indicates s.t. <i>Ang búlak nga íyang gihátag mauy tandà nga siya nagmahal,</i> The flower that he gave is a sign that he cares. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>mark</tr>, put a mark on, esp. for identification. <i>Si Pápa ang nagtandà sa mga lubi nga amúa,</i> Father marked the coconut trees that were ours. <i>Tandái ang átung mga dalhunun,</i> Put identifying marks on our baggage. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> <tr>remember</tr>, <tr>recollect</tr>. <i>Wà ku makatandà nga nag-áway mi,</i> I don&apos;t remember a time that we quarrelled. <form>{-l-an|talandaan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>indicator</tr>. <i>Ang rilu mauy talandaan sa úras,</i> A watch is an indicator of time.

<p id=18322><form>tandang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b26(1)]</itype> for the sun or moon to shine. <i>Bísan dì pa mutandang ang adlaw, túa na siya sa uma,</i> The sun hadn&apos;t shone yet but he was already in the field. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for light to hit or shine upon. <i>Pulis ang nagtandang sa ímung nawung,</i> It was a policeman who beamed a light in your face.

<p id=18323><form>tanday</form> <xr>= <sc>tangday</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18324><form>tandáyag</form> <xr>= <sc>andáyag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18325><form>tandì</form> <xr>= <sc>tangdì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18326><form>tanding</form> <xr>= <sc>tangdì</sc>, <i>v 1.</i></xr>

<p id=18327><form>tandù</form> <xr>= <sc>tangdù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18328><form>tandug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; a1b2]</itype> touch s.t. lightly to disturb it. <i>Dinhà giyuy nagtandug sa rúsas kay nabálì ang sanga,</i> S.o. must have <tr>brushed against</tr> the rosebush because a branch is broken. <i>Ayaw siya tandúga kay natúlug na,</i> Don&apos;t <tr>touch</tr> her because she is asleep. <number>1a</number> touch a wound. <i>Ayaw ug apil sa dúlà kay hitandugan (hingtandugan) nyà ang ímung samad,</i> Don&apos;t take part in the game because s.o. might strike your wound. <number>1b</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> produce an effect, <tr>affect</tr>. <i>Bísan ug kusugkusug tung hangína, ang barku walà matandug,</i> The wind was quite strong, but it did not affect the boat. <number>1c</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> for fish to bite a line. <i>Gitandugan siya, apan wà makúhà,</i> A fish bit his line, but he didn&apos;t catch it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> touch s.t. in the process of using it. <i>Wà gánì siya makatandug sa íyang pagkáun,</i> He hasn&apos;t even touched his food. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> do s.t. to interfere with one&apos;s thoughts, decisions, plans. <i>Ang disisiyun sa kuymi dílì matandug,</i> The umpire&apos;s decision is final. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A3P; a3]</itype> move s.o. to have sympathetic feelings or pity. <i>Way kasingkásing nga dílì matandug adtung mga pulúnga,</i> No heart could fail to be touched by those words. <number>4</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <tr>touch on</tr> past events. <i>Dílì tà ángay nga magtandug sa inyung miáging kabangían,</i> You ought not to touch on what <pb n=983>you quarrelled about long ago. <number>5</number> <itype>[AP; a2b8]</itype> cause a <tr>relapse</tr> of an illness or injury. <i>Natandug ang piang,</i> His broken bone broke again. <pos>n</pos> pull on the line when fish bite. <form>{-l-un(&rarr;)|talandugun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>critical</tr>, <tr>grave</tr> in health or condition. <i>Ang masakitun náa sa talandugun nga kahimtang,</i> The patient is in a grave condition. <i>Tandugun ang kahimtang sa Mídul Ist,</i> The situation in the Middle East is critical. <number>1a</number> prone to sickness. <i>Tandugun siya. Hilantan lang, magkumbulsiyun dáyun,</i> He is prone to sickness. Even if he has just a slight fever, it turns to convulsions. <number>2</number> <tr>touchy</tr>, <tr>temperamental</tr>. <i>Paabúta nga maáyu siya kay tandugun nang íyang kinaíya,</i> Wait until he is in a better mood because he is a bit temperamental right now. <number>3</number> subject to question, reconsideration. <i>Hukum nga talandugun,</i> A decision open to question. <form>{pag-|pagtandug}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>test</tr>, <tr>trial</tr>. <i>Kadtung hitabúa mga pagtandug lámang sa usa ka táwu nga gikasináhan,</i> That event is just a trial for you because you are the object of envy. <number>2</number> strike, act of taking the bait. <i>Sa ikaduhang pagtandug napaktan sa bàbà ang isdà sa tagà,</i> On the second strike, the fish was hooked in the mouth.

<p id=18329><form>tanduktanduk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>top shells</tr>.

<p id=18330><form>tánga</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>scorpion</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>cockroach</tr>.

<p id=18331><form>tangà</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>inattentive</tr>, doing even simple things incompetently. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1]</itype> stay put when one is supposed to do s.t. at hand. <i>Nagtangà ka mang daghan tang trabahuun,</i> You&apos;re just standing around when we have so much work. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> consider s.o. incompetent. <i>Gitangaan ku níya kay dúgay kasabut,</i> I consider him stupid because he takes forever to understand.

<p id=18332><form>tángà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>climb</tr> up an incline. <i>Gitángà níya ang hagdan sa tulu lámang ka lákang,</i> He climbed the stairs in only three steps. <form>{-un|tangáun}</form> <pos>a</pos> on an upgrade.

<p id=18333><form>tangad, tángad</form> <xr>= <sc>tanglad</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18334><form>tangag, tángag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> hold s.t. between the teeth, vise, and the like, or on s.t. pointed. <i>Nagtangag ug papil ang makinilya,</i> There is paper in the typewriter. <i>Tagà nga nagtangag ug paun,</i> A hook with bait on it. <i>Gitangag sa iring ang tinap-ánan,</i> The cat has got the smoked fish in its mouth. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for the key to be left in the lock or keyhole. <i>Nagtangag ang lyábi sa yawihánan,</i> They left the key in the keyhole. <form>{-an(&larr;)|tangágan}</form> <pos>n</pos> litters with teeth at birth.

<p id=18335><form>tangali, tangáli</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a funnel-shaped holder made from coconut or banana leaves into which leaf tobacco or a cigarette is placed. <number>2</number> turrid shells (which look similar to a cigarette holder). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a tobacco or cigarette holder of this sort. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> smoke with this device.

<p id=18336><form>tangantángan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>castor-oil plant</tr>, the seeds of which produce castor oil: <bio>Ricinus communis</bio>.&dagger;

<p id=18337><form>tángas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S; a12]</itype> <tr>go up</tr> a slope or incline. <i>Namatay ang makina samtang nagtangas ang trák,</i> The motor quit while the truck was going up the slope. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> step on, go to dry land. <i>Sa tingpangitlug ang pawíkan mutángas sa mamala ug mangitlug sa balas,</i> During the egg-laying season, the sea turtle goes on land and lays its eggs in the sand. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|tangasun}</form> <pos>a</pos> upgrade, <tr>ascending</tr> slope. <i>Tangasun kaáyung dalána,</i> A very <tr>steep</tr> path. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125]</itype> be, become steep.

<p id=18338><form>tangay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>bribe</tr> s.o. into doing s.t. <i>Akuy mutangay sa ímung bátà ug tsukulit arun dì muuban nátù,</i> I&apos;ll bribe your child with chocolate so that she will consent not to come with us. <i>Dì ta makatangay ning irúa kay mupáak giyud,</i> This dog will bite even if we give it food to keep away. <form>tangaytángay</form> <xr>= <sc>tangay<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=18339><form>tangay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> take a great liking to s.o. <i>Mutangay dáyun ang babáyi níya kay gwápu,</i> A woman will immediately <tr>take a liking to</tr> him for he is handsome. <pos>a</pos> taking a liking to s.o., easily won over.

<p id=18340><form>tangba</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; b8]</itype> inspire fear mixed with respect. <i>Dílì mutangba ang mga istudiyanti ug dì mag-inistriktu ang magtutudlù,</i> Teachers should be somewhat strict to inspire fear and respect from the students.

<p id=18341><form>tangbid</form> <xr>= <sc>tambid</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18342><form>tangbù<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tambù<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=18343><form>tangbù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. coarse <tr>grass</tr> of swamps with a hollow stem, used for the manufacture of brooms and hats: <bio>Phragmites vulgaris</bio>.

<p id=18344><form>tangday</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB36C3; cP]</itype> for s.t. not wide to rest on top of s.t. else not wide. <i>Kinsay nagtanday ánang tukun sa trúsu?</i> Who laid that pole on the log? <i>Purmag kurus ang nagtanday nga lápis,</i> The crossed pencils looked like a cross. <i>Itanday (ipatanday) ang lápis sa ngilit sa libru,</i> Rest the pencil against the edge of the book. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> rest one&apos;s leg on s.t., rest with one&apos;s legs on each other. <i>Natúlug siyang nagtanday sa bána,</i> She slept with her leg over her husband&apos;s. <form>{-in-ay|tinangdayay}, {-anay|tangdayanay}, {-ay|tangdayay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c3]</itype> have their legs resting on each other&apos;s. <form>{-an|tangdayan}</form> <pos>n</pos> type of cushion for putting the leg over.

<p id=18345><form>tangdì</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC2; ac]</itype> <tr>compare</tr> which is greater in degree, quality or size. <i>Way makatandì (makagtandì) sa íyang kaanyag,</i> Nothing can compare with her beauty. <i>Makigtandì ka nákù sa katas-un?</i> You want to compare <pb n=984>your height with mine? <i>Tandía ang duruha kun háin ang mas putì,</i> Compare the two to see which one is lighter in complexion. <i>Way sarang ikatandì (ikagtandì) kang Risal,</i> There is no one who can be compared with Rizal. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12C; c1]</itype> match fighting cocks for a cockfight. <i>Natandian ang íyang ugis ug buyugun,</i> His white-feathered cock was paired with a honey-colored one. <form>{-ay|tangdiay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c3]</itype> compare with each other.

<p id=18346><form>tangding</form> <xr>= <sc>tangdì</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr>

<p id=18347><form>tangdù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>nod</tr> the head. <i>Mitandù siya ingun sa miúyun apan nagdukà diay,</i> He nodded as though in approval, but in reality he had dozed off. <i>Tandúan gánì ka nákù, byái mi,</i> When I nod at you, leave us alone. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> <tr>consent</tr> to, <tr>accept</tr>. <i>Tandúa nang íyang paghálad,</i> Accept his proposal. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>consent</tr>, <tr>assent</tr>. <number>2</number> click or snapping <tr>beetle</tr>, a black or dark brown beetle growing to &frac23;&Prime; that moves its head with a clicking noise when trying to extricate itself from s.t. <form>tangdùtangdù</form> <xr>= <sc>tangdù</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr>

<p id=18348><form>tanggab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a1]</itype> cut s.t. down clean, usually with one stroke. <i>Nananggab ang mag-uúma sa kasagingang gialkuhíris,</i> The farmer is cutting down the bananas that are infected with a mosaic disease. <pos>a</pos> winning a card game with the first card that opens. <i>Ang íyang kard wíting dáyun, unyà tanggab pa giyud siya kay ang íyang wíting mau say úpin kard,</i> His hand needed only one card to make rummy on the deal, and then he won with the first card because the open card was the card he was waiting for.

<p id=18349><form>tanggal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; a]</itype> <tr>detach</tr>, <tr>remove</tr> s.t. from where it is held firmly. <i>Ug matanggal gánì nà, ipasulda lang,</i> If that comes off, have it soldered. <i>Lyábi túbu ang itanggal sa kupling,</i> Use a pipe wrench to get the joint of the pipe off. <xr><ix>see also</ix> <sc>anananggal</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18350><form>tanggíli<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large timber <tr>tree</tr>.

<p id=18351><form>tanggíli<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tangígi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18352><form>tanggu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tango</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> dance the tango. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> play, dance in tango rhythm.&dagger;

<p id=18353><form>tanggu<sub>3</sub>, tanggub<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small, easily maneuvered, two-man fishing boat.

<p id=18354><form>tanggub<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tangkub</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18355><form>tanggung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>incarcerate</tr>. <i>Itanggung ang kriminal arun pagpanalípud sa susyidad,</i> Criminals are <tr>jailed</tr> to protect society. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b1]</itype> raise an animal for slaughter on a special occasion. <i>Magtanggung kug bábuy pára sa sunud pista,</i> I&apos;ll raise a pig for next fiesta. <i>Tanggúngi nang baktin pára sa inyung kasal,</i> Raise that piglet for your wedding. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126; b8]</itype> be stranded, maneuvered into a place with no exit. <i>Sulug mauy nakatanggung (nakapatanggung) námù sa isla,</i> The strong current caused us to get stranded on the island. <i>Ang batalyun natanggung sa kimba,</i> The battalion was trapped in the gully. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|tanggungan}</form> <pos>n</pos> place one keeps an animal he is raising.

<p id=18356><form>tanghag</form> <xr>= <sc>danghag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18357><form>tanghágà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>riddle</tr>, <tr>mystery</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give a riddle, puzzle. <i>Way makatubag kun akuy mutanghágà,</i> No one can answer if I give a riddle.

<p id=18358><form>tanghal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> stare blankly. <i>Wà ka makakità sa pag-ági sa bátà kay nagtanghal ka man lang,</i> You did not see the child pass by because you were just staring blankly.

<p id=18359><form>tanghun</form> <xr>= <sc>sutanghun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18360><form>tangì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a]</itype> <tr>break off</tr>, <tr>detach</tr> s.t. attached. <i>Makatangì (makapatangì) ug tangu ang íyang suntuk,</i> His fist can loosen your teeth. <i>Ayaw tangia ang kaptanan sa bág,</i> Do not detach the handle of the bag.

<p id=18361><form>tangígi</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. Spanish <tr>mackerel</tr>, silvery white and black color, with no scales, popularly eaten raw: <bio>Scomberomorus commersoni</bio> and <bio>guttatus</bio>, and others.

<p id=18362><form>tangil</form> <pos>n</pos> charm worn for protection, e.g. by a fighting cock to keep it from being badly cut. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> wear, make into a protective charm. <i>Ang tangu sa buáya mauy maáyung tangilun (itangil) památuk sa buyag,</i> A crocodile&apos;s tooth is said to be an effective charm against <ix>buyag</ix>. <form>{pa&N;-|panangil}, {pa&N;-(&larr;)|panángil}</form> <xr>= <sc>tangil</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18363><form>tangíngi</form> <xr>= <sc>tangígi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18364><form>tangis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> <tr>cry</tr>, <tr>weep</tr>. <i>Mitangis siya sa pagkamatay sa íyang inahan,</i> She wept when her mother died. <pos>n</pos> <tr>cry</tr>, <tr>weeping</tr>.

<p id=18365><form>tangítang</form> <pos>n</pos> stalk of a banana bunch.

<p id=18366><form>tangkà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> set to do s.t. <i>Mutangkà kug alas syíti sa buntag sa ákung trabáhu,</i> I set to work at seven o&apos;clock in the morning. <i>Gitangkaan níla ang usa ka litsun ug nahurut,</i> They set to eating a roast pig, and they finished it off. <number>1a</number> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> go s.w. to do work, usually the <ix>aláyun</ix>. <i>Tangkái intáwun kug usa ka adlawng dáru,</i> Please come to my place to plow for one day. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> reach an entrance, vicinity of a place. <number>2a</number> <itype>[C23]</itype> agree to meet to do s.t. <i>Nagtangkà silang mangalígù sa Sabadu,</i> They agreed to meet to go swimming on Saturday. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>place on</tr>, <tr>set upon</tr>. <i>Nakatulug siyang nagtangkà sa bangkíyu,</i> He fell asleep sitting on the toilet. <i>Tangkái únà ang sug-ang sa kaldíru únà dagkuti,</i> Place the pot on the stove first before you light it. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> one&apos;s turn to do work in communal rotational work (<ix>aláyun</ix>). <number>2</number> <tr>feast</tr>, <tr>banquet</tr>. <i>Makabuhung nga tangkà ang gidúlut níla,</i> They served a sumptuous banquet. <pb n=985><form>{hi-|hitangkà}/{ha-|hatangkà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b2]</itype> <tr>happen on</tr> s.t., come to a place by chance. <i>Hitangkaan níya ang kawatan nga nangabli sa húnus,</i> He <tr>came upon</tr> the burglar opening the drawers. <form>{pa-|patangkà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab]</itype> have s.o. come to work. <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s turn to have people come to work in communal rotational work. <form>{pa&N;-|panangkà}</form> <xr>= <sc>tangkà</sc>, <i>v1a, n1.</i></xr>

<p id=18367><form>tangkag</form> <pos>a</pos> sticking out of ears. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for ears to stick out, prick up. <i>Natangkag ang íyang dunggan kay gipanamkun siyag inasal,</i> His ears stick out because his mother had a desire for roast pig when she was pregnant with him. <i>Mitangkag ang íyang dunggan pagkadungug níyag isturyang hílas,</i> His ears pricked up when he heard the dirty story.

<p id=18368><form>tangkal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cage</tr>, covered enclosure. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> put in a cage. <i>Malúuy kung mutangkal sa langgam,</i> I pity the bird too much to put it in a cage. <number>2</number> <tr>jail</tr>. <i>Tangkálun (itangkal) ang sinumbung,</i> The accused will be put in jail.

<p id=18369><form>tangkalù</form> <xr>= <sc>tuktur</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18370><form>tangkas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> rip open the seam, rip off hinges, and the like. <i>Nagtangkas siya sa sinínang guut,</i> She&apos;s ripping open the seams of her tight dress. <i>Natangkas ang pultahan nga gilúgus pag-abli,</i> The door was ripped off its hinges when s.o. forced it open. <number>1a</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <tr>burst at the seams</tr>. <i>Natangkas ang sáku ug naúsik ang pasì,</i> The sack burst at the seam and the grain spilled out. <number>2</number> <tr>unfasten</tr>, <tr>unhook</tr>. <i>Gitangkásan níya ang kábaw sa yúgu,</i> He took the yoke off the water buffalo.

<p id=18371><form>tangki</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tank</tr> for water, fuel, et al. <number>2</number> military tank used in warfare. <number>3</number> tank, artificial pool for fish. <i>May tulu ka tangki ang ílang pispan,</i> Their fishpond has three tanks. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> keep, raise in a fishpond. <i>Daghang nagtangki ug bangus niíning dapíta,</i> A lot of people here raise milkfish in fishponds.

<p id=18372><form>tangkig</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. harmless freshwater <tr>snake</tr>, growing up to <measure reg="61 cm">2&prime;</measure> and <measure reg="5.1 cm">2&Prime;</measure> in circumference.

<p id=18373><form>tangkihud</form> (from <ix>kihud</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; b6]</itype> <tr>limp</tr>. <i>Arun dì siya sugúun gitangkihuran ku níya,</i> She walked with a limp in front of me so I wouldn&apos;t send her on an errand.

<p id=18374><form>tangkil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> attach to s.t. so that it dangles. <i>Tangkíli ug gamayng krus ang kwintas,</i> Attach a small crucifix on the necklace. <i>Gitangkílan ang patayng irù ug batu ug gitambug sa dágat,</i> They attached a rock to the dead dog and tossed it into the sea. <number>2</number> carry s.t. attached to the body. <i>Itangkil sa ímung háwak ang pistúla,</i> Carry the pistol around your waist. <number>3</number> carry a baby while one is doing s.t. <i>Bísag magmadyung, túa nagtangkil ug bátà,</i> She carries her baby even while she plays mahjong. <number>3a</number> for a man to drag along a woman wherever he goes. <i>Dì nà siya mutangkil sa íyang asáwa kay ábi dì man gwápa,</i> He doesn&apos;t bring his wife along with him because she&apos;s not beautiful.

<p id=18375><form>tangkiyu</form> <tr>thank you</tr>. <i>Tangkiyu kaáyu sa gása, ha?</i> Thank you very much for the gift. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> say thank you. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23; a2]</itype> just say thanks without giving money. <i>Dimálas giyud kun tangkiyúhun lang ang átung panaygun,</i> We are out of luck if all we get is a thank you for our caroling.

<p id=18376><form>tangkù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a2]</itype> take water for toddy from the coconut tree without the owner&apos;s permission. <i>Tangkúun námù ímung sanggutan ug magdináwù ka,</i> We&apos;ll steal the water from your coconut tree if you are so selfish. <form>{-an|tangkuan}, {ma&N;-r-|mananangkù}</form> <pos>a</pos> one who steals palm toddy right from the tree.

<p id=18377><form>tangkub</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>silverfish</tr>, a silver-colored insect that attacks papers and starched clothes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infested with silverfish.

<p id=18378><form>tangkuban</form> <pos>n</pos> the reed holder in the loom which holds the reeds (<ix>suluran</ix>) in place.

<p id=18379><form>tangkud</form> <pos>a</pos> exactly to date. <i>Tangkud kung diyis run,</i> I&apos;m exactly ten today. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B246]</itype> be exactly to date. <i>Ugmà mutangkud nang túig,</i> It will be exactly one year tomorrow.

<p id=18380><form>tangkúgù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>nape</tr> of the neck. <form>{(&rarr;)|tangkugù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> hit in the nape. <form>{hi-|hitankugù}/{ha-(&rarr;)|hatankugù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be hit where it hurts. <i>Nahitangkugù ang mga insik kay gidid-an pagtindag bugas,</i> The Chinese merchants were hit where it hurts because they were prohibited from selling rice.

<p id=18381><form>tangkul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a slender bamboo tube, about a foot or two in length, tied to an animal&apos;s neck and to a tether rope, the purpose of which is to prevent the animal from biting the tether rope. <number>2</number> <tr>shackle</tr>, <tr>manacle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> tie with a shackle or with a piece of bamboo between the tether and the neck. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a shackle, or bamboo tether-guard.

<p id=18382><form>tangkul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>coral reef</tr> under 3&ndash;4 fathoms of water. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|tangkulan}</form> <pos>n</pos> place where there are corals under deep water.

<p id=18383><form>tangkung</form> <pos>n</pos> leafy <tr>vegetable</tr> of swamps and stagnant pools, cultivated and wild: <bio>Ipomoea aquatica</bio>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> make, have <ix>tangkung</ix>.

<p id=18384><form>tanglad</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lemon grass</tr>, a k.o. tall grass that smells of lemon and is used as a spice: <bio>Andropogon citratus</bio>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> season with <ix>tanglad</ix>.

<p id=18385><form>tanglas</form> <pos>a</pos> smooth to the throat when drunk or taken as medicine. <i>Maháwut ug tanglas nga tubà,</i> Mellow and smooth palm toddy. <form>{ma-|matanglas}</form> <xr>= <sc>tanglas</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=986>

<p id=18386><form>tangpi</form> <xr>= <sc>tampi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18387><form>tangsà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become very <tr>thin</tr>, <tr>emaciated</tr>. <i>Magtangsà (matangsà) ka giyud ug dì ka mukáug maáyu,</i> You&apos;ll grow thin if you don&apos;t eat well. <pos>a</pos> emaciated, thin.

<p id=18388><form>tangsà<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tingsì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18389><form>tangsi</form> <pos>n</pos> strong <tr>monofilament</tr> of nylon or catgut, used for guitar strings, fishline, and the like.

<p id=18390><form>tangsù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB16; a1]</itype> be <tr>loosened</tr> from its socket or <tr>detached</tr> from its place, cause s.t. to be so. <i>Kinsay nagtangsù sa tiil sa silya?</i> Who loosened the legs of the chair? <i>Natangsù ang kab-ing sa kibídu,</i> One side of the eyeglass frame came off. <i>Tangsúa úsà ang ngípun únà ibta,</i> <tr>Loosen</tr> the tooth first before you pull it. <form>tangsùtangsù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> be wobbly after being loosened at its base. <i>Nagtangsùtangsù ang pasamánu,</i> The handrail is wobbly.

<p id=18391><form>tangtang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB123; a]</itype> <tr>take off</tr>, <tr>remove</tr> s.t. fastened or tied. <i>Tabángi kug tangtang sa yúgu sa kábaw,</i> Help me take off the carabao&apos;s yoke. <i>Nakatangtang ang bábuy sa íyang gihigtan,</i> The pig worked himself loose from the place it was tied. <i>Tangtánga ímung pustísu kun manutbras ka,</i> <tr>Remove</tr> your false teeth when you brush them. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> pay off debts, free from obligation. <i>Tangtángun ku ang útang,</i> I will pay off the debt.&dagger;

<p id=18392><form>tangu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>canine tooth</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>fang</tr> of animals. <i>Maáyung anting-anting ang tangu sa buáya,</i> A crocodile&apos;s tooth is a powerful charm. <number>3</number> <tr>cog</tr> of gears. <form>{&mdash;|tangu} sa báliw, lintì</form> <pos>n</pos> in folk belief, the tooth of a thunderbolt that gets lodged in places where it strikes. It possesses a magical power. <form>tang-an</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> highly <tr>unscrupulous</tr>. <i>Pahiphip giyud kanang mga tang-an sa sitihul,</i> Those unscrupulous people in City Hall have to be bribed. <number>2</number> tops in one&apos;s field due to experience. <i>Tang-an siyang magsusúlat sa Binisayà,</i> He is one of the top Visayan writers. <number>3</number> <tr>rich</tr>, <tr>wealthy</tr>. <i>Nagparti ang mga tang-an sa Maníla Hutil,</i> The oligarchs are having a party at the Manila Hotel.

<p id=18393><form>tangud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB26; a1]</itype> <tr>attract</tr> s.o. with s.t.; be attracted. <i>Ang balhíbu sa manuk makatangud (makapatangud) ug mga isdà,</i> Chicken feathers will attract fishes. <i>Karmilítus ang itangud níla sa mga bátà,</i> They use candies to attract the children. <i>Mutangud ang mga kwaknit sa mga búlak sa duldul,</i> Bats are attracted to the flowers of the kapok tree. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>heed</tr>, <tr>obey</tr>. <i>Ang magtangud sa púlung sa Diyus malangit,</i> Those who follow the words of the Lord will go to heaven. <i>Gitangud ku ang tanang pahimangnù mu,</i> I followed all your advice.

<p id=18394><form>tang-ug</form> <xr>= <sc>tan-ug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18395><form>tángul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b2]</itype> be, get lodged between the teeth. <i>Sakit ang ákung bag-ang kay hitangulan ug gamay nga bukug,</i> My molars hurt because a piece of bone got lodged between them. <pos>n</pos> particle of food stuck between the teeth.

<p id=18396><form>tangul-ul</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>bird</tr>, the yellow-vented bulbul: <bio>Pycnonotus goiavier</bio>.

<p id=18397><form>tang-un</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B23(1); b4]</itype> <number>1</number> for liquids to stop flowing. <i>Mutang-un ang dugù kun baátan siyag turniki,</i> The bleeding will stop if we tie a tourniquet around it. <number>2</number> come to a <tr>stop</tr>. <i>Kun mutang-un ang pulsu wà nay kinabúhi,</i> When one&apos;s pulse <tr>ceases</tr> to beat he is dead. <i>Mitang-un ang kasukù,</i> His anger <tr>subsided</tr>. <i>Wà pa giyud makatang-un ang kasábà sa gawas,</i> The noise outside has not stopped. <i>Kining tambála makatang-un (makapatang-un) sa sakit sa ngípun,</i> This medicine can stop a toothache.

<p id=18398><form>tangunan</form> <xr>= <sc>talungan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18399><form>tangway</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> buy coconut palm toddy. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> buy things in small quantities for consumption. <i>Diin ka makatangway ug asin?</i> Where did you manage to buy salt? <i>Gitangway na ang tanan nílang utanun,</i> Their vegetables were already all bought up. <form>{-anan|tangwayanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> place where one habitually buys things in retail or palm toddy. <form>{ma&N;-r-|mananangway}</form> <pos>n</pos> buyer of palm toddy in large quantities.

<p id=18400><form>tangyad</form> <xr>= <sc>tanglad</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18401><form>taniag</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for the day to be bright after being cloudy. <number>2</number> for glass to be shiny and clear. <number>3</number> <tr>clear</tr>, <tr>vivid</tr> in outline. <i>Taniag kaáyu ang litra kun maggámit kag antiyúhus,</i> The letters become very clear when you use spectacles. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B]</itype> for a gloomy day to <tr>brighten</tr>. <i>Mutaniag gánì run, pangarmirul giyud,</i> As soon as the sun shines, starch the clothes. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; c16]</itype> for the face to brighten. <i>Unsa kahang balitáa nakataniag (nakapataniag) sa íyang nawung?</i> What news could have brightened her face? <number>3</number> <itype>[APB; c1]</itype> for glass to be, become transparent and clear; cause it to become so. <i>Túbig lang ang magtaniag (magpataniag) ánang lapúkung bildu,</i> Only water will make that muddy pane of glass transparent and clear. <i>Mutaniag ang básu kun hugásan ug tayid,</i> The glass will become transparent and clear if you wash it with detergent. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>foretell</tr> the past, present, and future. <i>Taniagun (itaniag) ku ang ímung kaugmáun pinaági sa pagtan-aw sa ímung pálad,</i> I will foretell your future by looking at the palm of your hand. <number>5</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> peer, peep through s.t. at s.t. else. <i>Mitaniag <pb n=987>siya sa lungag sa yawihánan,</i> He peeped through the keyhole. <pos>n</pos> s.t. to peer into to foretell the future.

<p id=18402><form>tánil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tunnel</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> make a tunnel.

<p id=18403><form>táning</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C3; c3]</itype> for two to die together. <i>Nagtáning ang magtiáyun pagkalúnud sa barku,</i> The couple died together when the boat sank.

<p id=18404><form>tanlad</form> <xr>= <sc>tanglad</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18405><form>tanlag</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>conscience</tr>. <i>Pamináwa ang ímung tanlag únà ka muhukum,</i> Listen to your conscience before deciding.

<p id=18406><form>tanlak</form> <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s child. <i>Iyang gikúgus ang íyang tanlak nga naghilak,</i> She carried her child in her arms as it cried.

<p id=18407><form>tanlas</form> <xr>= <sc>tanglas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18408><form>tansan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bottle cap</tr>.

<p id=18409><form>tansil</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tonsils</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>tonsilitis</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> have swollen tonsils.

<p id=18410><form>tantan<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB126; c1]</itype> shake a container up and down to let the contents become more compact, <tr>settle</tr>. <i>Walà matantan ang íyang kináun,</i> His food did not settle in his stomach. <i>Tantána (itantan) ang sáku arun daghang masúd,</i> Shake the sack well so we can get lots in it.

<p id=18411><form>tantan<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c]</itype> pay off a debt partially. <i>Gikuháag bayinti písus ang swildu kay gitantan sa útang,</i> Twenty pesos was deducted from the salary to pay off part of the debt.

<p id=18412><form>tantiya, tantíya, tantíyar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>estimate</tr>. <i>Tantiyaha lag pilay magastu,</i> Just make an estimate of how much it will be. <pos>n</pos> <tr>estimate</tr>. <i>Sa íyang tantiya ang gúbat sa Biyit Nam mulungtad ug nap&umacrgra; ka túig,</i> According to his estimate the war in Vietnam will last for ten years.

<p id=18413><form>tantu<sub>1</sub></form> <form>sa {&mdash;|tantu} nga <r>[<ix>verb base</ix>]</r></form> do [verb] to such an extent that s.t. else happens. <i>Sa tantu nákung hinílak gilunúpan ang sáwug,</i> I cried so much the floor was flooded. <form>dílì {&mdash;|tantu}</form> not very. <i>Grábi piru dì tantu,</i> It&apos;s bad but not too much. <form>myintras {&mdash;|tantu}</form> for the time being, <tr>while</tr>. <i>Paglípay myintras tantung bátà pa,</i> Be merry while you are still young.

<p id=18414><form>tantu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>interest</tr> on money loaned. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2N; b6(1)]</itype> borrow money with interest. <i>Ug way kwarta, panantu lang,</i> If you&apos;re out of money, borrow. <i>Tantúhan námù ímung kwarta, dílì libri,</i> We will borrow your money with interest, not for nothing. <number>2</number> <itype>[cP]</itype> charge interest. <i>Pilay ímung itantu (ipatantu)?</i> How much interest do you charge? <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> give, pay interest. <i>Mutantu kug kinsi pursintu ug pahulam ka nákù,</i> I will pay fifteen percent if you lend me money. <i>Nagtantu kus singsing nga ákung giprinda,</i> I am paying off the interest on the ring I pawned. <form>{pa-|patantu}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> lend money for interest. <i>Nagpatantu siyag kwarta,</i> He lends money for interest. <form>{ma&N;-r-|mananantu}</form> <pos>n</pos> one who lends for interest or borrows on interest.

<p id=18415><form>tanud<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tame</tr>. <i>Tanud ang íyang langgam maung binuhían,</i> His pet bird is tame so it is not caged. <number>2</number> for things which are normally elusive to approach, be submissive. <i>Tanud nímu ang kapaláran,</i> Good fortune does not elude you. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become tame, <tr>submissive</tr>. <i>Kining lumáya makapatanud (makatanud) sa mga babáyi nímu,</i> This potion can make girls submissive to you.

<p id=18416><form>tanud<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> sewing <tr>thread</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> thread a needle or sewing machine. <i>Tanuri ang makina,</i> Thread the sewing machine.

<p id=18417><form>tánud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> keep watch over s.t. that needs care. <i>Nagpulipúli mig tánud sa masakitun,</i> We took turns keeping watch over the patient. <number>2</number> stay, <tr>live with</tr> s.o. <i>Way makatánud nímu tungud sa kalas-ut sa ímung kinaíya,</i> Nobody can live with you because you are so wicked. <pos>n</pos> s.o. who keeps watch over s.t. which needs care.

<p id=18418><form>tanug</form> <xr>= <sc>tanud<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=18419><form>tan-ug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b1]</itype> store mature fruits in such a way as to hasten ripening. <i>Tan-úgi nang ságing sa sáku,</i> Store the bananas in the sack to ripen. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> keep unused, dormant. <i>Dúgay natan-ug ang yútà,</i> The land was left unused for a long time. <i>Ayaw tan-úgi ang ímung puhúnan,</i> Don&apos;t keep your capital unused. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> keep coconut juice for a time to ferment it before cooking into oil. <i>Itan-ug ug mga usa ka adlaw úsà lanáha,</i> Keep and ferment it for about a day before cooking it into oil. <number>3</number> harbor s.t. in secret. <i>Dúgay na siyang nagtan-ug ug gugma,</i> He has been harboring a secret love for a long time. <form>{-in-|tinan-ug}</form> <pos>n</pos> raw oil which floats to the surface after the coconut juice has fermented. <form>{-in-an|tinan-úgan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fruits kept for ripening. <number>2</number> things kept in secret. <i>Sa ílang áway, nabutyag ang mga tinan-úgan sa kadaghánan,</i> In their quarrel they exposed their secrets to the public. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>{-in-|tinan-ug}</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18420><form>tanuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> boil starchy foods, but not rice: ears of corn, root crops, bananas. <form>{-in-|tinanuk}</form> <pos>a</pos> cooked root crops, bananas, or corn.

<p id=18421><form>tanum</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>plant</tr>, grow plants. <i>Katamnan nag sibúyas ang ímung líug,</i> Your neck is so thick with dirt you could plant onions on it. <number>2</number> implant, nurture in the mind. <i>Ayaw pagtanum ug kayugut sa ímung dughan,</i> Don&apos;t harbor hatred in your heart. <i>Itanum sa ímung kaisípan ang ákung pína,</i> Implant my admonition in your mind. <pos>n</pos> <tr>plant</tr>. <form>{(&larr;)|tánum}</form> <pb n=988><pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> plant a large crop. <i>Makatánum ta kun dúnay ígung ulan,</i> We can plant our crops if there is enough rain. <form>talamnánan</form> <pos>n</pos> area prepared for planting. <form>{mag-r-|magtatanum}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.o. engaged in planting. <form>{pa&N;-|pananum}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>planting</tr>, <tr>farming</tr>. <i>Pananum ang ílang panginabúhì,</i> Agriculture is their source of livelihood.

<p id=18422><form>tanungan</form> <xr>= <sc>talungan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18423><form>tánus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB; c1]</itype> <tr>straighten</tr>; be, become <tr>straight</tr>. <i>Siyay mitánus (mipatánus) sa sangang báwug,</i> He straightened the bent branch. <i>Nagtánus lang nang ímung bukubuku,</i> Your back is certainly straight. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>discipline</tr>, impose disciplinary measures. <i>Ang amahan ray makatánus ánang batáa,</i> Only the father can discipline that child. <number>2a</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be <tr>chastened</tr>. <i>Natánus ang maldítung bátà human malatiguhi,</i> The mischievous child was chastened after he got his whipping. <pos>a</pos> <xr>= <sc>tanus</sc>.</xr> <form>{(&rarr;)|tanus}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>straight</tr>, not curved or bent. <i>Tanus nga karsáda,</i> Straight road. <i>Tanus nga bára,</i> Straight bar.

<p id=18424><form>tan-us</form> <pos>n</pos> a yellowish swelling in the skin caused by an infection of a wound or sore. <i>Gitusdikan níyag dágum ang íyang tan-us,</i> He pricked the yellow swelling next to the scratch on his skin with a needle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)46; b4]</itype> develop a yellow-colored infection under the skin next to a wound. <i>Gitan-usan ang íyang núka,</i> His skin ulcers developed yellow swellings on the sides.

<p id=18425><form>tanyag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>offer</tr> s.t. for s.o.&apos;s consideration. <i>Mitanyag siyang ihatud ku,</i> He offered to escort me. <i>Gitanyagan aku níyag trabáhu,</i> He offered me a job. <i>Pilay gitanyag sa balay?</i> How much did they offer for the house? <number>2</number> offer an opportunity, entertainment. <i>Kining dúlà itanyag álang sa inyung kalingáwan,</i> This play is offered for your enjoyment. <pos>n</pos> <tr>offer</tr>.

<p id=18426><form>táp</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> be the tops in an exam. <i>Siya ang mitáp sa bár,</i> He <tr>topped</tr> the bar exam. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> buy all of s.t. <i>Akuy mutáp sa ímung mangga,</i> I&apos;ll buy all of those mangoes. <i>Ákung baratúhun kun tápun nímug palit,</i> I&apos;ll give them cheap if you buy all of them. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> take on all of s.o.&apos;s bet. <i>Tápun ku bísag pilay inyung pusta,</i> I will take you on no matter how much you bet. <pos>n</pos> one who is tops in an exam.

<p id=18427><form>tapa</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> smoke fish. <i>Makatapa kug isdà ug náay ginabas ipaasu,</i> I can smoke fish if there is some sawdust to smoke it with. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> broil fish not close to the embers. <i>Bagul itapa sa isdà,</i> Use coconut shells for broiling the fish. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> kiln-dry copra. <i>Magtapa mi sa kupras kay way ínit,</i> We&apos;ll kiln-dry the copra because there is no sun. <pos>n</pos> <tr>smoked fish</tr>. <form>tapahan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> copra kiln-drier. <number>2</number> grate for broiling. <form>{-in-|tinapa}</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>tapa</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <xr><ix>see also</ix> <sc>tap-an</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18428><form>tápa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make jerked meat. <i>Magtápa kug unud sa kábaw,</i> I&apos;ll <tr>jerk</tr> some carabao meat. <form>{-in-|tinápa}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> jerked meat. <number>2</number> canned fish in small, thin tin cans.

<p id=18429><form>tapad, tápad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3SC; ac]</itype> <number>1</number> stay, put beside s.t. <i>Nakatapad kug gwápa sa dyíp,</i> I sat beside a pretty girl in the jeep. <i>Ayaw sila tapára,</i> Don&apos;t put them next to each other. <i>Itapad nang diksiyunári kun magbásag librung lisud,</i> Put the dictionary beside you when you read a difficult book. <number>2</number> stay next to s.o. to keep him company. <i>Bisan dì ka mukáun, tapari ku diri,</i> Even if you don&apos;t eat anything, sit here to keep me company. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.o. sitting beside s.o. else. <number>2</number> <tr>next</tr>. <i>Ang ámung báy tápad (tapad) sa íla,</i> Our house is next to theirs. <form>{(&larr;)|tápad}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C; ac]</itype> compare so as to match. <i>Gwápa ka kun tapáran ug maksut (maksut ang itápad nímu),</i> You are pretty if you are compared with an ugly person (if an ugly person is put next to you). <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; ab2]</itype> match a cock with another for a cockfight. <i>Way mutápad sa ákung manuk nga maáyu mulabuk,</i> No one will match his cock with mine because it is good in fighting. <pos>n</pos> <tr>comparison</tr>. <i>Dì siya maiwit sa tápad,</i> He does not lose out in comparison. <form>taparan</form> <pos>n</pos> place where cocks are usually matched for a cockfight. <form>{ka-(&larr;)|katápad}</form> <tr>seatmate</tr>. <i>Siyay ákung katápad sa klási,</i> He is my seatmate in class.

<p id=18430><form>tápak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>patch</tr>. <i>Tapáki ring gisì sa kurtína,</i> Patch the tear here in the curtain. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; c6]</itype> cover one&apos;s debts. <i>Karung swildúha ígù rang ikatápak sa mga bayranan,</i> This salary is just enough to pay for the bills. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>cover up for</tr> undertime. <i>Magtápak ku sa ákung naabsinan,</i> I&apos;ll <tr>make up for</tr> the time I lost when I was absent. <number>3a</number> cover over a bad feeling. <i>Ang pag-inum-ínum ray íyang itápak sa íyang mga kaguul,</i> He drowns his sorrows in alcohol. <form>{(&rarr;)|tapak}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>patch</tr> on s.t. torn. <form>{-in-an(&rarr;)|tinapakan}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. patched. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|tapakun}</form> <pos>a</pos> having patches.

<p id=18431><form>tap-ak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> <tr>step on</tr>. <i>Hingtap-akan nákù ang ímung ituy,</i> I accidentally stepped on your puppy. <i>Ngánung gitap-ákan man nímu ang ákung irasan?</i> Why did you step on my seedbed?

<p id=18432><form>tapal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b1]</itype> <number>1</number> pay, make up for s.t. lost or short. <i>Makatapal giyud kag wad-un nímu nà,</i> You&apos;ll have to pay for it if you lose it. <i>Tapli tung adlaw nga naabsin ka,</i> <tr>Make up for</tr> the day you were absent. <number>2</number> pay s.o.&apos;s bills for later reimbursement. <i>Tapli lang ku <pb n=989>kay nahibilin ang ákung pitáka,</i> Pay for me because I left my wallet. <pos>n</pos> amount of s.t. made up.

<p id=18433><form>tápal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> lay s.t. over a small area and stick it. <i>Nagtápal siyag itsiban sa íyang payuk,</i> He laid a medicinal plaster over his bruise. <i>Itápal ning inúsap dáhun sa samad,</i> Chew the leaves and spread them over the wound. <pos>n</pos> s.t. laid and stuck over.

<p id=18434><form>tapalúdu</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>mudguard</tr>, <tr>fender</tr> of a vehicle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put a fender on.

<p id=18435><form>tápan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do s.t. for a successive period without interruption. <i>Wà ku makatápan ug trabáhu karung bulána kay nagdaut ku,</i> I was not able to report for work steadily this month because I was ill. <i>Natápan nákù ang adlaw karung simanáha sa pagpanglaba,</i> I spent the whole week doing the laundry.

<p id=18436><form>tap-an</form> (from <ix>tapa</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b5]</itype> <tr>broil</tr> fish not close to the embers. <i>Tap-áni ang isdà ayaw isugba,</i> Broil the fish, but don&apos;t charcoal broil it. <form>{-in-an|tinap-anan}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. broiled but not close to the fire.

<p id=18437><form>tapang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b2]</itype> hit or do s.t. right, out of sheer luck. <i>Nakatapang siyag syát sa búla bísag layù,</i> He put the ball into the basket from a good distance by sheer luck. <i>Hitapangan (hitapngan) níya ang tubag sa pangutána,</i> He guessed the answer to the question correctly out of sheer luck. &dagger;

<p id=18438><form>tapangku</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> lean-to roof, a single-pitched, sloping roof constructed at the sides or end of a building without the floors or walls. <number>2</number> awning. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> put, construct a lean-to roof or awning. <i>Tapangkúhi ang inyung balay arun adúnay kabutangan sa awtu,</i> Put a porte cochere next to your house so you will have a place to keep your car.

<p id=18439><form>tapar</form> <xr>= <sc>tapal</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18440><form>tapas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>dress yarn</tr> for weaving by starching and combing it to eliminate fluff or lint and give it a degree of stiffness. <number>2</number> <tr>cut sugar cane</tr> and clean it of its leaves. <i>Nagtapas mis tubu pára galingun,</i> We are cutting sugar cane to mill. <form>{ma&N;-r-|mananapas}</form> <pos>n</pos> one who cuts sugar cane.

<p id=18441><form>tapat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <number>1</number> be <tr>true</tr> and loyal to s.o. <i>Sálig kay magtapat aku sa ákung sáad,</i> Trust me because I&apos;ll be true to my promise. <number>2</number> resolve oneself to reform. <i>Nagtapat siyang dílì na mangáwat,</i> He resolved not to steal any more. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>loyal</tr>. <i>Tapat ang irù sa íyang agálun,</i> The dog is loyal to its master. <number>2</number> <tr>sincere</tr>. <i>Tapat ang íyang paghinulsul,</i> He is sincere in his repentance.

<p id=18442><form>tápay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>cock&apos;s comb</tr>. <number>2</number> <formx>pula ang {&mdash;|tápay}</formx> for ears to be red from drinking (humorous). <i>Daling mamuwa ang íyang tápay ug makainum.</i> His ears grow red easily when he drinks. <form>{-an|tapáyan}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having a comb. <number>2</number> having a crest. <i>Sawang tapáyan,</i> Crested snake. <form>tapaytapay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. harmless insect resembling a spider but not spinning a web. <form>tapaytápay</form> <pos>n</pos> annual ornamental with red (or also white or yellow) flowers in panicles which resemble a cock&apos;s comb: <bio>Celosia argentea var. cristata</bio>.

<p id=18443><form>tápay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> for roasted rice grains to be pounded flat. <i>Nagkatápay na ang pinípig sa tantung linubuk,</i> The <ix>pinípig</ix> is becoming flat from constant pounding.

<p id=18444><form>tapdagan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. sweet banana with green peelings, growing to about <measure reg="10 cm">4&Prime;</measure>, similar to <i>búngan.</i> It is eaten uncooked.

<p id=18445><form>tapdagay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. light colored cerith found clinging to small stones. Upon sensing danger they draw back into their shells and release their hold thus falling down.

<p id=18446><form>tapdas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>brush off</tr> briskly with the hand or an instrument. <i>Hadluk siyang mutapdas sa uk-uk sa íyang sinínà,</i> She&apos;s afraid to brush the cockroach off her dress. <i>Hitapdasan níya ang básu pagkab-ut níya sa kan-un,</i> He knocked the glass off the table when he reached for the food. <number>2</number> <tr>dust off</tr> by whisking. <i>Tapdási sa kálù ang lingkuránan,</i> Dust the bench off with your hat. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for waves, wind to dash against s.t. <i>Makamig nga hángin mitapdas sa ákung nawung,</i> A chilly wind swept my face.

<p id=18447><form>tapdawun</form> <pos>n</pos> a convertible with the top down. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> have the top of a convertible down. <i>Mutapdáwun lang siya sa íyang awtu ug way ínit,</i> He will have his car with the top down when the sun is not out.

<p id=18448><form>taphaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>shallow</tr>, not well-based. <i>Taphaw ra kaáyu kanang katarungána,</i> That reasoning is too shallow. <i>Gidakup siya bísan taphaw lang ang katáhap,</i> He was arrested on very shallow suspicion. <number>2</number> <tr>insincere</tr>, <tr>superficial</tr>. <i>Taphaw ang pahíyum nga pinugus,</i> A forced smile is artificial. <number>3</number> <tr>silly</tr>. <i>Dì ba taphaw nang babayhána, mukatáwa lag kalit nga walay hinungdan?</i> Isn&apos;t she silly the way she laughs suddenly without reason?

<p id=18449><form>tapi<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>crooked</tr>, <tr>slanted</tr>, not well-rounded, <tr>off the mark</tr>. <i>Tapi ning pagkasulat kay way linya ang papil,</i> The lines are not straight because the paper has no lines. <i>Tapi siyag úlu,</i> His head is not well-rounded. <i>Tapi man, wà mabuls-ay,</i> It&apos;s off the mark, not a bull&apos;s-eye. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> come out crooked, off the mark; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Mutapi (matapi) ang úlu sa bátà ug pirmi takildun,</i> A child gets an irregularly-shaped head if he is put down on his side. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> fend off <pb n=990>a blow with a sideward motion of the arm or club. <i>Tapihun nímu ang duslak kay mau nay labing piligrúsu,</i> You must fend off the forward thrust because that is the most dangerous. <form>tapitápi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do s.t. <tr>unevenly</tr>, <tr>zigzaggedly</tr>. <i>Nagtapitápig lakaw ang hubug,</i> The drunk walked in a zigzag way.

<p id=18450><form>tapi<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> piece of cloth wrapped around the waist or upper body as a <tr>skirt</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> wear a <ix>tapi</ix>. <i>Nagtapi ang babáying nanglaba,</i> The woman who was washing clothes was wearing a skirt that covered her bosom down to her knee.

<p id=18451><form>tápig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>hide</tr> s.t. <i>Tapígi iyang sapátus arun dì siya kalakaw,</i> Hide his shoes so he can&apos;t go out. <number>2</number> put s.t. where people can&apos;t get at it. <i>Akuy nagtápig sa midisína arun dì <corr sic="dwáan">duláan</corr>,</i> I put the medicine away so no one could play with it. <number>3</number> hold for <tr>safekeeping</tr>. <i>Akuy tápig arun dì maw&amacrcir;,</i> I&apos;ll keep it so it can&apos;t get lost. <number>4</number> keep in secret. <i>Ang kagahápun nagtápig ug mga katáwag kasákit,</i> The past hides joys and sorrows. <form>{-anan|tapiganan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hiding place</tr>. <form>{-in-an|tinapigan}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. kept hidden.

<p id=18452><form>tapigas</form> <xr>= <sc>dapigas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18453><form>tapik</form> <pos>n</pos> one who is related to a family through marriage. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B236]</itype> be, become an <tr>in-law</tr> to a family.

<p id=18454><form>tápik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>topic</tr>. <form>áwut-ub {&mdash;|tápik}</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>áwut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18455><form>tap-il</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> teasingly match s.o. with s.o. else. <i>Ganáhan siyang itap-il nákù kay nakagustu siya nákù,</i> She likes people to pair her off with me because she does like me. <pos>n</pos> pairing people off in a teasing way. <i>Tap-il ang sinugdánan sa ílang pagkatrátu,</i> They were teasingly matched and it led to serious courtship. <form>{-ay(&rarr;)|tap-ilay}</form> <pos>n</pos> matching people off in a group with each other teasingly.

<p id=18456><form>tapindas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> <tr>slip</tr>, sliding and losing one&apos;s balance, but not falling. <i>Natapindas ku kay dangug ang ákung gilaktan,</i> I lost my balance because the path I was walking on was slippery, but I didn&apos;t fall. <form>{Culu-|tulutapindas}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> tip to the sides repeatedly because of unsteady footing.

<p id=18457><form>táping</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tap-dancing</tr>, dance with fancy footwork and tapping of the feet. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>tap dance</tr>.

<p id=18458><form>tap-ing</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> an animal with a solid-color coat and a splotch on the face of a different color. <number>2</number> big <tr>birthmark</tr> or splotch on the face. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b8]</itype> have a big <tr>splotch</tr>. <i>Natap-ing (natap-ingan) ang íyang píkas nawung tungud sa sanla,</i> Half of her face had a big splotch on it from leprosy.

<p id=18459><form>tapiri</form> <xr>= <sc>tampiri</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18460><form>tápir wír</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tupperware</tr>.

<p id=18461><form>tapis, tápis</form> <pos>n</pos> piece of cloth worn around the waist or upper body as a <tr>skirt</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear s.t. wound around the body. <i>Hubù siya gawas sa tualya nga gitápis,</i> She was naked except for a towel she wore around her waist. <form>{(&rarr;)|tapis}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> be at the stage of developing a sheath around the trunk. <i>Lubi kun magtapis na,</i> A coconut when it gets its sheath.

<p id=18462><form>tapíta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>taffeta</tr>, a fine, rather stiff, silk cloth with a sheen. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> use taffeta cloth.

<p id=18463><form>tapíti</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>billiard table carpet</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>sewing machine cover</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b6(1)]</itype> carpet a billiard table. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> use, make into a sewing machine cover.

<p id=18464><form>tapiun</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>press</tr> or lay one&apos;s hand on a part of the body. <i>Itapiun ang kamut sa nag-agus nga samad,</i> Press your hand down on the bleeding wound. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>stifle progress</tr>, <tr>prevent</tr> from developing. <i>Imbis tabángan arun muasinsu tapin-an na hinúun níya,</i> Instead of helping her improve, he stifles her progress. <number>2a</number> sit on an application or papers, pigeonhole them. <i>Ug way mutapiun sa aplikisiyun, madáwat ka,</i> If nobody pigeonholes your application, you will be accepted. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> play a chord by pressing it with the fingers. <pos>n</pos> chord of a guitar or any stringed instrument which is played by pressing with the fingers.

<p id=18465><form>taplud</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>luggage carrier</tr> on top of vehicles. <form>{-ing|tapluding}</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>taplud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18466><form>tapnatsir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>top-notcher</tr>, one who is tops in an examination. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be the top-notcher. <i>Ang miáging bár mauy íyang gitapnatsíran,</i> He was in first place in the bar examination last year.

<p id=18467><form>tapsay</form> <pos>n</pos> a triangular fishnet into which the fish are driven, operated by one or two people holding the V-shaped frame and two people working the scareline. <form>{pa&N;-|panapsay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> go fishing with a <ix>tapsay</ix>.

<p id=18468><form>tapsing</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b8]</itype> <tr>sideswipe</tr>, <tr>graze</tr>. <i>Ígù rang nakatapsing ang bála sa úlu,</i> The bullet only grazed his head. <i>Padaplin kay hitapsingan kag trák,</i> Stay on the side. You might get sideswiped by a bus.

<p id=18469><form>taptap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>cover</tr> s.t. by laying s.t. over it, putting s.t. flat on top of it. <i>Usa ka táwuy mitaptap nákù arun dì ku makadumdum sa agiánan,</i> A person blindfolded me so I wouldn&apos;t know the way. <i>Nagtaptap ug panyù ang mga tulisan,</i> The robbers covered their faces with handkerchiefs. <i>Taptápig puwa ang tabánug,</i> Cover the kite with red paper. <i>Ang lángit gitaptápan sa mabagang dag-um,</i> The sky is covered with thick clouds. <pos>n</pos> s.t. lain over as a covering.

<p id=18470><form>taptin</form> <pos>n</pos> the first ten from the top. <i>Nahiapil <pb n=991>ku sa taptin sa ámung klási,</i> I am among the top ten in our class.

<p id=18471><form>tápù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac6]</itype> put all together. <i>Kinsay nagtápù íning tanan sa sáku?</i> Who put them all in the sack? <number>2</number> <itype>[A2C3; c16]</itype> for one end of s.t. tied around the body to meet the other. <i>Nagtápù ang higut apan dì mabalighut,</i> The two ends of the bond meet but you can&apos;t tie them. <i>Matápù nímu ang duha nímu ka kamut sa íyang páa,</i> You can encircle her legs with your two hands. <number>2a</number> join, connect. <i>Gitápù ang ílang kamut,</i> They joined hands. <form>{hi-|hitapù}/{ha-(&rarr;)|hatapù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <number>1</number> be put together with the rest by chance. <i>Ngánung nahitapù ning ákung butang sa imúha?</i> Why are my things mixed with yours? <number>2</number> happen to join, live with a group. <i>Maáyung nahitapù ku sa inyung grúpu,</i> It&apos;s a good thing that I joined your group.

<p id=18472><form>tapuk</form> <pos>a</pos> for fibrous materials to be <tr>weak</tr>, <tr>easily torn</tr>. <i>Kining klasíha sa panaptun tapuk kaáyu,</i> This k.o. cloth is very weak. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> be weak, easily torn. <i>Ang bisti nga ihúmul sa klúruks matapuk,</i> Clothes soaked in chlorox get weak.

<p id=18473><form>tápuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC3; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> make a pile of s.t. scattered. <i>Nagkatápuk ang mga pangánud,</i> The clouds gathered. <i>Tapúka ang mga dáhun,</i> Pile the leaves up. <number>2</number> <tr>gather</tr> people, <tr>be gathered</tr>. <i>Nagkatápuk uruy ang mga búang,</i> A bunch of fools have gotten together in one place. <i>Tapúka ang mga saup kay ákung pakigsultíhan,</i> Get the tenants together so I can have a talk with them. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> pile of things. <number>2</number> crowd gathered. <form>tapuktápuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> form cliques within a larger group. <i>Kinahanglang úsa tanan, way magtapuktápuk,</i> All must be in one group, no forming of cliques. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> clique. <number>2</number> social gatherings, parties. <i>Sa mga tapuktápuk náa giyud ang susyalayit,</i> The socialites are sure to be present at gatherings. <form>tapuktapuk</form> <xr>= <sc>pundukpunduk</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>punduk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18474><form>tápuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>dump</tr>, <tr>throw away</tr> waste materials. <i>Itápuk nang patayng ilagà sa kanal,</i> Dump the dead rat into the canal.

<p id=18475><form>tapukù</form> <xr>= <sc>tipukù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18476><form>tapul</form> <pos>n</pos> any variety of root crop, grain, or beans that is dark violet in color.

<p id=18477><form>tápul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; a4b4]</itype> be, <tr>become lazy</tr>. <i>Mitápul siyas trabáhu kay gamayg swildu,</i> He became <tr>lazy</tr> in his work because he got a small salary. <i>Gitápul (gitapúlan) na sad siya maung miabsin,</i> He felt lazy again so he&apos;s absent. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|tapulan}</form> <pos>a</pos> lazy. <form>{-in-an(&rarr;)|tinapulan}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> do lazily. <pos>a</pos> lazily done. <form>{-in-|tinápul}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> do in a lazy way. <i>Gitinapúlan lang níya ang ákung súgù,</i> He just ran my errand in a lazy way.

<p id=18478><form>tapun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>move</tr> to another house or place. <i>Kung mag-áway ang magtiáyun ang asáwa adtu dáyun mutapun sa íyang ugángan,</i> If the couple quarrels, the wife immediately goes to stay with her mother-in-law. <number>2</number> move, bring to a nearby location separated by some k.o. barrier. <i>Mitapun ang langgam sa láing sanga,</i> The bird moved to another branch. <number>3</number> <tr>cross</tr> to the opposing party. <i>Daghang mutapun sa partídung daúgan,</i> Many people will <tr>cross over</tr> to the winning party. <pos>n</pos> <tr>area across</tr> s.t. <i>Kining kaingína muluwak sa tapun íning búd,</i> This clearing stretches over to the opposite slope of this hill.

<p id=18479><form>tapun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. used as a cover for a valve.

<p id=18480><form>tap-ung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>cover</tr>, close an opening or passage. <i>Manap-ung ka sa bàbà ug muubu ka,</i> Cover your mouth when you cough. <i>Natap-ungan ang kanal kay mikáwas ang túbig ngari,</i> The canal is <tr>clogged</tr> up because the water overflowed this way. <i>Tabla ang itap-ung sa lungag,</i> Use a piece of wallboard to cover the hole. <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to cover an opening or passage.

<p id=18481><form>tapun-ug</form> <xr>= <sc>tipun-ug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18482><form>tapuruk</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>ark shell</tr>.

<p id=18483><form>tápus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>put an end to</tr>, <tr>finish</tr>. <i>Dakung kumbíti ang mitápus sa silibrasiyun,</i> A big feast concluded the celebration. <i>Tapúsa na siya arun mahílum,</i> Kill him (lit. finish him off) to silence him. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2B12; a12]</itype> do to the end, <tr>come to an end</tr>. <i>Wà ku mutápus sa sini kay way lamì,</i> I didn&apos;t finish the movie because it was no good. <i>Mutápus (matápus) ang prugráma inig-aríya sa tilun,</i> The program will come to an end when the curtain comes down. <form>{pagka-|pagkatápus}</form> <tr>afterwards</tr>, after that. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> hold the <ix>tápus</ix> feast. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>after</tr>, at the end of. <i>Tápus sa gúbat,</i> After the war. <number>2</number> the feast which is prepared on the ninth day of the prayer for a deceased person. <form>{(&rarr;)|tapus}</form> that&apos;s all, that will do it. <i>Kun masukù siya hagki lang. Tapus,</i> If she gets angry, kiss her. That will do it. <form>{&mdash;|tapus} dáyun</form> <pos>n</pos> a story in a periodical or on radio or TV complete in one installment. <form>{hi&N;-(&rarr;)|hinapus}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> coming to an end. <i>Atangi ang naghinapus tang sugilánun,</i> Watch for our story that&apos;s nearing its conclusion. <form>{pa&N;-|panápus}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> make as a concluding point, part or finale. <i>Ang sáyaw mauy ipanápus nátù sa prugráma,</i> We will make the dance number the last part. <pos>n</pos> s.t. that concludes. <i>Maáyung panápus tung bálak sa ímung diskursu,</i> That poem made a good ending to your speech. <form>{pa&N;-(&rarr;)|panapus}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>final</tr>, no matter what the consequences might be. <i>Ibundak ku ning uska libu. Panapus ning <pb n=992>sugála kay nagkapildipildi ku,</i> I ran out of luck, but I&apos;ll gamble this one thousand pesos, come what may. <form>{ka-an|katapusan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>end</tr>, <tr>termination</tr>. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>tápus</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6(1)]</itype> hold the <ix>tápus</ix> feast. <form>{-um-r-(&rarr;)|tumatapus}</form> <pos>n</pos> about to end or finish. <i>Tumatapus na ang prugráma ug mamaulì na ta,</i> The program is about to end, and we will go home.

<p id=18484><form>tápus<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tulápus</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ílu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18485><form>tap-us</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>plaster</tr> medicinal leaves on an afflicted portion. <i>Gitap-úsan níyag dáhun sa tubatuba ang piang,</i> She put a plaster of <ix>tubatuba</ix> leaves on the sprain. <pos>n</pos> <tr>medicinal plaster</tr>.

<p id=18486><form>tapusuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wentletrap</tr>, k.o. edible <tr>univalve</tr>.

<p id=18487><form>taput</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC3; b]</itype> <tr>stick</tr>, be firmly attached to s.t. <i>Mitaput giyud ang buling sa sinínà,</i> The dirt sure stuck to the clothes. <i>Nagtáput ang láwas sa sayamis tuwins,</i> The bodies of the Siamese twins are stuck to each other. <i>Gitaptan ug sisi ang gapnud,</i> Small oysters were attached to the driftwood. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> for a disease to <tr>infect</tr> s.o. <i>Dì makataput ang sakit sa himsug nga láwas,</i> Disease cannot infect a healthy body. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> remain very <tr>close</tr> and <tr>loyal</tr> to s.o. <i>Mutaput siya nímu kun ímu siyang makúhà,</i> She will stick to you once you have had her. <number>4</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> be somewhat affected by an unpleasant feeling. <i>Gitaptan siyag kalísang,</i> Fear came over him. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tight-fitting</tr> clothes. <i>Taput kaáyu sa láwas ang sinínà ni Marilin,</i> Marilyn has a very tight-fitting dress on. <number>2</number> sticking to the spot as if stuck. <i>Kasing taput,</i> A top that whirls without wobbling. <form>{&mdash;|taput} láwas</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>láwas</sc>.</xr> <form>{&mdash;|taput} sa pamilya</form> one who has become a member of a family through marriage.<i> Wà kay lábut sa panunud kay taput lang kas mga Ríyis,</i> You do not get an inheritance because you are related to the Reyeses only by marriage. <form>{pa-|pataput}</form> <pos>n</pos> thin tissue paper used to make lanterns or kites. <form>taptanan</form> <pos>n</pos> joist in a roof to which the galvanized iron sheets are attached.

<p id=18488><form>tapuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> finger the strings or the keys of a musical instrument and the like. <i>Bungul ang tíngug sa sista kay luag kang mutapuy,</i> The guitar sounds dull because you&apos;re not holding tight enough to the chords. <i>Gitapuy níya ang íyang mga tudlù sa tikla,</i> He let his fingers move over the keyboard. <pos>n</pos> <tr>fingering</tr> of chords. <form>tapyanan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>finger board</tr> or a <tr>fret</tr> of a stringed instrument.

<p id=18489><form>tapwak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P; c]</itype> <tr>drag</tr>, <tr>push</tr> s.o. to danger or sin. <i>Ikaw ang nagtapwak níya sa kadaútan,</i> You drove her to danger. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>dive</tr>, <tr>dash</tr> forcefully towards. <i>Kinsa tung mitapwak sa ákung likud,</i> Who was that who jumped on my back? <number>3</number> <itype>[a3b8]</itype> meet the eyes. <i>Mauy natapwak (natapwakan) sa ákung panan-aw ang babáying naghúbù,</i> A stark naked woman met my eyes. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>splash</tr> onto. <i>Usa ka dakung balud ang mitapwak sa íyang náwung,</i> A big wave splashed his face. <i>Hitapwakan ug íhì ang nangharána,</i> The serenaders got splashed with a potful of urine.

<p id=18490><form>tapya</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for waves to dash against the shore. <i>Tapyáhun (itapya) nang gapnud sa baybáyun,</i> The waves will dash that driftwood against the shore. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>fend off</tr> blows with the palm or with an instrument. <i>Tapyáha íyang duslak sa ímung bangkaw,</i> Fend off his thrust with your spear. <pos>n</pos> dashing of waves. <form>tapyahan</form> <pos>n</pos> seashore where the waves break.

<p id=18491><form>tapyas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> <tr>graze</tr>, rub against slightly. <i>Gitapyasan sa panà ang íyang áping,</i> His cheek was grazed by the arrow. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>deflect</tr>, hit with a swinging arm. <i>Makatapyas ka íning dunggába?</i> Could you parry this thrust? <i>Tapyasa ang mga lamuk,</i> Drive the mosquitoes away by swinging your arms. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wipe s.t. off s.t. by sliding the palm of the hand over it. <i>Tapyása ang mga sagbut sa lamísa,</i> Sweep the scraps off the table.

<p id=18492><form>tarà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; cP]</itype> put s.t. where it is easy to get at, can easily be hit. <i>Mitarà siya sa íyang nawung sa táwu nga nag-ingung musagpà,</i> She put her face forward when the man threatened to slap her so he could hit her squarely if he dared. <i>Kinsay nagtarà ug usa ka plátung mani sa mga bátà?</i> Who put a plate of peanuts in front of the children where they could get at them? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>point at</tr>, <tr>train upon</tr>. <i>Wà pa gánì siya makatarà, mibutu na ang pusil,</i> The gun went off even before he could take his aim. <i>Itarà ang ímung nawung sa adlaw,</i> <tr>Face</tr> directly to the sun. a <number>1</number> in fighting, exposing the body and not parrying or ducking. <i>Tarà muáway manúka, dì mulihay,</i> That rooster exposes itself when it fights and fails to parry. <number>2</number> for a woman to be motionless, sexually unresponsive. <i>Tarà babayhána, dì mubálus kun dyangdyángun,</i> An unresponsive woman. She does not react to sexual play. <form>{pa-|patarà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> fail to move and thus expose oneself instead of defending oneself or hiding. <i>Ayawg patarà sa pinusílay,</i> Don&apos;t expose yourself to the line of fire.

<p id=18493><form>tarabáhu</form> <xr>= <sc>trabáhu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18494><form>tarabisíya</form> <xr>= <sc>trabisíya</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18495><form>taráha</form> <xr>= <sc>tráha</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18496><form>tarák</form> <xr>= <sc>trák</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18497><form>taraktarak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> put several blade marks on s.t. <i>Ákung gitaraktarakan ang punúan <pb n=993>sa nangkà arun muági ang taguk,</i> I put blade marks in the trunk of the jackfruit so the sap would flow.

<p id=18498><form>taraktarak<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> make noisy footfalls. <i>Gisabáan ang mga burdir sa sílung kay may nagtaraktarak sa táas,</i> The boarders on the ground floor were disturbed by the person walking noisily upstairs.

<p id=18499><form>táral</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> force s.t. to come along by dragging. <i>Gitáral nákug bábuy ngadtu sa ihawan,</i> I dragged the pig to the slaughterhouse. <number>1a</number> coax s.o. into coming along. <i>Ayaw pagkúyug ug dúnay mutáral pagpangharána,</i> Don&apos;t go if s.o. coaxes you into going serenading. <number>2</number> bring before the court for trial. <i>Tarálun sa hukmánan ang gikatahápan,</i> The suspect will be brought to court. <number>3</number> drag s.o. to misery. <i>Tarálun ta ka sa kauláwan uban nákù,</i> I&apos;ll drag you down to shame with me. <i>Tarálun ka sa kamatáyun niánang labihan mung paghingaguul,</i> You&apos;ll be dragged to death with your excessive grief. <form>taraltáral</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> carry or take along where s.o. is. <i>Ang íyang amígu mauy nagtaraltáral níya sa syudad,</i> His friend took him out and around the city.

<p id=18500><form>tarangka</form> <xr>= <sc>trangka</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18501><form>taranta, tarant&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b3(1)c5]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>lose one&apos;s head</tr> due to fright, panic. <i>Natarantar siya dihang nagpúsil na,</i> He <tr>panicked</tr> when the shoot-out started. <number>2</number> <tr>get rattled</tr>, lose one&apos;s presence of mind. <i>Natarant&acaron;r siya dihang gipangutána siyas abugádu,</i> He got <tr>rattled</tr> when the lawyer questioned him. <form>tarantádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>panicked</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>stupid</tr> in one&apos;s action. <i>Katarantádu nímu! Ngánu gung ímung gihíkap ang pintal nga basà pa,</i> You fool! Why did you touch the wet paint? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>panic</tr>. <number>2</number> become stupid.

<p id=18502><form>taras</form> <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s character trait in regards to the way he deals with other people. <i>Gidáyig ku ang íyang taras pagkamaabiabíhun ug pagkamaluluy-un,</i> I admire his trait of character, his hospitality and his ability to sympathize.

<p id=18503><form>tarbáhu</form> <xr>= <sc>trabáhu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18504><form>tardang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> strike at a trunk or branch of a tree with a bladed instrument with moderate force and without intention of cutting it off. <i>Nagtardang ku sa punúan sa nangkà nga ákung gikuháan ug taguk,</i> I chopped a mark in the jackfruit trunk to get sap.

<p id=18505><form>*tardang<sub>2</sub></form> <form>{pa-|patardang}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> expose s.t. or oneself to the elements or for others to see. <i>Gipatardang ni Rúsa ang íyang páa arun ku makaalinggat,</i> Rosa exposed her legs to catch my attention. <number>2</number> allow s.o. or oneself to do as much of s.t. as he wants. <i>Ayaw patardánga ug pakáun ang bátà,</i> Don&apos;t let the child eat as much as he wants.

<p id=18506><form>targit</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>target</tr>. <i>Aku bay targit sa ímung insultu,</i> Am I the target of your insult? <number>2</number> skill in throwing the knife. <number>3</number> <tr>bull&apos;s eye</tr> hit. <i>Syátir giyud ka kay targit man,</i> You must be a sharpshooter because it&apos;s a bull&apos;s eye. <number>4</number> children&apos;s game in which the object is to hook rubber bands which have been laid on the ground with an arrow projected by a rubber band. <number>4a</number> toy arrow made of coconut midribs used in a game of <ix>targit</ix>. <number>5</number> manner of shooting in basketball wherein the ball is made to go straight into the basket instead of describing an arc. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> hit the target. <i>Makatargit ku ánang láta,</i> I can hit that can. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> hit by throwing a knife. <i>Ayaw siyag pusila. Targíta lang,</i> Don&apos;t gun him down. Just hit him with a knife. <number>3</number> <itype>[C; b6]</itype> play <ix>targit</ix>. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a <ix>targit</ix> shot in basketball. <number>5</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> have s.o. for sexual intercourse. <form>{&mdash;|targit} praktis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>target practice</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> have target practice. <form>targittargit</form> <xr>= <sc>targit</sc>, <i>n4.</i></xr>

<p id=18507><form>tarha</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> deduct tare weight. <i>Ang Insik mitarhag singku kílus sa usa ka sákung kupras kay basà,</i> The Chinese deducted five kilos from the total weight of the sack of copra to make up for its being wet. <pos>n</pos> tare weight deducted.

<p id=18508><form>tarhíta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>card</tr>, <tr>tag</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> put a <tr>tag</tr> on s.t. <i>Tarhitái ang pákids arun dì maw&amacrcir;,</i> Put a tag on the package so it won&apos;t get lost.

<p id=18509><form>tárì</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; a]</itype> enter, fight a cock in a cockfight with gaffs. <i>Tarían ku nang ugis mu sa ákung pula,</i> I&apos;ll pit my red cock against your white one. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A1C; b6]</itype> have, hold a <tr>cockfight</tr>. <i>Magtárì rung Birnis,</i> There will be a cockfight this Friday. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> tie the gaff on the cock&apos;s leg. <i>Hapini ang tiil únà taríi,</i> Pad the leg before tying the gaff on it. <form>{(&rarr;)|tarì}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gaff</tr>. <i>Naunay ka sa kaugalíngun nímung tarì kay ang ímu hinúung irù ang nahílu imbis ang sa silíngan,</i> You fell into your own trap (lit. got cut with your own gaff) when your dog was poisoned instead of your neighbor&apos;s. <form>{pa-|patárì}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be in a fighting mood or shape (lit. wants to be made to fight). <form>{pa&N;-|panárì}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> go to the cockfights. <i>Kuháa ang hiniktan kay manárì ku,</i> Get the cock, I am going to the cockfights. <pos>n</pos> <tr>cockfighting</tr>. <form>{ig-r-|igtatárì}/{l-|igtalárì}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cock</tr> for fighting. <form>{ma&N;-r-(&rarr;)|mananarì}</form> <pos>n</pos> cockfighting enthusiast. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|tariun}</form> <pos>a</pos> a perfect match, ideal for pairing off in marriage. <i>Ikaw duktur ug siya nars; tariun giyud mu kaáyu,</i> You&apos;re a doctor and she&apos;s a nurse; you are a perfect match.

<pb n=994>

<p id=18510><form>tarik</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>outrigger boom</tr>, the poles to which the floats are attached. <number>2</number> <tr>penis</tr> (slang). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a]</itype> put, make into an outrigger <tr>boom</tr>.

<p id=18511><form>taríkì</form> <xr>= <sc>turíkì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18512><form>taríma</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> movable platform on which cargo is placed in loading or unloading a ship. <number>2</number> vending <tr>stall</tr>, <tr>stand</tr>. <i>Dúnay napúlù ka taríma sa isdaan,</i> There are ten stalls in the fish section of the market. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> make into, put up a movable <tr>platform</tr>. <number>2</number> make, put up a <tr>vending stall</tr>. <i>Gitarimáhan na ang bag-ung tabuan,</i> Stalls have already been installed in the new marketplace.

<p id=18513><form>taringtaring</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>flirt</tr>. <i>Dalì nang bayhána paangkan kay taringtaring,</i> That girl will surely get pregnant because she is a flirt. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> <tr>flirt</tr>; be a flirt. <i>Kusug siyang mutaringtaring sa mga laláki maung daghang uyab,</i> She flirts a lot. That is why she has lots of boys interested in her.

<p id=18514><form>tarípa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>customs duties</tr>.&dagger;

<p id=18515><form>tarírit</form> <pos>n</pos> a guide for the cue in billiards on which the cue is laid when one has to shoot a ball which is too far from the edge of the table for the hand to prop the cue.

<p id=18516><form>tariya, taríya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>assignment</tr>, <tr>allotment</tr> of work. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>assign</tr> a piece of work to s.o. <i>Si Tatay nagtaríya nákug kawus,</i> Father gave me the chore of fetching water. <i>Gaan ang itaríya sa luyahun,</i> Assign an easy job to weak persons.

<p id=18517><form>tarsan</form> <ix>name:</ix> <tr>Tarzan</tr>. <form>{-in-|tinarsan}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> act like Tarzan: climb and jump in a risky way. <i>Ayawg tinarsan dihà kay mahúlug ka,</i> Stop playing Tarzan. You might fall.

<p id=18518><form>tarsin</form> short for <ix>murtar sin</ix>. <xr>= <sc>murtal<sub>1</sub></sc>, <i>a2.</i></xr>

<p id=18519><form>tartanilya</form> <pos>n</pos> two-wheeled, horse-drawn <tr>rig</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> ride on a rig. <i>Tartanilyáhun nímu nang duul kaáyu,</i> Do you have to ride a rig for such a short distance?

<p id=18520><form>táru</form> <pos>n</pos> large cubical tin can made to contain kerosene and hold <measure reg="18.93 liters">five gallons</measure>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B256]</itype> get to be one <ix>táru</ix> full. <i>Wà ra mutáru ang nainum námung tubà,</i> We didn&apos;t even consume five gallons of palm toddy.

<p id=18521><form>tarug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> budge a little. <i>Ígù lang natarug ang kutsing ákung gitúlud,</i> The car I was pushing just barely budged. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; a1]</itype> for s.t. implanted to become loose. <i>Manghíngù na ang bátà kay nagkatarug na íyang ngípun,</i> The child will soon lose his teeth now that they are getting loose. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> for feelings to be moved, softened. <i>Bisan lúhà dì makatarug (makapatarug) sa íyang balatían,</i> Even tears cannot move his feelings. <pos>a</pos> s.t. planted that is loose. <i>Húmuk na ibtun ang lansang kay tarug na,</i> It&apos;s easy to pull the nail out now because it&apos;s loose. <pos>n</pos> a loose tooth. <i>Ipaibut na ímung tarug,</i> Have your loose tooth pulled.

<p id=18522><form>tarughuy</form> <xr>= <sc>tarugsuy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18523><form>tarugsuy</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>tapering</tr> to a point. <i>Daw tudlung nagsudiyà ang tarugsuy níyang dughan,</i> Her breasts are pointed like an accusing finger. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6]</itype> be <tr>pointed</tr>. <i>Nagtarugsuy lang ang mais kay wà ulana,</i> The cornstalks stood like pointed sticks because there was no rain.

<p id=18524><form>tarúgu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a <tr>peg</tr> or <tr>rod</tr> to hold s.t. in place or provide <tr>support</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>penis</tr> (slang). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> put a peg. <i>Tarugúhan ug dakù ang halígi arun makadaug sa busaug,</i> Put a large peg in the post to support it so it will hold up the joists.

<p id=18525><form>táruk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> plant a post or s.t. large. <i>Lawma kun magtáruk kag pusti,</i> When you plant a post make it deep. <number>2</number> <tr>erect</tr> a structure. <i>Magtáruk tag bunggalu inigkaminyù nátù,</i> We&apos;ll <tr>construct</tr> a bungalow when we get married. <form>taruktaruk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP]</itype> sit or stand motionless, not saying a word. <i>Ang táwung hilumun nagtaruktaruk (nagpataruktaruk) lag lingkud,</i> The quiet man was sitting without saying a word.

<p id=18526><form>tárung</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>straight</tr>, not curved. <i>Tárung nga dálan,</i> Straight path. <number>2</number> <tr>straight</tr>, not tilting or slanting. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> set <tr>upright</tr> or <tr>level</tr> s.t. slanting or tilting. <i>Tarúnga nang pusting naghirig,</i> <tr>Straighten</tr> up that leaning post. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> do s.t. <tr>seriously</tr> and <tr>properly</tr>, not playfully or improperly. <i>Káun ug tárung,</i> Eat properly. <number>3</number> <itype>[B6]</itype> be <tr>reformed</tr>. <i>Nagtárung (nagtarung) na siya gíkang giparul,</i> He has reformed since he was paroled. <number>4</number> <itype>[B456]</itype> <tr>behave</tr> well. <i>Magtárung ka kun dúnay bisíta,</i> Behave when we have visitors. <number>5</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do, put in a proper position. <i>Ug mutárung tag higdà, masulud tang tanan dinhi sa sála,</i> If we arrange ourselves properly we can all sleep in the living room. <form>{(&rarr;)|tarung}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>right</tr> and <tr>proper</tr>. <i>Wà kay mabúhat nga tarung kun matarant&acaron;r ka,</i> You won&apos;t do anything right if you panic. <number>2</number> <tr>sane</tr>, not crazy. <i>Tarung pa ba nang táwung síging tagawtaw,</i> Could you call s.o. who keeps talking nonsense to himself sane? <form>tarungtarung</form> <pos>a</pos> quite <tr>presentable</tr>. <i>Usa ra ka parisan ang ákung sapátus nga tarungtarung,</i> I have only one pair of shoes that is presentable. <form>{ka-|katárung}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>right</tr>, <tr>justice</tr>. <i>Ang katárung mudaug giyud sa dautan,</i> Right triumphs over wrong. <form>{ka-an|katarúngan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>reason</tr>. <i>Matag búhat dúna giyuy katarúngan,</i> Every action must have a reason. <number>2</number> <tr>justice</tr>. <i>Labánan ang katarúngan,</i> Defend justice. <form>láwas ug {ka-an|katarúngan}</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>láwas</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> give as a reason. <i>Milális giyud siya bisag way ikatarúngan,</i> <pb n=995>He argued even if he had no argument to make. <form>{panga-an|pangatarúngan}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> give an explanation or defense, justify oneself. <i>Pangatarúngan kun hustu ka,</i> Explain yourself when you&apos;re right. <pos>n</pos> argument given in defense, <tr>explanation</tr> for <tr>justification</tr>. <form>{maka-anun|makatarungánun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>reasonable</tr>. <i>Makatarungánun ang íyang hangyù,</i> Her request is reasonable. <number>2</number> <tr>just</tr>, <tr>fair</tr>. <i>Makatarungánun ang Diyus,</i> God is just. <form>{ma-|matárung}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>righteous</tr>. <i>Wà siyay diyus, apan matárung siya,</i> He knows no God, but he is righteous. <form>{mina-(&rarr;)|minatarung}</form> <pos>a</pos> in a righteous way.

<p id=18527><form>tarúngan</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>crested</tr>, having a circular growth of flesh or feathers on the crown or head. <i>Ang tarúngan nga manuk dúnay balhíbu nga mag-ulbu sa úlu,</i> A crested chicken has a puff of feathers forming a circle on the top of its head.

<p id=18528><form>tarúrut</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> paper, leaf rolled into a <tr>cone</tr>. <i>Usa ka tarúrut mani,</i> Peanuts in a piece of paper rolled into a cone. <number>2</number> k.o. <tr>squid</tr> characterized by its long tapering tail. <number>3</number> any musical instrument or noisemaker blown with the mouth. <number>3a</number> <tr>drumbeater</tr>, <tr>publicity man</tr>. <i>Gisangyaw dáyun sa mga tarúrut sa mayur nga siya ang nakapasimintu sa dálan Kulun,</i> The mayor&apos;s publicity men immediately broadcast that he was responsible for cementing Colon St. <number>4</number> <tr>cuckold</tr>. <pos>a</pos> short and stout. <i>Tarúrut tan-áwun ang mubù nga mutambuk,</i> A short person looks like a cone when he grows stout. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> roll s.t. into a cone. <i>Nagtarúrut si Tátay arun ipúli sa íyang nawálang hunsuy,</i> Father rolled a leaf into a cone to smoke with when he lost his pipe. <number>2</number> play a <tr>wind instrument</tr>. <number>3</number> for a wife to make a fool of her husband by taking up with other men. <i>Gitarúrut siya sa íyang asáwa,</i> His wife made him a cuckold.

<p id=18529><form>tarúti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>trot</tr>, a gait of a horse in which the legs are lifted in alternating diagonal pairs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>trot</tr>. <i>Maáyu mutarúti ning kabayúa, dì kaáyu lihuk,</i> This horse trots well. It does not bounce so much.

<p id=18530><form>tarútut</form> <xr>= <sc>tarúrut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18531><form>tarútuy</form> <xr>= <sc>turútuy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18532><form>táruy</form> <xr>= <sc>tagduy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18533><form>tása, tásà</form> <pos>n</pos> cup. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> use a cup. <i>Tasáa lang ang sabaw kun way yahung,</i> Use cups if there are no soup bowls.

<p id=18534><form>tasadur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>assessor</tr>, a person who sets valuation on property for taxation purposes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be, become an assessor.

<p id=18535><form>tasal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> set a date or time to do s.t., or for s.t. to happen. <i>Dì ku mutasal anus-a ku mubálik,</i> I won&apos;t set a date as to when I&apos;m coming back. <i>Gitasalan ang masakitun sa kansir ug usa ka búlan,</i> The cancer patient was given a month to live. <i>Lúnis ang gitasal nga adlaw sa kasal,</i> Monday was the day set for the wedding. <pos>n</pos> date fixed for s.t. expected. <form>tasádu</form> <pos>n</pos> a fixed date, term. <i>Way tasádu kun anus-a ang ílang kasal,</i> There&apos;s no date fixed for their wedding. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> give a date, term or period. <i>Mutasádu kag úras kun anus-a ku ikaw hapita,</i> You have to set a fixed time as to when I shall pick you up.

<p id=18536><form>tasar</form> <xr>= <sc>tasal</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18537><form>tasasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>valuation</tr>; <tr>assessment</tr> of s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> <tr>assess</tr>, <tr>value</tr> s.t. at. <i>Gitasasiyunan lag mínus arun dì ku mabuktut sa buluhísan,</i> My property was given a low valuation so I could escape the taxes.

<p id=18538><form>tásik</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the liquid residue of sea water that has been crystalized in salt making. <number>2</number> liquid residue left after milling sugar. <form>haluan {&mdash;|tásik}</form> <pos>n</pos> snakeheads found in salt water.

<p id=18539><form>taslak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); b2]</itype> <tr>loaf</tr>, go about lazily in one&apos;s work. <i>Mutaslak ang mga trabahadur ug way magtan-aw níla,</i> The workers loaf in their work if no one watches them. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|taslakan}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lazy</tr>, fond of loafing. <i>Taslakan kaáyu siya ug náay masúgù,</i> She is very lazy when there&apos;s s.o. to do the household work. <number>2</number> <tr>cowardly</tr>. <i>Taslakan kaáyu nang bayhána, dì makatáhas sa báy nga mau rang usa,</i> That woman is very cowardly. She is afraid to stay in the house alone. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> become a lazybone. <number>2</number> become cowardly. <form>{ka-|kataslak}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fear</tr>, <tr>cowardice</tr>.

<p id=18540><form>taslup</form> (from <ix>salup</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>penetrate</tr>, <tr>sink into</tr>. <i>Mitaslup ang tinggà sa túbig,</i> The sinker sunk into the water. <i>Walà makataslup sa íyang buktun ang dágum sa indiksiyun,</i> The hypodermic needle didn&apos;t penetrate into his arm. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> penetrate deep into s.t.; impart s.t. into the thing penetrated. <i>Mitaslup na ang kaparat sa isdà,</i> The saltiness has penetrated deep into the flesh of the fish. <i>Nakataslup na ang kahumut sa panákut sa kasahusun,</i> The taste of the spices has penetrated deep into the jerked meat. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> for the sun to disappear behind s.t., set.

<p id=18541><form>tasngà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> grin idiotically. <i>Nagtasngà lang siyang gikasab-an,</i> He just grinned stupidly as he was scolded.

<p id=18542><form>taspuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; b6]</itype> <tr>laze</tr>, <tr>loaf</tr>. <i>Nagtaspuk siya sa íyang trabáhu,</i> He is loafing on his job. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|taspukan}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lazy</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become lazy. <form>{ka-|kataspuk}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>laziness</tr>.

<p id=18543><form>tastas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> undo stitches. <i>Tastása ang tahì sa sákung himúung hábul,</i> Undo the stitches of the sacks to make them into a blanket. <pos>a</pos> stitches that came undone.

<pb n=996>

<p id=18544><form>táta</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>father</tr>, address of respect to a father, esp. among Muslims. <number>2</number> address of respect to an old man, esp. a close relative. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> address or call s.o. <i>táta.</i>

<p id=18545><form>tátà</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>tà</bx> <pos>n</pos> a pet name for boys or girls.

<p id=18546><form>tàtà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> <tr>worn out</tr>, damaged due to rough or constant use. <i>Natàtà ang karsúnis ug ginámit,</i> The pants are worn out after long use. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> badly bruised by blows. <i>Tàtáun ku ang simud ánang pisti,</i> I&apos;ll pulverize that s.o.b.&apos;s snout.

<p id=18547><form>tàtà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> empty a container of its contents by turning it upside down and banging it downwards. <i>Nagtàtà ku sa mga síli áring butilya,</i> I&apos;m pushing the chili peppers out of this bottle. <i>Itàtà (tàtáa) ang mga sulud sa sáku,</i> Shake out the contents of the sack. <number>2</number> pour, take out catch from a fish net or fish trap. <number>3</number> empty coconut-palm toddy in a container. <number>3a</number> sell coconut-palm toddy to a permanent customer. <i>Mutàtà kug tubà nímu káda buntag,</i> I&apos;ll sell you fresh coconut-palm toddy every morning. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>lap</tr> at a liquid. <i>Irù ang mitàtà sa litsis bátà,</i> The dog lapped the baby&apos;s milk. <form>{-an|tàtáan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a shed where catch from different bancas are put together for division into shares. <number>2</number> place where palm toddy is kept. <number>3</number> person who sells palm toddy on a regular basis.

<p id=18548><form>tatak</form> (slang) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>label</tr> indicating the make of s.t. <number>2</number> <tr>tattoo</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> attach a certain label. <i>Dílì tinúud mahalun nang íyang sinínà. Gitatakan lang ug Kristiyan Díyur,</i> It&apos;s not really an expensive dress. She just sewed a Christian Dior label into it.

<p id=18549><form>tátang</form> <pos>n</pos> an address of respect given to an old grandfather or great-grandfather; sometimes used to address an old and well-respected leader in a community. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> call s.o. <i>tátang.</i>

<p id=18550><form>tátaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> clearly visible, not covered. <i>Tátaw sa bintánà ang ílang rinubuhay,</i> You could see them necking clearly through the window. <number>2</number> <tr>obvious</tr>. <i>Tátaw kaáyu siyang nag-inartista,</i> She&apos;s obviously faking. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> be clearly seen. <i>Matátaw nímu ang dágat ibabaw sa búkid,</i> You can clearly see the sea from the top of the hill. <number>2</number> be <tr>obvious</tr>. <i>Minuri kay matátaw kaáyung gustu ka níya,</i> Slow down. It&apos;s obvious that you like him.

<p id=18551><form>tatay, tátay</form> <pos>n</pos> term of address to one&apos;s father and sometimes uncle or grandfather. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> call s.o. father. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become a father. <form>{(&rarr;)|tatay}</form> voc. <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>tay</bx>.

<p id=18552><form>tatha</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> cut or lop off branches with a bladed tool. <i>Tatháun ku ning sangáha nga nagdaplay sa alambri,</i> I will cut off the branch that hangs across the electric wires.

<p id=18553><form>táting</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tatting</tr>, <tr>knotted lace</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>shuttle</tr> for making tatting. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make tatting.

<p id=18554><form>tatsa</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; b4(1)]</itype> <tr>mark</tr> or <tr>blemish</tr> on an otherwise smooth surface. <i>Wà giyud makatatsa ang buksidur sa íyang kuntra,</i> The boxer was not able to make a single mark on his opponent. <i>Natatsahan ang íyang puting barung,</i> His white barong has a <tr>spot</tr> on it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2N; b5c]</itype> <tr>criticize</tr>; <tr>find fault</tr> with s.t. <i>Kusug siyang mutatsa (manatsa) sa búhat sa uban,</i> He is fond of criticizing others&apos; work. <pos>n</pos> <tr>mark</tr>, <tr>blemish</tr>. <i>Way tatsa ang íyang pagkababáyi,</i> Her womanhood is unblemished. <form>{-dur|tatsadur}</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of criticizing or despising. <form>{-dúra|tatsadúra}</form> <xr>= <sc>tatsadur</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=18555><form>tats&acaron;r</form> <xr>= <sc>tatsa</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18556><form>tatsing</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> touch the net in volleyball. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the violation of touching. <number>2</number> one who commits the violation. <i>Tatsing ka. Ákung sirbi,</i> You touched the net. My serve.

<p id=18557><form>tatsu</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. rounded, shallow brass or clay <tr>pan</tr> having two handles, used primarily in making sweets. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> use a <ix>tatsu</ix>.

<p id=18558><form>tatu, tatù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> mark with a <tr>tattoo</tr>. <i>Tatuhan tag kurus ímung buktun,</i> Let&apos;s tattoo a cross on your arm. <pos>n</pos> tattoo marks.

<p id=18559><form>tátut</form> <xr>= <sc>bí</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p id=18560><form>tatuwa</form> <xr>= <sc>lunaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18561><form>táub</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>high tide</tr>. <i>Táub (taub) kaáyu ang dágat run,</i> The tide is high now. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B45; b4]</itype> be high tide. <i>Láwum ang pantalan kun mutáub,</i> The harbor is deep when it&apos;s high tide. <pos>n</pos> <tr>tide</tr>. <i>Ang táub gaagad lang sa búlan,</i> The tide depends on the moon. <form>{-un|taúbun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sea at high tide. <i>Misíbug na ang taúbun,</i> The tide is going out now. <number>2</number> <tr>high tide</tr>. <i>Abtun giyud nang sináug nga barútu kay milíhuk na ang taúbun,</i> When the high tide rushes in it will surely reach the boat that has been beached.

<p id=18562><form>táud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put s.t. up or on by fastening, attaching, or inserting. <i>Pagtáud ug muskitíru,</i> <tr>Put up</tr> a mosquito net. <i>Itáud ang singsing,</i> Put the ring on. <number>2</number> <itype>[C2; c3]</itype> have <tr>sexual intercourse</tr>. <i>Nagtáud sigúru sila kay nahílum,</i> They must be having intercourse because they&apos;re silent. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make a plow. <pos>n</pos> <tr>plow</tr>. <i>Bargas karun ang ákung táud,</i> I use a Vargas plow now. <form>{(&rarr;)|taud}</form> <pos>n</pos> a trimming of lace attached to a garment as a frill.

<p id=18563><form>taudtaud</form> <number>1</number> <tr>after a while</tr>. <i>Mihigdà ku, unyà taudtaud nakatúlug,</i> I lay down, and after a while fell asleep. <number>2</number> be for some time. <i>Taudtaud ka nang wà mubisíta nákù,</i> It&apos;s been some time since you visited me. <number>3</number> [do] <tr>every now and then</tr>. <i>Taudtaud lag pangíhì ning táwung gibus-aw,</i> This man with a bladder <pb n=997>ailment keeps having <tr>frequent</tr> urination. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B246; b]</itype> done some time ago. <i>Mutaudtaud na karung wà kung kakità ug sini,</i> It&apos;s been some time now since I&apos;ve last seen a movie. <i>Pataudtauri (taudtauri) nà sa káyu únà haúna,</i> Let it stay over the fire for several minutes before you take it off. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> do s.t. every now and then. <number>3</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> taking a rather long time. <i>Mataudtauran pa dagway úsà siya muulì,</i> It will probably be some time before he comes home.

<p id=18564><form>táuk</form> <xr>= <sc>taláuk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18565><form>taun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> set a trap or fishline in place. <number>2</number> offer a part of the body to receive blows or abuse. <i>Gitaun sa irù ang íyang líug arun kahiktan,</i> The dog offered its neck to let us tie it. <number>3</number> place s.t. as a bet. <i>Ayaw itaun ang buakung húlin,</i> Don&apos;t put broken marbles down as your bet. <pos>n</pos> bet put together with others in a game.

<p id=18566><form>taunduk</form> <xr>= <sc>tausduk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18567><form>táup</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; P]</itype> pierce deep. <i>Mitáup ang udiyung sa íyang dughan,</i> The arrow pierced deep into his breast. <number>2</number> <itype>[B125]</itype> for the sound of s.t. one cannot see to fade away. <i>Natáup ang tíngug sa nagkalayung ayruplánu,</i> The sound of the airplane faded as it got further and further away. <form>{pa&N;-|panáup}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>sink</tr>, disappear below the level of. <i>Nanáup ang barku sa pagkalúnud niíni. Bisan pálu wà makítà,</i> The ship was completely hidden when it sank. Even the mast could not be seen on the surface of the water. <i>Nanáup ang bátà sa daghang táwu,</i> The child disappeared in the midst of the crowd. <number>2</number> for a score to be at the lowest, or at the bottom. <i>Sa lima ka tím, íla rang iskur ang nanáup,</i> Of the five teams, their score was the lowest.

<p id=18568><form>tausduk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4; c1]</itype> be piled or heaped high. <i>Nagtausduk ang labhanan sa palanggána,</i> The laundry is <tr>piled high</tr> in the basin. <i>Ayawg tausdúka (itausduk) ang kan-un sa plátu,</i> Do not <tr>heap</tr> the food on the plate.

<!-- TODO: odd type: [A2S; b3C5] -->

<p id=18569><form>tawa</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>jovial</tr> of face or visage. <i>Ang táwu nga tawa (matawa) ug panagway,</i> A person of joyful mien. <form>{ma-|matawa}</form> <xr>= <sc>tawa</sc>.</xr> <form>{ka-(&larr;)|katáwa}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b3C5]</itype> <tr>laugh</tr>. <i>Nagkatawa sila sa múut kaáyung sini,</i> They were laughing at the funny picture. <i>Gikataw-an ang bukidnun,</i> They laughed at the bumpkin. <i>Dílì ikakatáwa kanang hitabúa,</i> That incident cannot be laughed off. <pos>n</pos> <tr>laughter</tr>. <form>{hika-|hikatawa}/{haka-|hakatawa}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> laugh despite oneself. <i>Nahikatawa ku pagkadalin-as níya,</i> I couldn&apos;t help laughing when he slipped. <form>kataw-anay, kinataw-anay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C3]</itype> smile at each other. <form>{hinga-|hingatawa}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>gay</tr>, easily aroused to laughter. <form>kataw-anan</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>funny</tr>. <form>kalataw-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>laughing stock</tr>. <form>kinataw-an</form> <pos>n</pos> manner of laughing. <form>kataw-unun</form> <pos>a</pos> feel like bursting into laughter. <form>mataw-ánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>laughingly</tr>, <tr>jokingly</tr>. <i>Mataw-ánung pangutána,</i> A joking question.

<p id=18570><form>tawà</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fishing with a drift line for moderately deep seas. A swivel is attached between the leader and the line which is in turn attached to a bamboo float having a coconut frond stuck into it as a marker.

<p id=18571><form>tawag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> <tr>call</tr>, <tr>call on</tr>. <i>Tawga siya kay mangáun na,</i> Call him. Lunch is ready. <i>Pagtuun básig hitawgan kang mám,</i> Study because the teacher might call on you. <number>1a</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> consider one as s.t. <i>Daw ikaúlaw níya nga tawgun silang magsúun si Dúris,</i> Apparently she was ashamed to be called Doris&apos; sister. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; a1c]</itype> call s.o. s.t. <i>Tawga lang kug Suping,</i> Just call me Sofing. <i>Bahálà nag unsay ímung itawag nákù,</i> I don&apos;t care what you call me. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>call up</tr>. <i>Tawga (tawgi) ku inig-abut nímu,</i> Call me up when you arrive. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> way one calls s.t. <i>Unsay tawag nímu nang táwung hambugun?</i> What name do you give to a braggart? <number>2</number> action of calling out. <form>{(&larr;)|táwag}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>call out</tr> the marriage bans. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>tawag</sc>, <i>3.</i></xr> <pos>n</pos> the call of marriage bans in church. <form>{pa&N;-|panawag}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <number>1</number> for a dead person to call the relatives to follow him shortly after his death. In folk belief, if a corpse fails to stiffen, it is a sign that he is calling for his relatives to follow him, and it must be warded off with a <ix>sumpà</ix>. <i>Ang minatay nga húmuk mu rag búhì, magpanawag sa mga kaparintíhan,</i> A corpse that is soft as if it were alive is calling his relatives to follow him in death. <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;|panawag} ug nánay, tátay, ginikánan</formx> call out in great distress or pain (lit. say &lsquo;<ix>Máma!</ix>&rsquo;). <i>Nagpanawag ug nánay ang gisirulan,</i> The man had stomach cramps and yelled &lsquo;Mama!&rsquo; in pain. <form>talawgun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> frequently called on for services. <i>Talawgun kaáyu nang duktúra,</i> That doctor is very <tr>busy</tr>. <number>2</number> requiring repeated calls to make him come. <i>Talawgun nang batáa. Dì muanhi ug dì sigíhag tawag,</i> That child needs to be called a lot. He doesn&apos;t come unless you keep calling him. <form>{-l-un(&larr;)|talawágun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>errand boy</tr> or girl. <form>{pa&N;-an(&larr;)|panawágan}</form> <pos>n</pos> place where one makes a call, esp. for an assembly. <form>{pala-|palatawag}, {pala-(&larr;)|palatáwag}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. that calls. <i>Ang bagting sa kampána mauy palatáwag sa mga manuk níla,</i> The ringing of the bell gathers their chickens. <pos>a</pos> fond of calling on others. <form>panawagtawag</form> <xr>= <sc>pamutingting</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>butingting</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18572><form>tawak</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. black fungus <tr>beetle</tr> that infests mung beans and stored cereals. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a4]</itype> <pb n=998>be infested with this sort of beetle. <form>{-un|tawakun}</form> <pos>a</pos> beetle-infested beans or cereals.

<p id=18573><form>tawal</form> <pos>n</pos> treatment in folk medicine consisting of betel nut spit on the afflicted area and a magical prayer. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> treat with <ix>tawal</ix>. <i>Gitawalan ang íyang pinaakan sa hálas,</i> His snakebite was treated with betel nut spittle.

<p id=18574><form>tawas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>alum</tr>.

<p id=18575><form>tawatawa</form> <xr>= <sc>mangágaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18576><form>tawgi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mung bean sprouts</tr>, used as vegetable. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a2b6]</itype> cook with or make into bean sprouts.

<p id=18577><form>tawhay</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>orderly</tr>, <tr>well-arranged</tr>. <i>Tawhay ang mga butang sa lamísa,</i> The things on the table are well-arranged. <number>2</number> <tr>relaxed</tr>, with the mind free from trouble or worries. <number>2a</number> face looking fresh and relaxed, free from worry or pain. <number>3</number> work that is light and easy to do. <i>Tawhay kaáyu ang trabáhu kay íhap lang,</i> The work is very light because it&apos;s just counting things. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> be, become <tr>orderly</tr>, <tr>well-arranged</tr>. <number>2</number> be <tr>peaceful</tr> and free from trouble or worries. <i>Mitawhay ang íyang buut pagkatápus sa mga bátà sa ílang kursu,</i> He felt relaxed and relieved after his children had finished their courses. <i>Tawháya (itawhay) ang mga trabahadur,</i> Calm the laborers down. <number>2a</number> for the face to look fresh and relaxed. <i>Mitawhay (natawhay) ang náwung sa bag-ung nanganak,</i> The face of the woman that had just delivered her baby looked relieved and relaxed. <number>3</number> <tr>become light</tr>. <i>Mutawhay ang trabáhu ug hingpit ta sa kasangkápan,</i> The work becomes easy if one has all the tools one needs.

<p id=18578><form>tawid</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>cross</tr>; go over to the other side. <i>Nagtawid na sa taytáyan ang trák,</i> The truck is crossing the bridge now. <i>Kining barkúha dì makatawid ug dagkung lawud,</i> This boat cannot cross large seas. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>leave</tr>, <tr>go away</tr> from a place. <i>Mitawid ang mga tulisan pag-abut sa písi,</i> The robbers vanished when the P.C. arrived. <pos>n</pos> <tr>opposite side</tr>, place across.

<p id=18579><form>táwid</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>meadow</tr>, uncultivated <tr>grassland</tr> for pasturing. <i>Adtu nákù itugway ang mga báka sa táwid,</i> I&apos;ll pasture the cows in the meadow. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become a meadow. <i>Natáwid ang ámung yútà nga wà kultibaha,</i> The piece of land that wasn&apos;t tilled turned into a meadow.

<p id=18580><form>tawiltawil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> <tr>dangle</tr> to and fro. <i>Lagmit sakmitun nang ímung kayril nga nagtawiltawil sa ímung bulsa,</i> S.o. is likely to grab the watch chain that is dangling from your pocket.

<p id=18581><form>tawngun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>thorny vine</tr> of thickets, similar to the bougainvillea but sharper, with small leaves in three lobes and small white flowers.

<p id=18582><form>tawsì</form> <pos>n</pos> small, brown k.o. <tr>sunbird</tr>, similar to <ix>tamsi</ix>, white in front with a brown spot.

<p id=18583><form>Tawsug</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the Muslims of Jolo. <number>2</number> their language.

<p id=18584><form>tawsyu</form> <xr>= <sc>tahusyu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18585><form>táwu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>man</tr>, <tr>person</tr>. <number>1a</number> <tr>man</tr>, <tr>fellow</tr>. <i>Naunsa mag táwu! Nanghawuk man!</i> What&apos;s gotten into the man! Kissing me like that. <i>Kanà gung tawhána,</i> That guy ... <number>2</number> <tr>follower</tr>. <i>Táwu nà siyang Markus,</i> He is one of Marcos&apos; men. <number>3</number> <tr>face card</tr>. <i>Nindut íyang baráha kay púlus táwu,</i> He has good cards, all face cards. <number>4</number> s.o. left to watch the house. <i>Kinsay táwu run sa balay,</i> Who&apos;s left to watch the house? <number>5</number> <tr>visitor</tr>. <i>Dì ku makalakaw kay náay táwu sa ámù,</i> I can&apos;t leave the house because we have visitors. <number>6</number> <ix>in phrases:</ix> <form>anak sa {&mdash;|táwu}</form> the son of man (Biblical). <form>{-ng|Táwung} Matúud</form> Jesus Christ. <form>dakung {&mdash;|táwu}</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>dakù</sc>.</xr> <form>tawhána</form> particular man. <i>Kanang tawhána,</i> That man. <i>Kinsang tawhána?</i> Which man? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> stay and watch the house. <i>Taw-i ang báy samtang manábù ku,</i> Watch the house while I go marketing. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256; b8]</itype> be <tr>born</tr>. <i>Natáwu siya sa pasungan,</i> He was born in a manger. <i>Unsang pitsáha íyang natawhan?</i> On what date was he born? <i>Yútang natawhan,</i> <tr>Native land</tr>. <number>3</number> <itype>[AN]</itype> prepare for guests on special occasions. <i>Manáwu sila unyà sa pista sa ílang baryu,</i> They will prepare for visitors when it is the feast day in their village. <number>4</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>attend</tr> an affair or special occasion. <i>Mutáwu ta sa kasal níla,</i> We will attend their wedding. <i>Nagtáwu sila sa mísa sa kaadláwun,</i> They are attending the early morning mass. <number>5</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> <tr>pay a visit</tr>. <i>Gitáwu níla ang mga prísu,</i> They <tr>visited</tr> the prisoners. <form>{pa-|patáwu}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <number>1</number> have s.o. stay in a house. <number>2</number> give rise to a feeling. <i>Mupatáwu sa talagsaung kadásig,</i> Gives rise to an unusual enthusiasm. <form>{paka-|pakatáwu}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; a]</itype> come, bring into the world. <i>Ngánung gipakatáwu pa aku?</i> Why was I brought into this world? <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> take the form of man, pretend to be man. <i>Magpakatáwu ang ingkantu kun mangulitáwu,</i> The enchanted beings take the form of man when they go after women. <form>{hi-|hitáwu}/{ha-|hatáwu}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be left in a house to watch it. <i>Siya na lay nahitáwu sa balay,</i> She was the only one left in the house to watch it. <form>tawutáwu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>figurehead</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1B12; c16]</itype> make s.o. a figurehead, become a figurehead. <form>taw-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> not unoccupied. <i>Taw-an nang payága kay dúnay sugà,</i> That hut is not unoccupied because there&apos;s <pb n=999>light. <number>2</number> inhabited by supernatural beings. <i>Magdiwáta sila sa káhuyng taw-an,</i> They&apos;ll offer offerings to the tree that is inhabited by spirits. <form>tawhánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>characteristic</tr> of humans, <tr>earthly</tr>. <i>Gibyáan sa mungha ang mga tawhánung tingúhà,</i> The nun put away earthly desires. <i>Masayup kita tungud kay tawhánun,</i> We commit mistakes because we are human. <form>makitawhánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>humanistic</tr>, <tr>humanitarian</tr>. <i>Makitawhánun siya, dílì manaugdáug sa láin,</i> He is humanitarian. He does not oppress other people. <form>{-in-|tináwu}</form> <pos>a</pos> done in a human way. <i>Ang ímung gibúhat dì na tináwu, linuug na,</i> What you did was no longer human but beastly. <pos>n</pos> paid by individuals, not by the whole vehicle, service, etc. <i>Tináwu ang báyad sa dyíp, dì pakyaw,</i> The amount of fare depends on the number of people. It&apos;s not for the whole car. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> pay for individually, not for a whole. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> do s.t. <tr>manually</tr>, use bare manpower on as compared to the use of machines. <i>Kun tinawhun (itináwu) nà pagbúhat madúgay giyud,</i> If you do it <tr>by hand</tr> it will take time. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> <tr>give a banquet</tr>. <i>Dì ka ba magtináwu rung pyista?</i> Aren&apos;t you going to prepare a banquet this coming feast? <form>katawhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>people</tr>, <tr>masses</tr>.<i> Kabus ang átung mga katawhan,</i> Our people are poor. <form>{pagka-|pagkatáwu}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>character</tr>, <tr>personality</tr>. <i>Kasalígan siyang pagkatáwu,</i> He has a trustworthy character. <number>2</number> <tr>birth</tr>. <form>{kina-|kinatáwu}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>nature</tr>, <tr>inborn</tr> character or <tr>inherent</tr> tendencies of a person. <i>Kinatáwu nà níla nga mga dagkù sila kaáyu,</i> It runs in their family that they grow to be large people. <number>2</number> <tr>genitalia</tr> (euphemism). <form>tawutáwu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. like a person, e.g. <tr>scarecrow</tr> or the like. <number>2</number> pupil and iris of the eye. <form>tinawutáwu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>comic strips</tr>. <i>Unáhun kug bása ang tinawutáwung sugilánun,</i> I&apos;ll read the comic strips first. <form>{uli-|ulitáwu}</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ulitáwu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18586><form>tawu-</form> <ix>for forms with</ix> tawu- <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>talu-</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18587><form>tawugtawug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> for s.t. long and thin that is standing with the base firmly attached to wave back and forth. <i>Antína sa awtu nga magtawugtawug inighúnung sa awtu,</i> An automobile antenna that waves back and forth when the car stops.

<p id=18588><form>tawun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>move</tr> to a place to take shelter or refuge. <i>Nakatawun na mi sa simbahan pagbahà,</i> We moved to the church when there was a flood. <number>2</number> move to another place. <i>Nakatawun na sila sa Mindanaw,</i> They have already moved to Mindanao. <form>tawuntáwun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>transfer</tr>, go over from place to place. <i>Nagtawuntáwun lang ang mga manaygúnay sa kabalayan,</i> The carolers caroled from house to house. <i>Gitawuntawúnan (gitawuntáwun) sa bátà ug paráyig ang íyang máma ug pápa,</i> The child went back and forth between his mother and father asking for affection.

<p id=18589><form>táwun</form> <ix>short for</ix> <xr><sc>intáwun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18590><form>tayà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> place a bet. <i>Adtu ku tayà sa hárì,</i> I&apos;ll bet on heads. <i>Ayawg itayà ang tibuuk puhúnan,</i> Don&apos;t stake all the money you have. <number>2</number> stake one&apos;s life, honor. <i>Nagtayà ang sundálu sa íyang kinabúhì álang sa násud,</i> The soldier puts his life on the line for his country. <i>Ákung itayà ákung dungug paglában sa sinumbung,</i> I&apos;ll stake my name to defend the accused. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> pay for the others in a treat (slang). <i>Akuy magtayà sa átung inúmun,</i> I&apos;ll pay for the drinks. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> bet. <number>2</number> treat, turn to pay (slang).

<p id=18591><form>tayà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rust</tr>. <form>way {&mdash;|tayà} ang bulsa</form> be broke (slang). <i>Wà giyud bisag tayà ákung bursa,</i> My pocket doesn&apos;t have a thing (lit. not even rust [from money]). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> become rusty. <i>Tay-an ang gamitung dì lanahan,</i> Tools get rusty if you don&apos;t oil them. <number>2</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> be rusty from lack of practice. <i>Natay-an na ku sa pagtukar kay dúgay na kung wà kahikap,</i> I&apos;ve gotten rusty because I haven&apos;t picked my instrument up in ages. <form>{-un|tayáun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>rusty</tr>.

<p id=18592><form>tayáda</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23; b6]</itype> engage in the action of doing s.t., make the motions of doing s.t. <i>Wà pa gánì mubagting ag kampána mitayáda dáyun ang usang buksidur,</i> The bell had not even rung when one of the boxers started swinging his fist. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> put on a big show, make ostentatious motions of doing s.t. <i>Mitayáda dáyun siya sa íyang nakat-unan nga tanggu,</i> He immediately set out to show off the tango steps he had learned. <pos>n</pos> act of making motions, esp. ostentatiously. <i>Púrus lang tayáda, way natúman,</i> They just put on, but accomplish nothing.

<p id=18593><form>tayakan</form> <pos>n</pos> a makeshift stall in a marketplace.

<p id=18594><form>tayam, táyam</form> <pos>a</pos> a little bit sweet or salty. <i>Ang atábay nga duul sa dágat tayam ug túbig,</i> The water of a well near the sea is a bit salty. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> have a faint taste of sweetness or saltiness, make s.t. so. <i>Wà na tay kámay maung ígù lang mitayam ang kapi,</i> We&apos;re out of sugar. That&apos;s why the coffee is just slightly sweetened. <i>Ígù rang mitayam (gitayam) ang asin sa íyang pagkáun,</i> He used just enough salt to make his dinner slightly salty.

<p id=18595><form>taydal wib</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tidal wave</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a4]</itype> have a tidal wave, be affected by a tidal wave.

<p id=18596><form>taygir</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>urkid</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18597><form>tayhad</form> <pos>a</pos> having an erect posture with the abdomen thrust out. <i>Tayhad kaáyu siya nga <pb n=1000>nagtindug,</i> He is standing tall and straight. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1</number> stand erect. <number>2</number> stand around doing nothing when s.t. should be done. <i>Nagtayhad ka man lang dihà nga daghan mang buluhatun,</i> You are just standing around when there is so much to do!

<p id=18598><form>tayhup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> blow through a tube to build a fire. <i>Magtayhup ku sa háling,</i> I will blow on the fire I&apos;m building. <number>2</number> treat sickness by blowing on the crown, nape of the neck or the spot that ails. <i>Tayhúpi ra ring pinaakag h&amacracu;s,</i> Would you treat this snake bite by blowing on it? <pos>n</pos> tube through which one blows to build a fire.

<p id=18599><form>tayid</form> <pos>n</pos> detergent (from the brand name <ix>Tide</ix>).

<p id=18600><form>tayils</form> <pos>n</pos> tile. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make s.t. tile. <i>Gitayils níya ang sawug sa banyu,</i> He made the bathroom floor a tile floor.

<p id=18601><form>tayim</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> time, o&apos;clock. <i>Unsay ímung tayim,</i> What time do you have? <number>2</number> time at which s.t. is scheduled to begin or end. <i>Daliag human kay hápit na ang tayim,</i> Finish it quickly because it&apos;s almost time. <number>3</number> time, chance. <i>Wà kuy tayim pagrilaks,</i> I don&apos;t have time to relax. <form>{&mdash;|tayim} pa</form> <number>1</number> time out, let me have some more time. <i>Tayim pa. Wà pa kung katágù,</i> Time out. I haven&apos;t hidden yet. <number>2</number> just a minute. <i>Tayim pa kay tawgun ku siya,</i> Just a minute. I&apos;ll call her. <number>3</number> just a second, I&apos;ll be right back. <i>Tayim pa. Ákung kuháun,</i> Just a second. I&apos;ll get it. <number>4</number> excuse me, let me interrupt or change the subject. <i>Tayim pa ra gud, kinsa tu?</i> Excuse me. Who did you say it was? <number>5</number> excuse me (correcting oneself). <i>Muabut sa Lúnis. Tayim pa diay, sa Martis,</i> He is arriving on Monday, I mean, on Tuesday. <form>{&mdash;|tayim} awut</form> <xr>= <sc>tayimpa</sc>, <i><number>1</number>.</i></xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> ascertain the time, rate. <i>Taymi kung magtayip,</i> Time me typewriting. <number>2</number> <itype>[B256]</itype> be time to start or end. <i>Buhíi ang klási kay hápit na mutayim (matayim),</i> Dismiss the class because it&apos;s almost time. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> say &lsquo;time out&rsquo;, &lsquo;wait a second&rsquo;. <i>Sa ríng dì ka makatayim ug kupúgan ka na sa kuntra,</i> In the ring you can&apos;t ask for time-out when your opponent mauls you.

<p id=18602><form>tayim-áwut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> call for <tr>time-out</tr>. <i>Itayim-áwut sà kay manginum ta,</i> Call time-out so we can get a drink. <pos>n</pos> time-out.

<p id=18603><form>tayimkípir</form> <pos>n</pos> timekeeper at work, in a game. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be the timekeeper.

<p id=18604><form>táyip</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>typewrite</tr>. <i>Taypa inyung tirmpípar,</i> Type your term papers. <form>{-in-|tináyip}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. typed.

<p id=18605><form>tayiprayting</form> <pos>n</pos> typewriting paper.

<p id=18606><form>tayipraytir</form> <pos>n</pos> typewriter.

<p id=18607><form>taylan</form> <xr>= <sc>bígà<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=18608><form>tayming</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>timing</tr>, the way s.t. is made to coincide with s.t. else. <number>2</number> timing in music, rate of beating. <number>2a</number> tempo. <i>Rumba ang tayming íni, dì tanggu,</i> This is a rumba beat, not tango. <number>2b</number> sense of rhythm. <i>Maáyug tayming nang batáa sa íyang pagkanta,</i> That boy sings with very good timing. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> well, opportunely timed. <i>Tayming kaáyu ang ámung pag-abut sa íla kay nagbinignit sila,</i> We timed our arrival perfectly because they were serving <ix>binignit.</ix> <number>2</number> in time, rhythmical. <i>Tayming kaáyu ang istíping sa íyang sáyaw sa ákung kanta,</i> His dance steps are in time with my song. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2NC3; b2c1]</itype> synchronize, do s.t. so as to make it correspond with s.t. else. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b2]</itype> happen on, get a chance to. <i>Nakatayming siyag baylig gwápa,</i> He happened to dance with a pretty girl. <form>{pa&N;-|panayming}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> take a chance on. <i>Panayming lag ansir. Siliksiyun tayip bítaw,</i> Take a chance on your answer. Anyway it&apos;s a multiple-choice exam.

<p id=18609><form>taypist</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>typist</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a typist.

<p id=18610><form>taytay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>mountain range</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>bridge</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> make a bridge. <i>Ákung gitaytáyan ug kawáyan ang ámung labnganan,</i> I made a bamboo bridge for us to cross on. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> start weaving a hat or a mat, weaving the fundamental portion (the crown in the hat) from which the rest is continued. <form>{pa&N;-|panaytay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> travel along the mountain ridge. <i>Manaytay ta arun makítà ang luyug luyu sa búkid,</i> Let&apos;s travel along the ridge so we can see both sides of the mountain. <form>{-an|taytáyan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bridge</tr>. <number>2</number> means by which s.t. is attained.

<p id=18611><form>taytul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> title. <number>2</number> title, championship. <number>3</number> law title. <form>{&mdash;|taytul} payit</form> <pos>n</pos> title fight in boxing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give a title to. <i>Unsay maáyung itaytul ning baláka,</i> What would be a good title for this poem?

<p id=18612><form>tayúbung</form> <pos>n</pos> starch made from cassava. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a2]</itype> make into starch. <i>Ilain ang dyábang tayubúngun,</i> Set aside the cassava to be made into starch.

<p id=18613><form>tay-ug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB6; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> shake s.t. large and tall, be shaken. <i>Natay-ug (mitay-ug) íyang láwas sa pag-inubu,</i> Her body shook with coughing. <i>Tay-úga ang káhuy arun mangataktak ang búnga,</i> Shake the tree so the fruits will fall off. <number>2</number> shake, affect the emotions with intensity. <i>Ang túmang kalísang ang mitayug kaníya,</i> Great fear shook him. <form>{pa-|patay-ug}</form> <xr>= <sc>paúyug</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>úyug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18614><form>táyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> row. <i>Kining tayúna sa lubi tag-un arun kapadak-an ang karsáda,</i> This row of coconut trees will be cut down so the road can be widened. <number>2</number> length or span of s.t. <i>Nagkinahanglan pa ta ug usa ka táyun nga <pb n=1001>túbu,</i> We still need a length of water pipe. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> put or arrange several things in rows. <i>Tayúna pagpamutang ang mga misitíra,</i> Put the flower pots in rows.

<p id=18615><form>tayúpì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> cheat, defraud. <i>Gitayúpì ta sa matadíru pinaági sa timbangang dílì hustu,</i> The butcher cheated us with inaccurate scales. <pos>a</pos> cheat, defrauder. <i>Ayaw pagsálig níya kay tayúpì kaáyu nà,</i> Don&apos;t trust him because he is a cheat.

<p id=18616><form>tayùtù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>talùtù</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>tagùtù<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>tagùtù<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=18617><form>TB</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tíbi<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=18618><form>ti</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> letter <i>t.</i> <number>2</number> the seventh note in a musical scale. <form>{&mdash;|ti} minur</form> B minor. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>tidyúwin</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18619><form>tì</form> short for <xr><sc>itì</sc> (vocative).</xr>

<p id=18620><form>tiad</form> <pos>a</pos> with the back arched. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> bend one&apos;s body backwards. <i>Dì ku makatiad kay musakit ang piang sa bukubuku,</i> I cannot bend backwards because it will hurt the sprain in my back.

<p id=18621><form>tiágak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> <number>1</number> for chickens to make the sound of being disturbed. <i>Mitiágak ang sunuy kay ímung gisámuk,</i> The rooster squawked because you bothered it. <number>2</number> yell, esp. when about to be punished. <i>Mitiágak siya dáyun dihang gihanaan ku siyag latigu,</i> He shrieked when I got set to whip him. <pos>n</pos> the action of squawking.

<p id=18622><form>tiamtíam</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; a]</itype> move one&apos;s mouth slightly in mumbling, chewing, smacking to get the taste. <i>Dúna siyay gihínuk pagkáun kay nagtiamtiam siya,</i> She&apos;s eating s.t. secretly because her mouth is moving. <i>Tiamtiáma úsà ang tubà usà ka mupalit,</i> Taste the coconut toddy first before you buy it.

<p id=18623><form>tiámu</form> <ix>short for</ix> tíaw mu. <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tíaw</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr>

<p id=18624><form>tiaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. goatfish.

<p id=18625><form>tíaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> tease, play a joke on. <i>Ayawg túu kay gitiáwan ka lang níya,</i> Don&apos;t believe him. He&apos;s just teasing you. <number>1a</number> for supernatural beings to cast a spell on s.o. <i>Gimínù siya kay gitiáwan sa ingkantu;</i> He couldn&apos;t find his way because a spirit cast a spell on him. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> joke, prank. <form>dílì {&mdash;|tíaw}</form> no small thing. <i>Dì tíaw nga búhat,</i> No small job. <i>Dì tíaw ang ákung kakurat,</i> I was really frightened. <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;|tíaw} (ba)y, nga; &mdash; mu (ba)y, nga</formx> just imagine! <i>Tíaw bay limay íyang kabit,</i> Just imagine, he has five mistresses. <i>Tíaw mu nang diyut mi mabuku,</i> Imagine, we were almost exposed. <number>2a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|tíaw} mu ugud nga, y</formx> can you beat that, [so-and-so] happened despite everything. <i>Tíaw mu guy nakapasar ug bár,</i> Imagine, he passed the bar despite everything. <number>2b</number> <formx>{&mdash;|tíaw} mu kanà</formx> I warned you, now see what happened. <i>Tíaw mu nà ug mipatúu ka pa,</i> I told you so. If you had only listened. <form>{(&rarr;)|tiaw}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a4]</itype> be punished by the soul of a departed relative for engaging in merry-making activities too soon after the person&apos;s death. The victim usually behaves odd but only temporarily. <number>2</number> <itype>[A123P]</itype> cause to grow gray hairs early. <i>Makatiaw kunu nang magkanta sa abúhan samtang naglung-ag,</i> You will get grey hair before your time if you sing while standing before the stove and cooking. <form>tiawtíaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> be <tr>joking</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>toy with</tr> an opponent in a contest.<i> Gitiawtiáwan lang sa kampiyun ang tsalindyir,</i> The champion just toyed with the challenger. <form>{-l-an|tiliáwan}</form> <pos>n</pos> one who is the usual object of ridicule. <i>Ang bungì gibúhat lang tiliáwan sa iskuylahan,</i> The harelip was made the butt of ridicule in school. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be, become the object of ridicule. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|tiawan}, {pala-|palatíaw}, {ma-un|matiawun}</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of making jokes.

<p id=18626><form>tiáyun</form> (from <ix>ayun</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C3; a12]</itype> be <tr>married</tr> to each other. <i>Gustu giyud sa ílang mga ginikánan nga tiayúnun ang ílang isig ka anak,</i> It was the parents&apos; wish that their children be married to each other. <form>{mag-|magtiáyun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>married couple</tr>. <i>Way anak ang magtiáyun,</i> The couple is childless. <form>{panag-|panagtiáyun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>marriage</tr>, the state of being <tr>married</tr>. <i>Sa ámung panagtiáyun wà giyud mi magkaáway,</i> During our marriage we never once quarrelled.

<p id=18627><form>tibà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b8]</itype> for liquid contents to <tr>spill</tr> out from a container. <i>Dì makatibà ang tubà ug butangag sungsung,</i> The palm toddy won&apos;t spill out if s.t. is stuffed in the mouth.

<p id=18628><form>tibadtibad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>talk back</tr> in a grumbling manner. <i>Dílì maáyu sa usa ka anak nga magtibadtibad kun kasab-an,</i> It isn&apos;t good for a child to talk back when scolded. <form>tibadtibaran</form> <pos>a</pos> given to back talk.

<p id=18629><form>tibagnul</form> <pos>a</pos> for root crops and fruits to have hard <tr>lumps</tr> in the flesh. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> having hard lumps in the flesh. <i>Sakit ang nakatibagnul (nakapatibagnul) sa mga búnga sa tsíkus,</i> Blight has caused the sapodillas to get <tr>lumpy</tr>. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|tibagnulun}</form> <pos>a</pos> of a lumpy sort of fruit.

<p id=18630><form>tibagsuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> go out straight without minding anything or anyone. <i>Mitibagsuy lang siya, wà ku hulata,</i> She went straight away without waiting for me.

<p id=18631><form>tíbak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. <tr>rot</tr> causing decay in portions of jackfruit (<ix>nangkà</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a4; b4]</itype> be affected with jackfruit rot. <i>Tibákun ang nangkà ug dì pustun,</i> The fruits of jackfruit will get affected with rot if you don&apos;t wrap them. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26; a4b4]</itype> for a body to be covered with <tr>sores</tr>. <i>Natíbak ang íluk sa pamutu,</i> The armpit is full of skin eruptions. <form>{-un|tibakun}</form> <pos>a</pos> fruits affected with this rot.

<p id=18632><form>tíbak<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tíbin</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=1002>

<p id=18633><form>tibaknul</form> <xr>= <sc>tibagnul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18634><form>tibalas</form> <pos>n</pos> the Schach <tr>shrike</tr>: <bio>Lanius nasutus</bio>.

<p id=18635><form>tíbas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>take the rest</tr> of s.t., <tr>finish</tr> doing the remaining portion. <i>Akuy mitíbas ug pamutul sa mga káhuy sa maisan,</i> I cut the rest of the trees in the cornfield. <i>Kinsay nagtíbas ug palit sa ímung mga mangga?</i> Who bought the rest of your mangoes? <i>Tibása nang kan-un sa ímung plátu,</i> Eat the rest of the food on your plate. <number>2</number> <itype>[B23; b6]</itype> for crops or fruits to be past their season. <i>Hápit na matíbas (mutíbas) ang mga mangga,</i> Mango fruits will soon be <tr>out of season</tr>. <i>Nagkatibas na ang áni sa mga humay,</i> The rice harvest season is starting to be over.

<p id=18636><form>tibás</form> <xr>= <sc>tibalas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18637><form>tíbaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>visit</tr>, usually to see how s.t. is. <i>Aku ray mutíbaw sa ákung nangkà ug nahinug na ba,</i> I&apos;ll take a look at the jackfruit that I kept and see if it&apos;s ripe yet. <i>Tibáwun na sad níya ang íyang tinagúan,</i> He will visit his mistress again. <number>2</number> inspect a trap to see if there is a catch. <i>Way kuhà ang gitíbaw kung lit-ag,</i> The trap I inspected had no catch.

<p id=18638><form>tibáwas</form> (from <ix>báwas</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>tibás</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>finish</tr>, bring to completion. <i>Ang hiniluang indiksiyun mauy nagtibáwas sa nagpinal,</i> The poisoned injection finished off the dying man. <number>3</number> go all the way to marriage. <i>Tibawása (ipatibáwas) na lang sila. Tutal, nag-ípun na man,</i> Marry them off. Anyway they are living together. <form>impas {&mdash;|tibáwas}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <tr>be destroyed</tr>, done away with with <tr>irrevocable</tr> finality. <i>Nabuak ang katapúsan. Naimpas tibáwas na ang huygu,</i> The last of them broke. Now the set is completely gone.

<p id=18639><form>tibhang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b7]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>remove</tr> a portion of a whole. <number>1a</number> <tr>cut off</tr> a piece to make s.t. <i>Ákung tibhángan ang pára sa bàbà sa sag-ub,</i> I will <tr>chip off</tr> a piece of the end of the bamboo to serve as a mouth. <number>2</number> <tr>lessen</tr>, <tr>diminish</tr>. <i>Way makatibhang sa ákung pagbátì nímu,</i> Nothing can make me love you less. <i>Matibhang ákung trabáhu kun mutábang ka,</i> My work will be less if you help me. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>deduction from</tr>, <tr>lack</tr>. <i>Gihátag níya ang swildu ngadtu sa íyang asáwa nga way tibhang,</i> He handed his salary intact to his wife. <number>2</number> space left after s.t. was removed. <i>Ang tibhang sa yútà nga giagian sa karsáda mga siyin mitrus kwadrádu,</i> About 100 square meters were taken off the land for the road. <form>tibhangtibhang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>chop</tr> the outer part of a tree trunk to leave open marks.

<p id=18640><form>tibhung</form> <xr>= <sc>tib-ug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18641><form>tíbi<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>TV</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> <tr>watch TV</tr>.

<p id=18642><form>tíbi<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> TB. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a4]</itype> become, <tr>get TB</tr>. <i>Makatíbi nang subrang kahágù,</i> Overwork causes <tr>TB</tr>. <i>Matíbi ang ubung pinasagdan,</i> A cough may turn into TB if you let it go. <i>Gitíbi siya,</i> He got TB. <form>tibihun, tibíhun</form> <pos>n</pos> one with TB.

<p id=18643><form>tíbi<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for <ix>Tinípung Bansa</ix> (U.S.).

<p id=18644><form>tíbì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; c1]</itype> screw up the lips as if about to cry. <i>Muhílak nà run siya kay mitíbì na,</i> She is going to cry because she&apos;s screwing up her lips. <pos>n</pos> action of screwing up the lips. <form>{pa-|patíbì}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> tease a baby until it cries. <i>Ang mupatíbì sa bátà mau say mupahílum,</i> Whoever teases the baby is going to have to quiet him down.

<p id=18645><form>tíbin</form> <pos>n</pos> twenty pesos or twenty centavos (slang). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> secure twenty pesos or twenty centavos. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> be, become twenty pesos or twenty centavos. <i>Hápit mutíbin (matíbin) ang íyang daug,</i> His winnings come to nearly twenty pesos.

<p id=18646><form>tíbis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> pour <tr>water</tr> on s.t. to <tr>rinse</tr> it off or sprinkle it. <i>Túa siya sa gardin nagtíbis sa mga tanum,</i> He is in the garden watering the plants. <i>Bi, tibísan nátù ug túbig arun makapanghinaw ka,</i> Here, let&apos;s pour water on your hands so you can wash them. <number>2</number> pour liquid into a container. <i>Aku lay mutíbis sa tubà arun dì mayabu,</i> I&apos;ll pour the palm toddy into your glass so that it won&apos;t spill over.

<p id=18647><form>tibíwis</form> <xr>= <sc>tabílis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18648><form>tibtìb</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>chip off</tr>, cut off small pieces with repeated strokes. <i>Akuy mutibtib sa butung arun makainum tag sabaw,</i> I&apos;ll chip off the top of the young coconut so we can drink the water. <i>Tibtíbi ang kawáyan sa buku arun mahámis,</i> <tr>Chop off</tr> the nodes from the bamboo pole to make it smooth.

<p id=18649><form>tibu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible, dark-grey spindle shell, between one and two inches long, found in shallow bays.

<p id=18650><form>tibù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a2]</itype> do s.t. in large quantity rather than little at a time, be in a large quantity. <i>Natibù ang labhunun kay nasakit ku,</i> My laundry piled up because I was sick. <i>Kusgan giyud ang makatibù ínig hákut,</i> Whoever can carry all of this at once must be strong. <i>Tib-ag báyad ang útang. Ayawg datadatáhi,</i> Pay the debts all at once, not bit by bit. <form>{(&larr;)|tíbù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; c1]</itype> <tr>group</tr> or <tr>join</tr> together. <i>Nagtíbù sa usa ka dápit ang mga bantúgang mamumulung,</i> All the best orators grouped in one place. <i>Dílì makatíbù ang mga kabus ánang kapunungána,</i> The poor cannot join that organization. <form>tinib-anay, tinib-ánay</form> <pos>a</pos> putting everything one has into it at once. <i>Tinib-anay tung ílang panamílit,</i> They poured all of their emotions into their <pb n=1003>farewell.

<p id=18651><form>tibuagsà</form> (from <ix>buagsà</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B246; b3]</itype> move rapidly in various directions, be <tr>dispersed</tr>. <i>Mitibuagsà ang punduk nga giitsáhag libintadur,</i> The group scattered in all directions when firecrackers were thrown in their midst. <i>Nagtibuagsà ang mga anak sa dihang nangaílu,</i> The children were scattered when they got orphaned.

<p id=18652><form>tibuagya</form> (from <ix>buagya</ix>) <xr>= <sc>tibuagsà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18653><form>tibud</form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>clay jar</tr>.

<p id=18654><form>tib-ug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>add</tr> a liquid to another liquid, usually to adulterate or dilute. <i>Akuy mitib-ug ug túbìg sa payn-ápul dyús arun madaghan,</i> I added water to the pineapple juice to make it go a long way.

<p id=18655><form>tibugsuk</form> (from <ix>bugsuk</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; a3b6]</itype> <tr>dive</tr> or <tr>fall headlong</tr>. <i>Mitibugsuk ang tikaruy ngadtu sa dágat arun pagdágit sa isdà,</i> The kingfisher dove into the water to snatch fish. <i>Natibugsuk siya sa íyang pagkah&umacracu;g sa hagdan,</i> She fell headlong down the stairs.

<p id=18656><form>tibug-uk</form> (from <ix>buuk</ix>) <pos>a</pos> beads of <tr>sweat</tr> or drops of <tr>tears</tr> formed s.w. <i>Tibug-uk nga mga lúhà,</i> Drops of tears. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46N; b6]</itype> for beads of sweat to form or tears to well up. <i>Mitibug-uk (nanibug-uk) ákung singut dihang gikasab-an kung Tátay,</i> I got beads of sweat on my forehead when Father scolded me. <i>Hápit na mutúlù ang nagtibug-uk níyang lúhà,</i> The tears that welled up in her eyes are about to come streaming down.

<p id=18657><form>tibugul</form> (from <ix>bugul</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>lump</tr>. <i>Tumur nang tibugul sa ímung súsu,</i> The lump in your breast is a tumor. <i>Gilábay ku siyag tibugul nga yútà,</i> I threw a <tr>clod</tr> of earth at him. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be formed into lumps. <i>Natibugul ang litsi kay dì maáyung pagkakútaw,</i> The milk came out all lumpy because it was not well mixed.

<p id=18658><form>tibug-ul</form> <xr>= <sc>tibugul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18659><form>tibugun</form> (from <ix>bugun</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>lump</tr>, <tr>cyst</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)]</itype> be formed into lumps or cysts. <i>Mitibugun ang ági sa ákung indiksiyun,</i> My injection formed a lump. <i>Nagtibugun ang brásu sa buksiyadur,</i> The muscles of the boxer are <tr>hard</tr> and <tr>firm</tr>. <i>Dì makatibugun ang pawdir milk ug ayúhun pagkútaw,</i> Powdered milk does not form lumps if you stir it well.

<p id=18660><form>tibukul</form> (from <ix>bukul</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>lump</tr>, a mass of indefinite or irregular shape. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> be, <tr>become lumpy</tr>, form into a lump. <i>Mitibukul ang harína nga ákung gikas-a paglúnud,</i> The flour formed lumps because I poured it into the liquid all at once. <i>Tibukula ang kan-un nga ímung ihátag sa bátà,</i> Form the food into a lump before you give it to the baby.

<p id=18661><form>tibuk-ul</form> <xr>= <sc>tibugul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18662><form>tibul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> pour liquid into a vessel with a narrow opening. <i>Daghang úsik kun ikay mutibul sa lamparilya,</i> You waste so much when you pour kerosene into the lamp. <number>2</number> pour a liquid over another liquid. <i>Tibuli ug gás ang kanal arun mamatay ang wayawaya,</i> Pour kerosene over the ditch so that the wrigglers will die. <number>3</number> have <tr>intercourse</tr> (humorous). <i>Magbagulbul ang asáwa ug dílì katiblan káda gabíi,</i> The wife complains if she doesn&apos;t have bit of sex every night. <form>{-anan(&larr;)|tibulánan}, tiblanan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> pouring vent or hole. <number>2</number> s.t. which needs to have liquids poured into it. <i>Ayaw sag dagkuti nang sugáa kay tibulánan (tiblanan) pa nà,</i> Don&apos;t light that lamp yet because it has not been filled with kerosene.

<p id=18663><form>tíbul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> have a hostess sit at one&apos;s table in a night club. <i>Ug kwartáhan siya magtíbul siya ug duha ka hustis,</i> If he is in the money he has two entertainers sit at his table. <pos>n</pos> <ix>in phrases:</ix> <formx>{madyung|madyung tíbul}, pingpung {&mdash;|tíbul}</formx> mahjong, <tr>pingpong table</tr>. <formx>multiplikisyun {&mdash;|tíbul}</formx> <tr>multiplication table</tr>. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>lung tíbul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18664><form>tib-ul</form> <xr>= <sc>tibul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18665><form>tibuláag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC3]</itype> go in various directions. <i>Mitibuláag ang mga táwu pagkadungug sa butu,</i> The crowd ran to all directions upon hearing the gunshot. <i>Nagkatibuláag ang mga Hudíyu human mabíhag,</i> The Jews were <tr>scattered</tr> after their captivity.

<p id=18666><form>tibùtibù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>mumble</tr> words unintelligibly. <i>Musúkul ang anak nga magtibùtibù ug kasab-an,</i> It is a sign of defiance if your own child mumbles under his breath when he is scolded. <i>Nagtibùtibù ang íyang bàbà sa pangadyì,</i> Her mouth mumbled as she prayed.

<p id=18667><form>tibuuk</form> (from <ix>buuk</ix>) <number>1</number> <tr>whole</tr>, <tr>all</tr> of s.t. <i>Gidúngug sa tibuuk lungsud ang ílang pagtában,</i> The whole town knew about their eloping. <i>Simbáhun ku ikaw sa tibuuk kung kasingkásing,</i> I&apos;ll adore you with all my heart. <number>2</number> whole, <tr>unfragmented</tr>. <i>Sinsiyúi ring tibuuk písu,</i> Change this whole peso bill. <i>Palita nang tibuuk, ayaw nang píkas,</i> Buy the whole piece, not just a half. <number>2a</number> <tr>whole grain</tr>, not ground. <i>Unsa man nang maísa, tibuuk u ginaling?</i> What kind of corn is that, whole grain or ground? <number>3</number> <tr>solid tires</tr>, not pneumatic. <i>Sa karáang mga trák ang gúma sa ligid tibuuk,</i> The old trucks had solid rubber wheels. <pos>a</pos> resonant in timbre of voice. <i>Máayu siyang mukanta kay tibuuk kaáyu siya ug tíngug,</i> He sings well because he has a very resonant voice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make whole, in one piece. <i>Tibuk-a ning dyigsu pásul,</i> Put the jigsaw puzzle together. <i>Wà <pb n=1004>siya katibuk-ig báyad,</i> He hasn&apos;t been paid <tr>in full</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|tibuuk} ang hunàhúnà, hukum</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be resolved, decided. <i>Natibuuk ang ákung hunàhúnà nga magmadri (Natibuuk sa ákung hunàhúnà ang pagmadri),</i> I have decided to become a nun. <form>kinatibuk-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> absolutely <tr>undivided</tr> <tr>whole</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>aggregate</tr>, <tr>total</tr> <tr>sum</tr>.

<p id=18668><form>tibwáag</form> <xr>= <sc>tibuláag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18669><form>tibwagsà</form> <xr>= <sc>tibuagsà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18670><form>tibway</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>complete</tr> s.t. unfinished. <i>Kinsay mutibway sa gibyáan nímung daruhun?</i> Who&apos;ll <tr>finish</tr> plowing the rest of the field? <number>1a</number> buy the remaining portion of s.t. <i>Tibwáya ring nahibilin kay ákung baratúhun,</i> Buy all that&apos;s left, and I&apos;ll let you have it cheap. <number>2</number> put to an <tr>end</tr>. <i>Kining hilu mauy mutibway ning kinabúhì,</i> This poison will <tr>end</tr> my life. <form>{&mdash;|tibway} ug</form> <tr>should have</tr> [done], would <tr>rather</tr> [do] than what is the case now. <i>Tibwayg mikúyug tu, malingaw untà ku,</i> I should have gone with them. I would have had a good time. <i>Tibwayg mamatay kay sa mag-antus,</i> I&apos;d rather die than suffer the way I am. <form>tibwanay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2]</itype> put an end to each other. <i>Ug wà ulánga magtibwanay ang duha,</i> If they had not been separated, they would have killed each other.

<p id=18671><form>tidisin</form> <xr>= <sc>disinti</sc> (slang).</xr>

<p id=18672><form>tídit</form> <xr>= <sc>títit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18673><form>tidiyum, tidíyum</form> <pos>n</pos> Te Deum, a religious service of thanksgiving.

<p id=18674><form>tidlum</form> (from <ix>lalum</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AP; cP]</itype> dive under water, <tr>sink</tr>. <i>Mitidlum ang angkla,</i> The anchor sank. <i>Mitidlum (mipatidlum) ang mamamánà sa lawum,</i> The diver dove into the deep. <i>Itidlum (ipatidlum) ang submarínu kay dúnay kaáway,</i> <tr>Submerge</tr> the submarine because there&apos;s an enemy. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for the sun to set. <number>3</number> <itype>[A]</itype> sink into the mind or feelings (literary). <i>Ang sirmun wà makatidlum sa íyang pagbátì,</i> The message of the sermon did not sink into his feelings. <form>{hi-|hitidlum}/{ha-|hatidlum}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> sink involuntarily. <i>Nahílum si Lúlu, nahitidlum,</i> Grandfather sank into silence.

<p id=18675><form>tidlung</form> <xr>= <sc>tidlum</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18676><form>tidlup</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AP; cP]</itype> <tr>dive sharply</tr>. <i>Mitidlup pagkalit ang tabánug sa yútà,</i> The kite suddenly <tr>nose-dived</tr> to the ground. <i>Mipatidlup (mitidlup) ang langgam,</i> The bird dove sharply downwards. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for the sun to set.

<p id=18677><form>tidyúwin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>T-joint</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> join things in a T-joint.

<p id=18678><form>tig-</form> prefix added to most verbs which refer to an action to form nouns which mean one who usually does [so-and-so]. <i>Siyay tiglampasu sa ámù,</i> He is the one who usually scrubs the floor in our house. <i>Irung tigkaun sa mga subra,</i> Dog that eats the leftovers.

<p id=18679><form>tig(&larr;)</form> prefix, short form for <ix>nakig-</ix> and <ix>makig-</ix>.

<p id=18680><form>tig-a</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>hard</tr>, not soft. <i>Tig-a daw puthaw,</i> Hard as steel. <i>Tig-a giyug balatían ang dì malúuy kaníya,</i> You have to be <tr>heartless</tr> not to pity her. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B24; b6]</itype> become hard, not soft. <i>Mitig-a ang karning gibulad,</i> The meat which was dried under the sun got <tr>hardened</tr>. <form>{ma-|matig-a}</form> <pos>a</pos> very <tr>hard</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be hard. <i>Nagmatig-ang kasingkásing,</i> A hard heart. <form>patig-atig-a</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> pretend to be unyielding. <i>Nagpatig-atig-a siya kay magpalúgit,</i> She pretended to be unyielding to give him a hard time.

<p id=18681><form>tigáan</form> <xr>= <sc>tagáan</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>*tágà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18682><form>tig-ab</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> make a jerky <tr>gasp for breath</tr>. <i>Namatay lag diritsu, wà gánì makatig-ab,</i> He was not even able to gasp for breath because he died suddenly. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>dug-ab</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18683><form>tigalbung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> fall hard, usually with a sound. <i>Kinsa tung mitigalbung (natigalbung) sa katri gabíi?</i> Who fell from the bed last night? <number>2</number> fail in an exam. <i>Unsang iksamína ímung gikatigalbúngan?</i> What test did you fail? <pos>n</pos> sound of s.o. falling with a thud.

<p id=18684><form>tigáman</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>remember</tr>, keep s.t. in one&apos;s mind thinking about it. <i>Nagtigáman kug singsing nga ákung palitun inigswildu,</i> I had my eye on a ring which I wanted to buy on payday. <i>Nakatigáman ka kung unsang adláwa ang kasal ni Bíbi?</i> Can you <tr>recall</tr> the date of Baby&apos;s marriage? <i>Tigamni ang ákung pahimangnu nímu,</i> Always <tr>bear in mind</tr> the precautions I gave you. <pos>n</pos> sign to help recall s.t. <i>Dúna kuy tigáman nga gikúlit sa mga káhuy arun dì ta maw&amacrcir; sa lasang,</i> I carved some signs on the trees so we won&apos;t get lost in the jungle.

<p id=18685><form>tigas</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tough</tr>, <tr>fearless</tr>. <i>Tigas nà siya, dì madág hulgà,</i> He&apos;s tough and cannot be threatened. <number>2</number> exceptionally good in s.t. <i>Tigas kaáyu nà siya mubaskitbul,</i> He&apos;s very good in playing basketball. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> become tough or a <tr>toughie</tr>. <i>Matigas ba ang baklà?</i> Can a sissy become a <tr>tough guy</tr>? <number>2</number> be exceptionally good in s.t. <i>Ang kaáyu níyang mulantúgì mauy nakatigas (nakapatigas) níyang abugádu,</i> His skill in debate made him a very good lawyer. <form>{paka-|pakatigas}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> act like a tough, treat like a tough. <i>Ang tigas magpakatigas,</i> A toughie will act like one. <form>patigastígas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> pretend to be tough. <i>Nagpatigastígas uruy ang báyut,</i> There goes the sissy pretending to be tough.

<p id=18686><form>tigasub, tigásub</form> <xr>= <sc>tikasub</sc></xr>, <xr><sc>tikásub</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=1005>

<p id=18687><form>tígaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>disturb</tr>, break up the quiet, serenity, or stillness of. <i>Ang butu mauy mitígaw sa kamíngaw sa kagabhíun,</i> The explosion disturbed the stillness of the night. <i>Ayawg tigáwa ang duut sa isdà,</i> Don&apos;t disturb the school of fish. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.o. considered responsible for misfortune, trouble. <i>Siyay tígaw adtung pagkakisas sa plánu,</i> He&apos;s the one responsible that the plan misfired. <number>2</number> <formx>dala sa {&mdash;|tígaw}</formx> bring misfortune.

<p id=18688><form>tígaw<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>áwuy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18689><form>tigayun</form> (from <ix>gayun</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B123(1)6]</itype> have <tr>good fortune</tr>, become <tr>prosperous</tr>. <i>Matigayun ang táwu nga kugihan,</i> A diligent man will <tr>prosper</tr>. <form>{pa-(&larr;)|patigáyun}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> put up a business. <i>Magpatigáyun tag puthaw,</i> We will put up a scrap iron business. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> manage to do s.t. on one&apos;s own without assistance. <i>Nagpatigáyun ang bátà ug hímù ug duwáan,</i> The child is making a toy on his own. <pos>n</pos> <tr>business</tr>, <tr>commerce</tr>. <i>Muuswag ang patigáyun kun maáyung pagkadala,</i> A business well-managed prospers. <form>{magpapa-|magpapatigayun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>businessman</tr>. <form>{ka-an(&larr;)|katigayúnan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>holdings</tr>, <tr>properties</tr>.

<p id=18690><form>tigbábaw</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>babaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18691><form>tigbak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> kill instantly on the spot. <i>Maay rag tigbákun nang manúka áning taría,</i> I hope this cock is killed instantly in this fight. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> <tr>die</tr> (coarse). <i>Maáyu rang natigbak ang animal,</i> Served that beast right that he died. <form>{-ay(&rarr;)|tigbakay}</form> <pos>n</pos> unlicensed cockfight. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> hold an illegal cockfight. <i>Magtigbakay sa buwangan kun mahiphípan ang pulis,</i> We&apos;ll hold an illegal cockfight if the police can be bribed. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12C; c3]</itype> have illicit sexual intercourse (humorous metaphorical). <i>Nakatigbakay giyud ang duha kagabíi,</i> The two managed to have illicit intercourse last night.

<p id=18692><form>tigbas</form> <xr>= <sc>tikbas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18693><form>tigbáyun</form> <xr>= <sc>tigbaláyun</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>balay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18694><form>*tigbung</form> <form>{-in-|tinigbung}</form> <xr>= <sc>tinikbung</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>*tikbung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18695><form>tighayà</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>hayà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18696><form>tighik</form> <pos>a</pos> very <tr>skinny</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> become skinny. <i>Nagkatighik siya kay gitíbi,</i> He&apos;s getting <tr>emaciated</tr> from <xr><sc>tb</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18697><form>tighud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B134]</itype> for the tide to begin to <tr>ebb</tr>. <i>Sulug kaáyu ang bukána sa subà ug mutighud ang dágat,</i> The current at the mouth of the river is strong when the tide ebbs.

<p id=18698><form>tighulug</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>húlug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18699><form>tigi</form> <pos>n</pos> a small <tr>anchovy</tr> of shallow waters, <measure reg="10&ndash;13 cm">4&ndash;5&Prime;</measure>, darkish brown in color on the dorsal part of the body and silvery sides: <bio>Thrissocles spp</bio>. and <bio>Scutengraulis spp</bio>. <form>tigihun</form> <xr>= <sc>tigi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18700><form>tígì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; a1c3]</itype> pit persons against each other to determine who is the best in s.t. <i>Ang prinsísay mutígì sa buut mangasáwa níya,</i> The princess will have the people that want to marry her vie with each other. <i>Magtígì (magtigiay) ta kun kinsay taas ug utung,</i> Let&apos;s have a contest to see who can hold his breath longest. <i>Palaínum sad tung gikatígì nákug ínum,</i> The one I had a drinking bout with was also a drunkard. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> diagnose an illness by a marble placed at the edge of a glass. A yes-no question is put by the sorcerer, and if the marble falls, the answer is &lsquo;no&rsquo;. <i>Tigíun nátù ang sakit,</i> We will divine the sickness. <pos>n</pos> <tr>contest</tr> between two people or teams. <form>{-ay(&rarr;)|tigiay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> <tr>vie</tr> with one another. <pos>n</pos> <tr>contest</tr>. <form>{panag-|panagtígì}</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>vying</tr> with one another. <i>Ang kulilísi panagtígì sa mga birsu,</i> The <ix>kulilísi</ix> is a contest in making verses.

<p id=18701><form>tigib</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chisel</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>chisel</tr>. <i>Tigiba (tigba) kun magtábas kag sín,</i> Use a chisel when you cut iron sheets. <form>{-in-|tinigib}</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. toy <tr>top</tr> with a chisel-shaped nail point.

<p id=18702><form>tigidig</form> word used in imitation of the sound made by a galloping horse. <form>{&mdash;|tigidig} bangbáng</form> <pos>n</pos> a western movie. <i>Ang salída run sa Uryinti tigidig bangbáng,</i> A western is playing in the Oriente.

<p id=18703><form>tig-ik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> make a high-pitched, suppressed cry. <i>Nakatig-ik ku dihang natumban ákung kalyu,</i> I let out a short cry when s.o. stepped on my corn. <pos>n</pos> a high-pitched suppressed cry.

<p id=18704><form>tígis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> pour liquid into a drinking receptacle. <i>Nakatígis ka na bag ímung ilimnun?</i> Have you poured some drinks for yourself?

<p id=18705><form>tigistígis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do a little or a part at a time. <i>Bísag mutigistígis ka lag báyad arun maimpas sa kadugáyan,</i> Just pay me <tr>little by little</tr>. Eventually your debt will be paid off. <i>Tigistigísa (itigistígis) ninyu paggáwì ang papil,</i> Use paper <tr>sparingly</tr>.

<p id=18706><form>tigkul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> turn deaf ears to an order or to pleadings. <i>Mitigkul lang si Huwan nga gipakabù ug túbig,</i> Juan just turned deaf ears when he was told to fetch water. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> be, become <tr>stubborn</tr>. <i>Mutigkul hinúun siyag buyagun,</i> He&apos;ll become more stubborn if he&apos;ll be reprimanded. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>stubborn</tr>, unwilling to do as told. <number>2</number> turning a deaf ear to pleadings. <i>Tigkul siya sa nangamátay,</i> He is the stingiest of the stingy.

<p id=18707><form>tigkung</form> <pos>a</pos> stooped and thin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become stooped and thin. <i>Nagkatigkung siya sa íyang sakit,</i> She&apos;s wasting away with her sickness.

<p id=18708><form>tig-l-</form> alternant prefix to <ix>tig-r-</ix>, but of more limited distribution.

<pb n=1006>

<p id=18709><form>tigma</form> <xr>= <sc>tingba</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tingub</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr>

<p id=18710><form>tigman</form> (from <ix>tígum</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> do several things together at one time. <i>Mutigman ku nímu ug báyad sa ákung mga útang sa Lúnis,</i> I will pay you all my debts on Monday. <i>Tigmanun ku ug dala ang mga hiraminta arun wà nay balíkun,</i> I will bring all the tools together at once so I won&apos;t have to go back for anything.

<p id=18711><form>tigmaya</form> <xr>= <sc>tagbaya<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=18712><form>tigmì</form> <xr>= <sc>tignì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18713><form>tigmù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give a riddle. <i>Tag-ána ning ákung itigmù,</i> Guess the answer of the riddle I&apos;m going to give. <pos>n</pos> <tr>riddle</tr>.

<p id=18714><form>tignì</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>filthy</tr>. <i>Tignì kaáyu ang ílang kasilyas,</i> Their toilet is very filthy. <number>2</number> for floors or the ground to be wet. <number>3</number> <tr>chilly</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> be, become <tr>filthy</tr>. <i>Nagkatignì ang lagúna kay síging gibalibayan ug sagbut,</i> The meadow is becoming filthy because they always throw trash there. <number>2</number> become <tr>damp</tr> or <tr>moist</tr>. <i>Mutignì ang tugkaran kun mag-ulan,</i> The yard will become <tr>wet</tr> when it rains. <number>3</number> become <tr>chilly</tr>. <i>Ang hángin sa búkid mauy nakatignì (nakapatignì) sa gabíi,</i> The mountain breeze made the night chilly.

<p id=18715><form>tigpud</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> food that has been cooked crisp and brittle. <i>Tigpud pagkaprítu ang isdà,</i> The fish has been fried until it is crisp and brittle. <number>2</number> for teeth or other things with sharp points to be broken off. <i>Talhi ring tigpud nga lápis,</i> Sharpen the pencil because it is broken. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> <number>1</number> get cooked <tr>brittle</tr>. <i>Mutigpud (matigpud) ug bálik ang sitsarun ug inítun pag-usab,</i> The pork rinds will get brittle if you reheat them. <number>2</number> be, become weak and easily broken, chip off easily. <i>Ang karmilítus makatigpud (makapatigpud) sa ngípun,</i> Candy ruins your teeth. <i>Nagkatigpud ang ákung bag-ang,</i> My molar is chipping off.

<p id=18716><form>tig-r-</form> alternant prefix to <ix>tig-</ix> but added only to some verbs which take <ix>tig-</ix>.

<p id=18717><form>tigri</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tiger</tr>. <form>{-in-|tinigri}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>striped</tr>.

<p id=18718><form>tigritigri</form> <xr>= <sc>ispáda diúru</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ispáda</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18719><form>tigsik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B246; b4]</itype> grow gray hairs. <i>Mutigsik ang úban kun matigúwang na ang táwu,</i> A man gets grey hair when he grows old. <form>{-an|tigsikan}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>grey-haired</tr>. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>tagsikan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18720><form>tigsù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> game of tag played by two teams in which the object is to reach the base without getting tagged. Team A sends out a player to try to reach the base and team B sends out a player to catch him. Then team B sends out a player to reach the base and team A sends out s.o. to catch him, and so forth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> play this game.

<p id=18721><form>tigsù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. <tr>bird</tr> that looks like a chick and lives near rivers and wet places so that it is always wet.

<p id=18722><form>tigsuk</form> <xr>= <sc>tisuk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18723><form>tigsun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>firm-fleshed</tr>. <i>Tigsun nga ságing,</i> Firm-fleshed bananas. <i>Tigsun ug buktun,</i> Firm arms. <number>2</number> for soil to be dry and hard. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> become firm of flesh.

<p id=18724><form>tígul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> dried young leaf of a nipa or buri palm filled with tobacco, used as a cigarette. <number>2</number> anything made of dried buri leaves. <i>Tígul nga banig,</i> Mat made of buri leaves.

<p id=18725><form>tigúlang</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>gúlang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18726><form>tígum</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; a2]</itype> <tr>assemble</tr>, <tr>gather</tr>. <i>Nagkatígum ang mga tabian sa barbiruhan,</i> The gossipers are assembled in the barber shop. <i>Tigúma ang mga iskuyla,</i> Have the pupils assemble. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3S; a2]</itype> <tr>save up</tr>. <i>Nakatigum (nakatígum) kug diyútay sa ákung paglangyaw,</i> I have saved a little from my work abroad. <i>Tigúma ang mga basíyu kay átung ibaligyà,</i> <tr>Save</tr> the empty bottles so we can sell them. <pos>n</pos> <tr>meeting</tr>, <tr>conference</tr>. <form>{(&rarr;)|tigum}</form> <pos>n</pos> stored coconut palm toddy that has had fresh toddy added continually for several days. <form>{-in-|tinígum}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>savings</tr>. <form>tigumtígum</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>social gatherings</tr>. <form>{ka-an|katiguman}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>meetings</tr>.

<p id=18727><form>tigway</form> <xr>= <sc>tugway</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18728><form>tihad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> <tr>stand erect</tr>, and straight. <i>Dì makatihad ang taas nga táwu kay ubus ang kisami,</i> A tall fellow cannot <tr>stand straight</tr> because the ceiling is low. <pos>a</pos> vertically erect, straight. <i>Tihad ang mga sundálu,</i> Soldiers are erect.

<p id=18729><form>tihap</form> <pos>n</pos> interest payable in kind (usually farm products) for money borrowed. The interest is paid continuously until the principal in cash is repaid. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> pay interest in kind for money borrowed. <i>Mutihap kug tulu ka bákid sa ímung dus syintus písus,</i> I&apos;ll pay three sacks of palay as interest on your two hundred pesos.

<p id=18730><form>tihaw</form> <pos>a</pos> unnatural smile given to cover up a feeling of embarrassment. <i>Tihaw kaáyu siya ug pinahiyuman kay sad-an siya,</i> He is smiling with discomfiture because he is guilty. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; a12]</itype> get a funny expression on the face in embarrassment. <i>Natihaw ang íyang nawung dihang nahibaw-an nga siya ang nangawkaw sa sápì,</i> He got a strange expression on his face when it was discovered that he was the one who stole the money.

<p id=18731><form>tihaytíhay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c16]</itype> straighten or stretch one&apos;s back. <i>Magtihaytíhay pud ta sa átung likud human sa dúgayng pagsinúlat,</i> You should stretch your back after writing for a long time.

<p id=18732><form>tihib</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> make a hole in s.t. round by <pb n=1007>chopping off part of the surface. <i>Tihibi (tibhi) ring lubing kuháag sabaw,</i> Punch a hole in this coconut to get the water.

<p id=18733><form>tihik</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>cheapskate</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become <tr>tightfisted</tr>. <i>Matihik ka kun síging kwinta sa gastu,</i> You&apos;ll become tightfisted if you keep counting expenses. <i>Tihikan ku níya kay dì mutíp,</i> I consider him a cheapskate because he doesn&apos;t give a tip. <form>tihiktíhik</form> <pos>a</pos> done on a <tr>niggardly</tr> scale. <i>Kasal nga way tihiktíhik,</i> A wedding with no expenses spared. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. in a niggardly way. <number>2</number> <formx>dílì, walà, ayaw tihiktíhik</formx> do s.t. <tr>extravagantly</tr>, <tr>without restraint</tr> (slang). <i>Dì ka man magtihiktíhik mangasábà,</i> You scold without restraint. <i>Ayaw siyag tihiktihíka paghaluk,</i> Kiss her without restraint.

<p id=18734><form>tihíras</form> <pos>n</pos> canvas <tr>cot</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a cot.

<p id=18735><form>tihìtihì</form> <pos>n</pos> edible meat of the sea urchin (<ix>saluwákì</ix>).

<p id=18736><form>tihul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a2]</itype> <tr>whistle</tr>. <i>Tihula kunu ang túnu ánang kantáha,</i> Whistle the tune of that song. <i>Tihuli ang irù arun mudúul,</i> Whistle at the dog to make it come near. <pos>n</pos> <tr>whistling</tr>.

<p id=18737><form>tiid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> <tr>observe</tr>, observe in secret. <i>Nakatiid ka bag katingad-an gabíi?</i> Did you observe anything strange last night? <form>{pa&N;-(&larr;)|paníid}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>observe</tr>, observe in secret. <i>Ayawg sábà kay dúnay naníid nátù,</i> Be quiet. S.o. is <tr>watching</tr> us. <i>Panid-ig muus-us bag íyang hilánat,</i> Observe him and see if his fever goes down. <pos>n</pos> opinion based on observations. <i>Sa ímung paníid mudaug kahang Libiral?</i> As far as you have observed it, is the Liberal Party going to win? <form>{tigpa&N;-(&larr;)|tigpaníid}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.o. who makes observations as a profession or task. <form>{ma&N;-r-|mananiid}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>spy</tr>. <form>mapaniírun</form> <pos>a</pos> critically <tr>observant</tr>.

<p id=18738><form>tiil</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>foot</tr>. <i>Sakit ang ákung mga tiil,</i> My <tr>feet</tr> hurt. <i>Lima ka tiil ang gitas-un,</i> Five feet tall. <number>2</number> <tr>leg</tr>. <number>3</number> leg of a table or other furniture. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> hit in the leg or foot. <i>Tiila lang siyag pusil kun muikyas,</i> Shoot him in the leg if he escapes. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put legs on furniture. <form>{pa&N;-|paniil}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> fight with the legs. <i>Nakabunù ang ugis kay maáyung maniil,</i> The white cock won because it fought well with its legs. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>legwork</tr>, as in a cockfight. <number>2</number> a short length of rope tied to an animal&apos;s foot and in turn attached to the tether rope to prevent it from kinking. <form>{-in-|tiniil}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> go <tr>barefoot</tr>. <i>Magtiniil ku kun magsakag lubi,</i> I climb a coconut tree barefoot. <number>2</number> do with the hands (humorous). <i>Nagtiniil mig káun,</i> We ate with our hands. <form>{-an|tiilan}</form> <pos>n</pos> place at the foot: foot of mountain, bed, etc.

<p id=18739><form>tíing</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC2; b1]</itype> pour liquid out for drinking. <i>Nagtíing siyag tubà pára nákù,</i> He poured me a glass of palm toddy. <number>2</number> <itype>[C2; c3]</itype> share joy, pleasure with s.o. <i>Nagtíing sila sa dugus sa gugma,</i> They are sharing the honey of love. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|tiingan}</form> <pos>n</pos> container drinks are poured into.

<p id=18740><form>tiíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> small cup for chocolate. <number>2</number> small <tr>saucer</tr>.

<p id=18741><form>tik<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sound made to get fowl to approach. <number>2</number> graphic representation of sound produced by clicking the fingers.

<p id=18742><form>*tik<sub>2</sub></form> <form>{&mdash;|tik} wan, tu</form> in basketball, take one, take two foul shots. <i>Tik tu basta pawlun ka,</i> You will have two foul shots if you get a foul.

<p id=18743><form>tika</form> contraction for <ix>ta</ix> and <ix>ikaw</ix>. <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ikaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18744><form>tíka</form> <pos>a</pos> for s.t. to be <tr>sticky</tr>. <i>Tíka ra kaáyu ang almirul,</i> The starch is too sticky. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B3; a12]</itype> solidify into s.t. sticky. <i>Dugayng nakatíka ang gilútung kalamay,</i> It took a long time for the coconut candy to become sticky. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for s.t. to become sticky from having come in contact with s.t. sticky. <i>Nagtíka ang íyang buhuk sa pamáda,</i> His hair is sticky with pomade.

<p id=18745><form>tíkà</form> <pos>n</pos> long, drawn-out coughing (as if one is about to vomit). <i>Dì na man nà urdinaryung ubu. Tíkà na man nà,</i> That is no ordinary cough. That is a churchyard cough. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> cough in a hard, drawn out manner, as if vomiting. <form>tikàtíkà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <corr sic=breath>breathe</corr> with difficulty due to suffocation or choking.

<p id=18746><form>tikab</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. full-bodied <ix>tamban</ix> (<tr>sardine</tr>). <form>tikabtikab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for the mouth to open and close in rapid succession in speaking, eating or any other activity. <i>Mutikabtikab ang bàbà sa halu ug makakità ug manuk,</i> The mouth of a monitor lizard moves up and down when he sees a chicken. <i>Mutikabtikab siya kun dúgay kung muulì,</i> She cusses me out good when I come home late.

<p id=18747><form>tíkad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB124; a]</itype> cultivate, develop land, industry, mining. <i>Kamiy mitíkad sa ámung kaugalíngung yútà,</i> We developed our own land. <i>Langyaw ang nagtíkad sa átung kamináhan,</i> Foreigners are developing our mines. <i>Nagkatikad na ang átung industriya,</i> Our industry is gradually developing.

<p id=18748><form>tikalbù</form> <xr>= <sc>tigalbung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18749><form>tikalbung</form> <xr>= <sc>tigalbung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18750><form>tikang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> place a foot on a step, rung, or any foothold. <i>Mitikang siya sa istríbu arun musakay sa kabáyù,</i> He <tr>stepped</tr> on the stirrup to get on the horse. <i>Katulu ra níya tikanga ang hagdanan,</i> He climbed the stairs in three steps. <pos>n</pos> act of <tr>stepping</tr>. <form>{-an(&larr;)|tikángan}, {-anan(&larr;)|tikangánan}, {-l-an(&larr;)|tilikángan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>step</tr>, <tr>stirrup</tr>, place one gets a <tr>foothold</tr>. <form>{-in-an(&larr;)|tinikángan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> first mass <pb n=1008>in a series of nine masses said at dawn for nine days before Christmas. <number>2</number> fine paid an older brother or sister by a younger brother or sister who marries ahead of him.

<p id=18751><form>tikangkang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B36; c1]</itype> lie or lean on one&apos;s back and spread the legs, fall into such a position. <i>Mitikangkang dáyun ang pampam,</i> The prostitute immediately raised her legs and spread them apart. <i>Natikangkang (mitikangkang) siya dihang ákung gibastruk,</i> He fell down with his legs in the air when I hit him.

<p id=18752><form>tikarul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the white-collared <tr>kingfisher</tr>: <bio>Halcyonchloris sp</bio>.

<p id=18753><form>tikaruy</form> <xr>= <sc>tikarul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18754><form>tikas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; ab2]</itype> raise s.t. which covers s.t. else into the air. <i>Natikas ang ámung atup pagbagyu,</i> The roofing was lifted off the house in the storm. <i>Tikasa ang kurtína,</i> Raise the curtain.

<p id=18755><form>tíkas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a2]</itype> <tr>cheat</tr>, <tr>swindle</tr>. <i>Ísug siyang maníkas (mutíkas) sa sugálan,</i> He has got the guts to cheat in gambling. <i>Gitíkas níya ang kwarta sa bangku,</i> He swindled the bank&apos;s money. <pos>n</pos> <tr>fraud</tr>. <i>Ang tíkas nga nahímung isyu nasyunal,</i> The fraud that made the national headlines. <form>{-in-an|tinikasan}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. gotten by swindling. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|tikasan}, {-íru|tikasíru}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cheat</tr>. <form>{-íra|tikasíra}</form> <xr>= <sc>tikasiru</sc> (female).</xr> <form>{ma&N;-r-(&rarr;)|maninikas}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>swindler</tr>. <form>{pa&N;-|paníkas}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>graft</tr>, rampant <tr>fraud</tr>.

<p id=18756><form>tikasub, tikásub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> fall into the water with a big splash. <i>Mitikásub ang táwung nahúlug sa pantalan,</i> The man fell from the wharf with a big splash. <pos>n</pos> splashing sound made when s.t. falls into the water.

<p id=18757><form>tikaw</form> contraction of <ix>ta</ix> and <ix>ikaw</ix>. <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ikaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18758><form>tikawtikaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> move about doing s.t. in a deserted place. <i>Talagsa ray táwu nga nagtikawtikaw sa kadalánan,</i> Only a few people were moving about in the streets. <i>Unsay ímung gitikawtikáwan ganínang kaadláwun,</i> What were you doing up and around at dawn?

<p id=18759><form>tikay-ang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; c1]</itype> fall on the back, overturn with the belly up. <i>Natikay-ang ku dihang nabálì ang sandigánan sa silya,</i> I fell on my back when the back of the chair broke. <i>Tikay-ánga (itikay-ang) ang bisiklíta arun ilísan tag ligid,</i> Turn the bicycle over so we can change the tire.

<p id=18760><form>tikayhang</form> <xr>= <sc>tikay-ang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18761><form>tikbà</form> <xr>= <sc>tikwà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18762><form>tikbas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> slash or hack with a machete or similar long knife. <i>Naputul dáyun ang kamunggay nga íyang gitikbas,</i> The tree he slashed at was cut down. <pos>n</pos> action of slashing, hacking with a machete. <form>{-ay(&rarr;)|tikbasay}, {-in-ay(&rarr;)|tinikbasay}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bolo duel</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> have a bolo duel.

<p id=18763><form>tikbil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>stir up</tr> a sensitive feeling. <i>Kadtung buháta mitikbil sa gitagúang kahiubus,</i> What you did stirred up the feelings of humiliation which he had kept hidden. <i>Ayaw tikbíla ang átung kagahápun,</i> Don&apos;t stir up the past.

<p id=18764><form>tikbù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B23(1)6; c]</itype> spill over the side of a vessel. <i>Matikbù ang sabaw,</i> The soup will spill over. <i>Ákung tikbúan sa bulà ang sirbisa,</i> I&apos;ll knock the foam off the top of the beer.

<p id=18765><form>*tikbung</form> <form>{-in-|tinikbung}</form> <pos>n</pos> style of swimming where the feet are kicked. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> swim kicking the feet. <number>2</number> for a baby to produce a thudding sound by kicking its feet in the cradle.

<p id=18766><form>tikdul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>rap</tr>, <tr>knock</tr> s.t. lightly. <i>Kinsay mitikdul sa ákung úlu,</i> Who rapped me on the head? <i>Tikdúli lang ang búla ayaw batíra,</i> <tr>Bunt</tr> the ball, don&apos;t bat it. <pos>n</pos> light <tr>rapping</tr>. <form>tikdultikdul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc1]</itype> do s.t. <tr>intermittently</tr> or <tr>once in a while</tr> or <tr>occasionally</tr>. <i>Mutikdultikdul lang siyag tunghà arun ingnung nag-iskuyla pa,</i> He goes to school once in a while so that people will say that he is still a student. <i>Tikdultikdúlan lang nà nákug trabáhug makalugar ku,</i> I&apos;ll just work on it off and on, as I get the chance. a done <tr>off and on</tr>, little at a time.

<p id=18767><form>tíki</form> acronym for <ix>Tinípung Kanasúran</ix>, United Nations.

<p id=18768><form>tikì</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>gecko</tr>. <form>matag {&mdash;|tikì}</form> things which resemble a gecko&apos;s eyes: <number>a</number> large pustule filled with pus similar to <ix>talubig, 1</ix>, but larger. <number>b</number> round blemishes on tobacco leaves. <number>2</number> baby in the womb (humorous). <i>Pisti, dúna nay tikì ang tiyan sa ákung uyab,</i> Damn! My girl is pregnant (lit. has a gecko in her womb). <form>tikìtíkì</form> <xr>= <sc>tabili sa dagat</sc>.</xr>&dagger;

<p id=18769><form>tikig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> become <tr>stiff</tr>. <i>Mitikig (natikig) ámung líug ug hinangad,</i> We got stiff necks from looking up. <i>Nagkatikig ang bagung minatay,</i> The body is getting stiff. <pos>a</pos> <tr>stiff</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|tikig} ug líug</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>haughty</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> become haughty. <i>Ang kalampúsan makatikig (makapatikig) sa líug,</i> Success makes one haughty. <form>{pa-|patikig}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> act haughty. <i>Ayawg patikig sa líug,</i> Don&apos;t be haughty.

<p id=18770><form>tikiltíkil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b]</itype> do s.t. <tr>little by little</tr> at intervals. <i>Magtikiltíkil gánì ka niánang trabahúa, ambut lang anus-a nà mahuman,</i> If you keep on working like that, a little at a time, God knows when you&apos;ll get done.

<p id=18771><form>tíkit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ticket</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> be issued a ticket for violating s.t. <i>Tikítan ka,</i> You&apos;ll get a ticket. <form>{pa&N;-|panítik}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>issue tickets</tr>. <i>Ang kunduktur mauy maníkit, dì ang draybir,</i> The conductor issues the ticket, not the driver. <form>{pa-|patíkit}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> hold an affair with admission. <i>Patikítan <pb n=1009>nátù ang dráma,</i> Let&apos;s charge admission for the play. <form>{ma&N;-r-|mananíkit}</form> <pos>n</pos> one who issues tickets. <form>{-íra|tikitíra}</form> <pos>n</pos> one in charge of the ticket counter.

<p id=18772><form>tikitíki</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. liquid vitamin preparation.

<p id=18773><form>tikiu</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for <tr>TKO</tr>, a <tr>technical knockout</tr> in boxing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> beat with a <tr>TKO</tr>. <i>Gitikiu sa tsalindyir ang kampiyun,</i> The champion was TKO&apos;d by the challenger.

<p id=18774><form>tikla</form> <pos>n</pos> key of piano, organ, or typewriter. <form>{-du|tikládu}</form> <xr>= <sc>tikla</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18775><form>tikláub<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2SB12S6; c1]</itype> turn a bowl, plate, or s.t. concave with its opening downward. <i>Siyay nagtiklaub sa dúwang,</i> He turned the basin over. <i>Miabay mi sa nagtiklaub nga sakayan,</i> We clung to the overturned boat.

<p id=18776><form>tikláub<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2456; c3]</itype> step or fall into the mud with a plop. <i>Mitikláub (natikláub) ang ákung tiil sa lápuk sa kangitngit,</i> In the darkness I stepped into the mud puddle with a plop.

<p id=18777><form>tikling</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. long-legged <tr>bird</tr>, the barred rail: <bio>Rallus torquatus</bio>. <pos>a</pos> <tr>long-legged</tr> and <tr>lanky</tr>. <i>Kasagáran sa mga mudílu mga tikling,</i> Most models are long-legged and lanky. <form>{-in-|tinikling}</form> <pos>n</pos> a dance in which dancers dance between two bamboo poles banged together in time to the music (in imitation of the <ix>tikling</ix> bird). <form>{-un(&rarr;)|tiklingun}</form> <xr>= <sc>tikling</sc>, <i>a</i>.</xr>

<p id=18778><form>tiklù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <number>1</number> catch s.t. by encircling the neck with a band or loop attached to an end of a pole. <i>Mutiklù siyag ubud,</i> He catches eels by grasping them by the neck. <number>2</number> steal s.t. petty (slang). <i>Tiklúun ta nang íyang manuk karung gabíi,</i> Let&apos;s swipe his chicken tonight. <number>3</number> catch s.o. committing a petty crime. <i>Maáyu nang pulísa mutiklù ug mangunguut,</i> That policeman is good in catching pickpockets. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> kill, esp. violently (slang). <i>Nakatiklù na siyag duha ka kuntra,</i> He has killed two enemies. <number>4a</number> have a girl for sexual purposes for the first time. <i>Minyù ang únang mitiklù ánang bayhána,</i> A married man had sexual intercourse with that woman for the first time.

<p id=18779><form>tiklù<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>takilpù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18780><form>tikluhud, tiklúhud</form> (from <ix>luhud</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> go down on one&apos;s knee(s). <i>Mutikluhud siya sa usa ka túhud,</i> He will <tr>genuflect</tr>. <i>Natikluhud siya sa dihang ákung gipigtíngan sa tuwaytúway,</i> He fell on his knees when I switched him on the knees.

<p id=18781><form>tiklup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> close by folding. <i>Kinsay nagtiklup sa páyung nga basà pa?</i> Who folded the umbrella while it was wet? <i>Itiklup (tiklúpa) ang tanang libru,</i> Close all your books. <form>tikluptiklup</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>collapsible</tr>. <i>Tikluptiklup nga silya,</i> Folding chairs.

<p id=18782><form>tikmìtikmì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> eat slowly, pecking at one&apos;s food. <i>Ngánung nagtikmìtikmì ka man? Wà ka ba gutma?</i> Why are you pecking at your food? Are you not hungry?

<p id=18783><form>tiknik, tiknika</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>technique</tr>. <number>2</number> cunning means of attaining s.t. <i>Maáyu siyag tiknik kay nagpabúy arun makapaniktik,</i> He was pretty smart, becoming a houseboy in order to spy on them.

<p id=18784><form>tiknikal</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>technical</tr>. <i>Hinábang tiknikal ang itanyag sa yúin,</i> The <xr><sc>un</sc></xr> offers technical aid. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>tiknikal nak-áwut</sc>.</xr> <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>tiknikal pawul</sc>.</xr> <form>{&mdash;|tiknikal} nak-áwut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>technical knockout</tr> in boxing, where one of the boxers is still conscious but not able to continue fighting. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|tiknikal} pawul</formx> <tr>technical foul</tr> in basketball, committed against a player who does not have the ball. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab3]</itype> beat by a T.K.O. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> slap a technical foul on.

<p id=18785><form>tikniku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>technician</tr>.

<p id=18786><form>tiknikúlur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>technicolor</tr> movie. <pos>a</pos> brightly colored like technicolor. <i>Tiknikúlur ang íyang púlu,</i> His shirt is brightly colored. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[c16]</itype> make a movie with technicolor. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do s.t. in colors.

<p id=18787><form>tiknisyan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>technician</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be a technician.

<p id=18788><form>tiknuludyi</form> <pos>n</pos> school course in technology.

<p id=18789><form>tiksas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. fierce <tr>gamecock</tr> (said to be bred from stock imported from Texas). <number>2</number> girl who is sexually aggressive. <i>Tiksas nang bayhána kay mugukud giyug láki,</i> That girl is aggressive because she runs after men.

<p id=18790><form>tikstu</form> <pos>n</pos> text of the Bible.

<p id=18791><form>tiktak</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tick-tock</tr> sound of a clock and the like. <number>2</number> two pieces of wood clapped against each other to produce a <ix>tik tak</ix> sound, used as percussion in a combo.

<p id=18792><form>tiktik<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b4(1)]</itype> <tr>spy on</tr>, discover by snooping. <i>Akuy maniktik (mutiktik) sa kalihúkan sa átung kuntra,</i> I&apos;ll spy on our enemies&apos; activities. <i>Natiktikan siyang may laláki,</i> She was discovered with a paramour. <pos>n</pos> <tr>detective</tr>. <form>{pa&N;-|paniktik}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>detective work</tr>.

<p id=18793><form>tiktik<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> portion of the corn grain that comes out powdery when the corn is ground into grits. <number>1a</number> by extension, the similar by-product of rice. <number>2</number> dirt under the foreskin of the penis. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become dirt under the foreskin. <i>Makatiktik nang way kalígù,</i> If you don&apos;t bathe you get dirt under your foreskin. <form>{&mdash;|tiktik} ug</form> it&apos;s impossible that [so-and-so] could happen (coarse). <i>Tiktik pug magbag-u siya,</i> I doubt that he&apos;ll ever reform. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|tiktikun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having dirt under the foreskin of the penis. <number>2</number> <tr>uncircumcised</tr>.

<p id=18794><form>tiktik<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> tap lightly on a hard surface, producing a sound of tick-tick. <i>Tiktíka <pb n=1010>(itiktik) ang linung-ag nga itlug sa lamisa,</i> Tap the hard-boiled egg gently on the table. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> chip off rust. <i>Tayaun na gánì ang barku tiktikan dáyun sa mga tripulanti,</i> When the sides of the ship become rusty, the crewmen chip off the rust. <form>{pa&N;-an|pangiktik} sa bakì</form> <pos>n</pos> out-of-the-way, hardly accessible place (place where the frogs go tick-tick). <i>Túa ku magmaistra sa paniktikag bakì,</i> I&apos;m teaching in the backwoods.

<p id=18795><form>tiktik<sub>4</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> call for chickens to come near in feeding them. <number>2</number> call of the mother hen for her chicks. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> call newly hatched or small chicks.

<p id=18796><form>tikúb</form> <xr>= <sc>tikulub</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18797><form>tikubù, tikúbù</form> (from <ix>kubù</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S; c]</itype> bend over as if to pick s.t. up. <i>Mitikubù siya pagpunit ug batu,</i> He stooped down to pick up a stone. <i>Itikubù ímung láwas inigsumbag níya,</i> Bend low when he swings at you. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2S; b6]</itype> be, become bent. <i>Nagtikubù ang táwu sa katigúlang,</i> The man is bent with age.

<p id=18798><form>tikud<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>heel</tr> of the foot. <number>2</number> <tr>heel</tr> of shoe. <i>Pagtaas ug tikud,</i> Wear high-heels. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put heels on shoes. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> hit s.o. on the heel.

<p id=18799><form>tikud<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> push back the lower part of the vaginal opening in delivery to prevent laceration.

<p id=18800><form>tikug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>selfish</tr>, <tr>ungiving</tr> and <tr>unsharing</tr>. <i>Tikug kaáyu nà. Ayaw na lag pangáyù bísag unsa,</i> He is very selfish. Don&apos;t waste time asking anything from him. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be selfish.

<p id=18801><form>tikug<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>stoop-shouldered</tr>. <i>Tikug na siya kay tigúwang na,</i> He is stoop-shouldered because he&apos;s old. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be stoop-shouldered.

<p id=18802><form>tíkug</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. thin-bladed <tr>grass</tr> of swamps growing to 3 m., used for mats and hats: <bio>Fimbristylis globulosa</bio>. <number>2</number> sleeping mat made from the <ix>tíkug</ix> plant.

<p id=18803><form>tikúgas</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>rail</tr> found in rice fields or marshy areas, <measure reg="13&ndash;15 cm">5&ndash;6&Prime;</measure> high, and used for food, the white-breasted <tr>swamphen</tr>: <bio>Amaurornis phoenicurus</bio>.

<p id=18804><form>tikugkug</form> <pos>a</pos> for the body to be very bent. <i>Tikugkug ka na kaáyu tungud sa tísis,</i> You are very haggard and bent because of your tuberculosis. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6]</itype> for the body to become bent. <i>Nagtikugkug na siya sa kaníwang,</i> She has grown bent from extreme thinness. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|tikugkugun}</form> <pos>a</pos> having a bent body.

<p id=18805><form>tikúkà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>retch</tr> in choking or prior to vomiting. <i>Nagtikúkà siya dihang nabut-ukan sa túbig,</i> He coughed hard rapidly after he choked on the water. <form>{hi-|hikúkà}/{ha-|hakúkà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <tr>retch</tr>.

<p id=18806><form>tikùkù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>curl up</tr> tight, be bent over. <i>Nagtikùkù siya paghigdà,</i> He lay down curled up. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be curled up.

<p id=18807><form>tikulub, tikúlub</form> (from <ix>kulub</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> turn over and lie on one&apos;s belly; <tr>overturn</tr>. <i>Makatikulub na ang bátà nga upat ka búlan,</i> A four-month-old baby can turn over and lie on his belly. <i>Tikulba (itikulub) ang mga kún,</i> Turn the pots face downward.

<p id=18808><form>tik-um</form> <xr>= <sc>tak-um</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18809><form>tikung</form> <xr>= <sc>butíti</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18810><form>tikungkung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> curl up the legs. <i>Nagtikungkung siyang natúg sa katugnaw,</i> It was so cold that he slept with his legs curled up. <i>Tikungkúnga (itikungkung) ímung tiil arun masúd ka sa kaban,</i> Curl up your legs so you&apos;ll fit in the trunk.

<p id=18811><form>tikup</form> <pos>n</pos> door or window <tr>shutter</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b6(1)]</itype> close an opening in a room or an enclosed area. <i>Ákung gitikupan ang bintánà ug banig,</i> I covered the window with a mat. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> make into a shutter to cover an opening.

<p id=18812><form>tíkup</form> <pos>a</pos> closed tight, without holes or spaces in between. <i>Tíkup pagkalála ning baníga,</i> This mat was tightly woven. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make s.t. <tr>tight</tr>. <i>Kadaug kang mutíkup ug siklat ánà,</i> Are you strong enough to weave the bamboo slats tight? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> close up the opening of a hollow area or a hole in s.t. that wraps around s.t. else. <i>Akuy mutíkup sa púyù,</i> I&apos;ll sew up the pouch. <i>Tikúpa na ang kural líbut sa balay,</i> Make the ends of the fence around the house meet.

<p id=18813><form>tik-up</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB46; b2c1]</itype> <number>1</number> cover over an opening with s.t. that moves over it and fits it. <i>Gidalì níyag tik-up ang bintánà,</i> She <tr>shut</tr> the windows at once. <i>Mutik-up ang kurtína human sa káda isína,</i> The curtain will <tr>close</tr> after each scene. <number>2</number> <tr>close up</tr>, be folded, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Ganíha ra nà siyang tábì wà pa giyud mutik-up ang bàbà,</i> She has been chattering for quite some time now. Her mouth never seems to shut. <i>Nagtik-up pa ang biyúus,</i> The bud is still unopened. <i>Dì siya makatik-up sa páyung kay gáhì,</i> She can&apos;t fold the umbrella because it is stuck. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> for the sun to set. <i>Mingitngit ang kalibútan dihang nakatik-up na ang adlaw,</i> The earth became dark after the sun had set.

<p id=18814><form>tikus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> strap s.t. to the waist. <i>Nagtikus ug sád ang mananggíti,</i> The toddy gatherer straps a sickle to his waist. <i>Itikus ang bukag inigpangáni nímu,</i> Strap the basket to your waist when you harvest rice.

<p id=18815><form>tikus<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small <tr>triggerfish</tr> with a protruding mouth and no dorsal spine. <form>nawung ug {&mdash;|tikus}</form> having a snout that protrudes.

<p id=18816><form>tikuskus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> <tr>curl up</tr> tightly, draw into <pb n=1011>itself. <i>Nagtikuskus siya paghigdà,</i> She lay curled up in a tight ball. <i>Ínit mauy nakatikuskus (nakapatikuskus) sa dáhung tagak,</i> The heat made the fallen leaves curl up.

<p id=18817><form>tikutkut</form> <xr>= <sc>tikuskus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18818><form>tíkuy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b3(1)]</itype> for s.t. baked to fall, settle and harden while baking. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fallen cake</tr>. <number>2</number> dough left over, not enough to make a whole cake, but at least enough to form into s.t. <number>2a</number> the youngest child in a family, still comparatively small in size (humorous&mdash;from the notion that <ix>tíkuy</ix> is a cake, not full-sized, made from the leftovers).

<p id=18819><form>tíkuy<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>filch</tr>, <tr>swipe</tr> s.t. usually of small value. <i>Kinsay nagtíkuy sa ákung mansánas diri sa lamísa?</i> Who swiped my apple from the table?

<p id=18820><form>tikwà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> for a liquid to <tr>spill</tr> over. <i>Hináyag dala ang tásà kay mutikwà ang kapi,</i> Carry the cup carefully so the coffee does not spill. <i>Ayawg tikwáa inigkáwus nímu,</i> Don&apos;t spill the water when you fetch it.

<p id=18821><form>tikwang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>tip over</tr> to the side.<i> Dakung balud mitikwang sa sakayan,</i> A big wave tipped the boat over to its side. <i>Tikwánga ang barsahan arun mayabu ang sulud,</i> Tip the sled over to get the load off.

<p id=18822><form>tikwì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sound made by a hawk. <number>2</number> name given to hawks or buzzards which sound <ix>tikwì</ix>: the <ix>ananangkil</ix> and the <ix>banug</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> produce such a sound. <i>Mutikwì ang banug inigkakitag madágit,</i> The hawk goes <ix>tikwì</ix> when he spies a prey. <number>2</number> fondle a baby by imitating a hawk&apos;s sound raising the hand and letting it fall in some part of the body to tickle it in imitation of a preying hawk.&dagger;

<p id=18823><form>tikwì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> get stiff in death (slang). <i>Nagtikwì na ang táwung naghíkug sa dihang hindiskubrihan,</i> The man who committed suicide was already stiff when they found him.

<p id=18824><form>tikyáub</form> <xr>= <sc>tikláub<sub>1 2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=18825><form>tikyup</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B456]</itype> close gently. <i>Mutikyup ang hibìhibì kun makahilan,</i> The leaves of the touch-me-not close when you touch it. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2456; b(1)]</itype> for darkness to close in. <i>Mitikyup ang kagabhíun binyáan ang láing adlaw,</i> Night came leaving behind another day. <number>2a</number> <itype>[AB; b5]</itype> for lights to <tr>dim</tr>, cause them to do so. <i>Tikyúpi (tikyúpa) ang sugà kun matúlug ka na,</i> Turn the lamp down when you go to sleep. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> fold s.t. flat over haphazardly once or twice. <i>Tikyúpa (itikyup) lang ang banig arun dì kan-un ang humay sa manuk,</i> Fold the mat so that the chicken won&apos;t get at the rice on it.

<p id=18826><form>tíla</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cloth</tr>, <tr>textile</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|tíla} mitalika</form> <tr>wire screen</tr> of fine mesh. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> screen s.t. with <tr>screening wire</tr>.

<p id=18827><form>tílà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> lick s.t. (normally not the lips). <i>Hápit mutílà sa ímung tiil kanang nanguyab nímu,</i> Your suitor nearly licks your foot. <i>Gitiláan sa irù ang íyang núka,</i> The dog licked his sores. <number>2</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> get s.t. out of s.o. or s.t. <i>Daghan kag amígu kun dúna pa silay matílà nímu,</i> You&apos;ll have lots of friends if there is s.t. they can get out of you. <number>3</number> <tr>obtain</tr>, get s.t. out of s.t. <i>Wà tay matílà dinhi?</i> Isn&apos;t there anything to get out of this place? <number>4</number> <formx>{&mdash;|tílà} ug háp</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b]</itype> for a certain quantity to be consumed entirely. <i>Gitiláag háp ang ákung swildu tungud sa daghang bayranan,</i> The bills completely ate up my salary.

<p id=18828><form>tílab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> slice off the flesh of fish close to the bone, usually lengthwise. <i>Magtílab kug ipaun,</i> I&apos;ll slice some fish off for bait. <form>{-in-|tinílab}</form> <pos>n</pos> fish sliced thin.

<p id=18829><form>tilabhù</form> (from <ix>buhù</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; c]</itype> for the foot to slip into a hole, deep mud or the like. <i>Natilabhù ku sa gabuk námung sáwug,</i> The floor gave way where I stepped on it. (Lit. I stepped through the rotten floor.) <i>Itilabhù ímung tiil sa lápuk kun unsa kaláwum,</i> Stick your foot into the mud to see how deep it is.

<p id=18830><form>tilad</form> <pos>n</pos> mixture of betel nut, bettle-pepper leaves, and lime for chewing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> chew betel. <form>tilaran</form> <pos>n</pos> container for the betel chewing equipment.

<p id=18831><form>tiladtilad</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. dark-brown <tr>millipede</tr> about <measure reg="3.2 cm">1&frac14;&Prime;</measure> long which coils up when touched.

<p id=18832><form>til-ag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> thoroughly clean rice of chaff, bran, unhusked grains, etc. <i>Til-ági ang bugas únà lung-ága,</i> Clean the rice before you cook it.

<p id=18833><form>tilagak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> drip in long drops. <i>Nagtilagak ang íyang láway,</i> His saliva is <tr>drooling</tr> from his mouth. <i>Gitilagakan ang sawug sa dugus,</i> Honey dripped on the floor.

<p id=18834><form>tilambù</form> <pos>n</pos> young coconut fruit at a stage where it is full-sized but the meat has not developed, and only the soft shell and water are found within the husk.

<p id=18835><form>tílang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> be <tr>pierced</tr> with a sharp, pointed object. <i>Lansang ang nakatílang sa íyang tiil,</i> It was a nail that pierced his feet. <i>Natílang ang íyang páa pag-ikid níyas kural,</i> Her thigh got <tr>spiked</tr> when she jumped over the fence.

<p id=18836><form>tilangù</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>sea cucumber</tr>.

<p id=18837><form>tilap, tílap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>lick</tr>. <i>Makahílu nà bísag makatilap ka lang,</i> That&apos;s poisonous even if you only lick it. <i>Tilapi ímung wait,</i> Lick your lips. <number>2</number> <tr>lap</tr> at, <tr>cover</tr> (literary). <i>Gitilapan <pb n=1012>ang bungtud sa sílaw,</i> The sun&apos;s rays are touching the hill now. <form>{pa&N;-|panilap}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>lick the lips</tr> in anticipation. <i>Nagpanilap siyang nagtan-aw nákù,</i> He was licking his lips looking at me.

<p id=18838><form>tilapya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. fresh-water <tr>fish</tr> with a dark color, <measure reg="15&ndash;20 cm">6&ndash;8&Prime;</measure> in length, commercially raised in ponds: <bio>Tilapia mossambica</bio>. <number>2</number> <tr>prostitute</tr> (slang). <form>{&mdash;|tilapya} sa mamala</form> <xr>= <sc>tilapya</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr>

<p id=18839><form>til-as</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>worm</tr> having hairs that cause a severe itch, commonly found in monkeypod (<ix>akasya</ix>) trees. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> be stung by such a worm.

<p id=18840><form>tilaub</form> <pos>n</pos> boiled young corn on the cob. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> boil young corn. <i>Saktu tilaubun ning maísa,</i> These ears of corn are just right to boil. <form>{-un|tilaub}</form> <pos>n</pos> young ears of corn ready to boil.

<p id=18841><form>tiláuk</form> <pos>n</pos> region of the upper back of the mouth in the vicinity of the uvula. <i>Maáyung pagkatáup ang tagà sa tiláuk sa isdà,</i> The hook was well lodged in the fish&apos;s <tr>throat</tr>. <form>{-an|tilaukan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>esophagus</tr>, <tr>gullet</tr>.

<p id=18842><form>tilaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>taste</tr>. <i>Tilawi ang sabaw kun parat ba,</i> Taste the soup to see if it&apos;s salty. <number>2</number> <tr>try</tr>, <tr>experience</tr>. <i>Mutilaw kug sakayg dyít,</i> I&apos;d like to experience riding a jet. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12; b2]</itype> get a beating, scolding, etc. <i>Makatilaw ka giyug muusab ka,</i> You&apos;ll get it if you do it again.

<p id=18843><form>tilhung</form> <xr>= <sc>talhung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18844><form>tílib</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab7]</itype> take a thin <tr>slice</tr> off of s.t. <i>Tilíbi pag ákung kalyu kay bagà pa,</i> Slice some more off of my corn because it&apos;s still thick. <i>Tilíban ug dakù ang bàbà sa sag-ub arun sayun pagtíing,</i> Slice a fairly good-sized piece off the bamboo toddy container so that it will be easy to pour water out of it.

<p id=18845><form>tilibisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>television</tr>.

<p id=18846><form>tiligráma</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>telegram</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> send a telegram. <form>{(&rarr;)|tiligrama}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> line for telegraph transmission. <i>Nabugtù ang tiligrama maung dílì ka na makatiligráma,</i> The <tr>telegraph wire</tr> is cut, so you can&apos;t send a telegram. <number>2</number> <tr>telegraph post</tr>. <i>Kabáyù nga gihukut sa tiligrama,</i> Horse that was tethered to the telegraph post.

<p id=18847><form>*tiligrapiku</form> <form>híru {&mdash;|tiligrapiku}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>telegraphic money order</tr>.

<p id=18848><form>tiligrapista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>telegraph operator</tr>.

<p id=18849><form>tiligrapu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>telegraph</tr>.

<p id=18850><form>tilíis</form> <pos>a</pos> shrill, high-pitched voice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be shrill, high-pitched. <i>Mitilíis ang singgit sa gilúgus,</i> The girl let out a shrill scream as she was raped. <i>Natilíis ang íyang tíngug tungud sa dipiktu sa tutunlan,</i> Her voice became shrill due to some throat defect.

<p id=18851><form>tílik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> spin coins for gambling. <i>Pusta úsà parabir nákù tilíkun ang usa ka dakù,</i> Put your bet first before I twirl the penny. <form>{pa-|patílik}</form> <pos>n</pos> a betting game twirling a coin, usually the big centavo piece, and the bettor chooses heads or tails. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> play a game of <ix>patílik</ix>.

<p id=18852><form>tilim</form> <xr>= <sc>lunas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18853><form>tilimad-un</form> (from <ix>balà<sub>1</sub></ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sign which portends s.t. (not necessarily sent or known to an individual). <i>Dautang tilimad-un ang kumíta,</i> A comet is a bad <tr>omen</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>indication</tr>, <tr>symptom</tr>. <i>Musumpà sa mga tilimad-un sa kasagárang sip-un,</i> Stops the symptom of the ordinary cold. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> signify, show as a sign or omen of. <i>Ang lapad nga agtang nagtilimad-un sa pagkautukan,</i> A wide forehead signifies high intelligence.

<p id=18854><form>tilingtiling</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>ring</tr> with the sound of tiny bells or the telephone. <i>Tilingtilinga ang kampanilya,</i> Ring the bell. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ringing</tr> sound. <number>2</number> tiny <tr>bell</tr>.

<p id=18855><form>tílip</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ornamental similar to the <ix>kilála</ix>.

<p id=18856><form>tilipunu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>telephone</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>phone</tr>. <i>Tilipunuhi ku,</i> <tr>Call</tr> me up. <form>tilipunista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>telephone operator</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a telephone operator.

<p id=18857><form>til-is<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tilíis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18858><form>til-is<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> for liquids, usually urine, to stream out with force. <i>Kinsay mitil-is (nanil-is) sa ákung tanum?</i> Who urinated on my plants? <pos>n</pos> <tr>urine</tr>.

<p id=18859><form>tiliskupyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>telescope</tr>, <tr>binoculars</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>eyeglasses</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2b]</itype> use, view through a telescope, binoculars. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> drink from an upraised container (from the notion that the face is in the same position as when peering into a telescope&mdash;humorous). <i>Sígi nang pangáun ang mga bisíta. Nagtiliskupyu na gánì ang uban,</i> The people are eating in full swing now. Some have started making like a telescope with their bottles.

<p id=18860><form>tilitayip</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>teletype</tr> machine.

<p id=18861><form>tilitul</form> <xr>= <sc>tulitul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18862><form>tiltil<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>rap</tr>, <tr>tap</tr> lightly. <i>Tiltíli, ayawg paknga ang íhi,</i> Tap it gently. Don&apos;t strike the axle hard. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> chip off s.t. small from s.t. hard by tapping on it. <i>Tiltíli ang simintung sapáwag pinising,</i> Roughen the concrete that we will put the finish on. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23; b(1)]</itype> make slightly biting or insulting remarks or allusions. <i>Ug mapikal siya mutiltil pud,</i> He makes slight digs when he&apos;s irked.

<p id=18863><form>tiltil<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)4N; b6]</itype> <tr>sink</tr> straight to the bottom. <i>Nagkatiltil ang sakayan,</i> The boat was sinking. <i>Nakatiltil na siya pag-itsa sa salbabída,</i> He had already sunk when the lifesaver was thrown to him.

<p id=18864><form>tílù</form> <xr>= <sc>tíluk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18865><form>tílub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be, become <tr>deaf</tr> (said in scolding or in a mild curse). <i>Nagsinggit na man gánì ku unyà walà gihápun ka kadungug. <pb n=1013>Unsa man? Natílub ka?</i> I shouted at you, but you didn&apos;t hear me. What is the matter with you anyway? You deaf? <form>patilubtilub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> pretend to be deaf, <tr>ignore</tr>. <i>Gipatilubtiluban ku níya sa ákung gikinahanglan,</i> He turned deaf ears to my needs.

<p id=18866><form>til-ug</form> <pos>n</pos> food prepared esp. for s.o. recuperating from s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> feed health food to s.o. <i>Ug nahadagat pa, dì ikatil-ug,</i> Terribly homely. (Lit. If it were a fish, it could not be used to feed a person recuperating from an illness.) <i>Maáyu itil-ug ang mayamáya,</i> Red snapper is good for s.o. recuperating from an illness. <form>{&mdash;|til-ug} sa hilánat</form> <pos>n</pos> boil that comes out after one is cured of fever. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> have a boil as an after-effect of fever. <i>Gitil-úgan ang ákung hilánat,</i> I had a boil as an after-effect of my fever. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|til-ugun}</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. food good for convalescents.

<p id=18867><form>tíluk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>remove</tr>, <tr>consume</tr> to the last bit. <i>Ang iring mauy nagtíluk sa salin,</i> The cat got all of the leftovers. <i>Tilúkag punit ang mga sagbut,</i> Pick up all of the refuse.

<p id=18868><form>tilun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> curtain on stage. <number>2</number> <tr>movie screen</tr>. <form>abri {&mdash;|tilun}</form> in stage presentation, expression meaning &lsquo;<tr>curtains up</tr>&rsquo;. <form>búka {&mdash;|tilun}</form> the main curtain that covers the whole stage. <form>sira {&mdash;|tilun}</form> in stage presentations, expression meaning &lsquo;<tr>curtains down</tr>&rsquo;. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a stage curtain. <number>2</number> <itype>[c]</itype> put a stage curtain. <i>Hábul lay átung itilun sa dúlà,</i> We&apos;ll just use blanket as a curtain for the play. <number>3</number> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> hang like a curtain (literary). <i>Nagtilun ang lasangnung kasagbutan,</i> The jungle vines hung like curtains. <form>{-iru(&larr;)|tiluníru}</form> <pos>n</pos> person in charge of opening or closing the curtain.

<p id=18869><form>tiluring</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tailor shop</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> run a <tr>tailoring shop</tr>. <i>May hílig ka sa pagpanahì ug karsúnis. Maáyu pag magtiluring ka,</i> You have an interest in making trousers, so you will do well running a tailoring shop.

<p id=18870><form>tilus</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>spoon</tr> made out of a coconut shell. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make, use a coconut-shell spoon.

<p id=18871><form>tím<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>team</tr>. <i>Usa ka tím sa písi ang nagguwardiya níya,</i> A <xr><sc>p.c</sc>.</xr> team is guarding him. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256C2; c3]</itype> form, be a member of a team.

<p id=18872><form>tím<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>theme</tr>, a short composition required in school. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> write a theme.

<p id=18873><form>tima</form> <pos>n</pos> a makeshift bit for a horse, made from a length of tether rope, usually in the form of a clove hitch, passed over the lower jaw. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> put such a bit on a horse.

<p id=18874><form>tíma<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>theme</tr>, <tr>subject</tr>. <i>Kasína mauy tíma sa sugilánun,</i> Envy is the theme of the story. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> use as a theme.

<p id=18875><form>tíma<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>plan</tr>, <tr>intend</tr> to. <i>Nagtíma ming magpiknik ugmà,</i> We plan to have a picnic tomorrow. <i>Mau kini ang gitimáhan níla,</i> This is what they plan to do.

<p id=18876><form>tíma<sub>3</sub></form> be <tr>done</tr> doing s.t., for s.t. to be <tr>finished</tr>. <i>Tíma ka nas ímung humwurk,</i> Are you through with your homework? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB126; a12]</itype> <tr>finish</tr> s.t.; be <tr>through</tr> with s.t. <i>Aku nay mitíma sa íyang trabáhu,</i> I finished his work. <i>Matíma na gánì ang trabáhu,</i> When the work is done.

<p id=18877><form>timáan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3S; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>remember</tr>, <tr>take note</tr>. <i>Maáyu siyang mutimáan ug ngálan,</i> He&apos;s good in remembering names. <i>Nakatimaan ka ba sa átung giagían niadtu?</i> Do you remember the road we took before? <i>Timan-i unsáun pagbúhat íni,</i> Take note how this is done. <number>2</number> keep, <tr>bear in mind</tr>. <i>Magtimáan ka sa íyang panambágun,</i> Keep his advice in your mind. <i>Timan-i nga sinagup ka lang,</i> Bear in mind that you are just a foster child. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>mark</tr>, <tr>indicate</tr>. <i>Way kurus nga nagtimáan sa íyang lubung,</i> No cross marks his grave. <number>4</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>mean</tr>, be an <tr>indication</tr> of. <i>Ang pagpasákit nagtimáan sa gugma,</i> Sacrifice is an indication of love. <number>5</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> affix a signature or thumbmark. <i>Ubligádu ka pagtúman kun mutimáan kag kuntrátu,</i> When you <tr>sign</tr> a contract, you are obliged to abide by it. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sign</tr>, <tr>mark</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>indication</tr>. <number>3</number> <tr>signature</tr> or <tr>thumbmark</tr>. <form>{(&rarr;)|timaan}</form> <formx>{&mdash;|timaan} ug buut</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> <number>1</number> regain consciousness. <i>Nagkatimaan nag buut ang nautas,</i> The person who fainted has regained consciousness. <number>2</number> reach the stage in life where one is aware. <i>Ílu na kung dáan pagkatimaan nákug buut,</i> From the time of my earliest consciousness I have been an orphan. <form>timan-anay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2]</itype> for two or more parties to sign papers agreeing to s.t. <i>Nagtiman-anay sila sa kasabútan,</i> They signed the agreement.&dagger;

<p id=18878><form>timailhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sign</tr>, <tr>symbol</tr> or <tr>mark</tr> to indicate s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>indicate</tr>, be a sign of. <i>Ang kadautan sa panahun nagtimailhan sa umaábut nga bagyu,</i> The bad weather is a sign of an approaching storm. <pos>n</pos> <tr>birthmark</tr>.

<p id=18879><form>tim-an</form> (from <ix>tíma</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> for rumors, gossip to die out. <i>Natim-an ang huhungíhung paglutaw sa tinúud,</i> The rumors stopped when the truth came out.

<p id=18880><form>timang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> change the topic or course of a conversation; <tr>digress</tr>. <i>Makatimang ku usáhay sa ákung pagliktiyur,</i> Sometimes I unwittingly digress in my lecture. <i>Ayawg itimang ang inyung kabildu ug láin ug iksplikaran ka,</i> Don&apos;t change the topic of the conversation when a man proposes to you. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> give an additional remark to supplement what has been said. <i>Nanglibak sila kanímu ug gitimángan sab dáyun sa <pb n=1014>ímung karibal,</i> They were talking against you and your rival quickly joined in with more information. <pos>n</pos> s.t. said in <tr>digression</tr>.

<p id=18881><form>timàtimà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> keep eating a little now and then, be munching on s.t. <i>Wad-an kag gána kun pirmi kang magtimàtimà,</i> You&apos;ll lose your appetite if you keep nibbling on food. <i>Pagdág matimàtimà sa sinihan,</i> Bring s.t. to <tr>nibble</tr> on in the movies.

<p id=18882><form>timaud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> keep one&apos;s word as to s.t. promised, <i>Walà giyud siya magtimaud sa ámung sábut,</i> She did not keep her word as per agreement.

<p id=18883><form>tim-aw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23P; a12]</itype> <tr>appear</tr>, <tr>show up</tr>. <i>Wà mutim-aw (mupatim-aw) ang nubya kay gitában,</i> The bride didn&apos;t show up because s.o. eloped with her. <i>Wà siya tim-áwa sa íyang dít,</i> Her date didn&apos;t show up to get her.

<p id=18884><form>timáwà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>poor</tr>, <tr>destitute</tr>. <i>Timáwà pa sa ilagà,</i> Poorer than a church mouse. <number>2</number> unfortunate and humble person. <i>Dungga intáwun ning timáwang hinikáwan sa gugma,</i> Hear the pleas of an unfortunate being deprived of love. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become <tr>destitute</tr>.

<p id=18885><form>timayud, timáyud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>recognize</tr>, be aware of the importance of s.t. <i>Mutimayud lang ka nákù kun dúna kay kinahanglan,</i> You bother about me when you want s.t. from me. <i>Nagtimáyud ku níla ísip ákung mga ginikánan,</i> I recognize them as my parents. <number>2</number> <tr>notice</tr>, be <tr>aware</tr> of s.t. <i>Nakatimáyud kung may misaka sa balay,</i> I noticed s.o. entering the house. <number>3</number> <tr>pay attention</tr> to, <tr>watch</tr> s.t. <i>Timayúra ang ímung manghud kun túa ba sa iskuylahan,</i> <tr>See</tr> if your brother is in school. <i>Itimáyud ku sa balay kun wà mi dihà,</i> Please watch the house for us while we are away. <number>4</number> do s.t. well putting one&apos;s full attention to it. <i>Mitimáyud na siyag trabáhu,</i> He now works consistently well. <i>Timayúra ug bása ang libru,</i> Read the book carefully.

<p id=18886><form>timbà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab1]</itype> fetch s.t. by dipping from a well, scooping from a pit, or the like. <i>Magtimbà ku sa atábay,</i> I&apos;ll go fetch some water from the well. <i>Timbáa ang kinubkub kay láwum nag buhù,</i> Bring the earth up because the pit is deep now. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pail</tr>, <tr>dipper</tr>, <tr>scoop</tr>. <number>2</number> pail-, <tr>dipperful</tr>. <i>Gái kug usa ka timbà,</i> Give me a dipperful.

<p id=18887><form>timbakúwas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> get up quickly from a lying position. <i>Mitimbakúwas siya sa íyang higdaan,</i> He got up instantly from his bed.

<p id=18888><form>timbálung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> fall headlong. <i>Walà siya makabrík ug ang awtu mitimbálung sa pangpang,</i> He didn&apos;t get a chance to apply the brakes and the car fell headlong down the cliff. <i>Íya kung gitulud ug natimbálung ku sa túbig,</i> He pushed me and I fell headlong into the water.

<p id=18889><form>timbang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>weigh</tr> s.t. <i>Akuy mutimbang sa kupras,</i> I&apos;ll weigh the copra. <i>Timbánga ang bábuy,</i> Weigh the pig. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>weigh</tr>, have the weight of. <i>Mutimbang siyag sisinta kílus,</i> He weighs sixty kilos. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC3; a]</itype> make s.t. <tr>balance</tr>. <i>Matikwang ang sakayan kung way makatimbang sa píkas,</i> The boat will capsize if nobody stays on one side to balance it. <i>Ang pagsálig ángay timbángan sa pag-amping,</i> Trust must be balanced with carefulness. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>help</tr>. <i>Timbángi ra ku,</i> Help me. <i>Mahímù siyang ikatimbang sa panimalay,</i> He can be used as a helper in the household. <number>3a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|timbang} ug kúgus (pangúgus), luhud (panglúhud)</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> be a sponsor in a wedding or baptism of a person of the opposite sex. <i>Nagtimbang mig pangúgus sa pyista,</i> We were co-sponsors of a baptism during the town feast. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>weight</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>helper</tr>. <number>2a</number> male sponsor of a female in wedding or baptism or the female sponsor of a male. <pos>a</pos> <tr>balanced</tr>. <form>{pa&N;-|panimbang}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>maintain balance</tr>. <i>Nanimbang siyang milátay sa písì,</i> He maintained his balance as he walked on the rope. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> engage in the buying and selling of things by weight. <i>Nanimbang siyag kupras,</i> He is engaged in the buying and selling (lit. weighing) of copra. <pos>n</pos> <tr>balance</tr>. <i>Nawad-an siya sa panimbang,</i> He lost his balance. <form>{Culu-|tulutimbang}, timbangtimbang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>ponder</tr>. <i>Nagtulutimbang siya kun kinsay íyang sugtun,</i> She is <tr>considering</tr> who to accept. <i>Timbangtimbánga kun magpárì ka ba giyud,</i> <tr>Think it over</tr> if you really want to be a priest. <form>{hi&N;-|hinimbang}</form> <xr>= <sc>{pa&N;-|panimbang}</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr> <form>{ka-|katimbang}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>helper</tr>, <tr>assistant</tr>. <i>Siyay ákung katimbang sa uma,</i> He&apos;s my <tr>farmhand</tr>. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|timbangan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>scale</tr> to weigh things.

<p id=18890><form>timbaruk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6]</itype> stand unmoving, rooted or frozen on one&apos;s feet. <i>Mitimbaruk ang babáyi pagkakità sa hálas,</i> The woman froze on her feet when she saw the snake. <i>Ngánung nagtimbaruk man mu? Hala trabáhu!</i> Why are you <tr>standing around</tr> like a bunch of statues? Get to work!

<p id=18891><form>timbaya, timbayà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> <tr>greet</tr>. <i>Mutimbaya siya káda súgat námù,</i> She greets me each time we meet. <i>Timbayahun diay nákù nang dì kaíla,</i> Do I have to greet s.o. I don&apos;t know? <pos>n</pos> <tr>greeting</tr>.

<p id=18892><form>timbri<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> put an official stamp or seal on. <i>Nutaryuy nagtimbri íning apidábit,</i> A notary stamped this affidavit. <i>Magámit ning istáma kay wà timbríhi,</i> You can use this stamp because it doesn&apos;t have a postmark. <number>2</number> affix one&apos;s thumbmark. <i>Timbríhi <pb n=1015>ang ímung balúta,</i> Put your <tr>thumbmark</tr> on your ballot. <pos>n</pos> <tr>stamp</tr> affixed, <tr>seal</tr>, <tr>thumbmark</tr>.

<p id=18893><form>timbri<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pushbutton</tr> or the <tr>bell</tr> or <tr>buzzer</tr> the pushbutton manipulates. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>push a button</tr> or <tr>ring a bell</tr> or operate a similar contrivance.&dagger;

<p id=18894><form>timbríra</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. food container consisting of several covered bowls which are hooked together.

<p id=18895><form>timbul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> <tr>mix</tr> s.t. into s.t. else in order to change the composition. <i>Maáyu siyang mutimbul ug ilimnun,</i> He&apos;s good in mixing drinks. <i>Nakigtimbul ang mga tigúlang sa mga tin-idyir,</i> The old folks mixed with the teen-agers. <i>Lamì timbúlun ang lambanug ug sibin-ap,</i> Nipa wine and seven-up are good mixed together. <number>2, 3, 4</number> <xr>= <sc>tibul</sc>.</xr> <pos>n</pos> s.t. added to mix with the dominant element.

<p id=18896><form>timbul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>thimble</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> wear a thimble. <i>Natupukan ang íyang tudlù kay wà timbúli,</i> She pricked her fingers because she didn&apos;t wear a thimble.

<p id=18897><form>timbúngan</form> <pos>n</pos> general name for <tr>goatfishes</tr>.

<p id=18898><form>timbúwad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> fall headlong. <i>Natimbúwad siya ngadtu sa túbig pagkatambug níya sa taytáyan,</i> He fell headlong into the water when he fell from the bridge.

<p id=18899><form>timbuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1, 2</number> <xr>= <sc>tibul</sc>, <i>3.</i></xr> <number>3</number> add a little amount of s.t. to s.t.; contribute a little. <i>Mitimbuy (nagtimbuy) siyag písus sa ílang kapunúngan,</i> He contributed one peso to their organization. <i>Nakatimbuy ning librúha pagkúhà ku sa iksámin,</i> This book helped a little when I took the examination. <i>Gitimbúyan níyag asin ang sabaw,</i> He added salt to the soup. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> have sexual relations with a married woman. <i>Nakatimbuy ka ánang batáa?</i> Have you contributed s.t. to the making of that child?

<p id=18900><form>timgas</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> neat, clean and white with a clear and fine texture. <i>Timgas kang tan-áwun gíkang nalígù,</i> You look clean-complexioned after bathing. <number>2</number> enunciated with clarity and determination. <i>&lsquo;Ipanimalus ku ang ákung asáwa,&rsquo; timgas ug maisúgung pamúlung ni Sultan Saranggáni,</i> &lsquo;I will avenge my wife,&rsquo; Sultan Saranggani averred firmly. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN]</itype> be clear, white and smooth in texture. <i>Magtimgas ang lugas sa humay nga maáyung pagkauga,</i> The grains of well-dried rice are smooth and clear. <form>{-un|timgasun}</form> <pos>a</pos> of a fair and clean sort.

<p id=18901><form>timhung</form> <xr>= <sc>tamhung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18902><form>*timì</form> <form>timìtimì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> pick at food, eat without appetite. <form>{-an|timian}</form> <pos>a</pos> prone to be having no appetite, just picking at the food.

<p id=18903><form>timik</form> <form>walà {&mdash;|timik}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> keep completely <tr>silent</tr>, <tr>tight-lipped</tr>. <i>Wà lang siya magtimik dihang giimbistigar,</i> He didn&apos;t say a word when he was interrogated. <form>walay {&mdash;|timik}</form> totally <tr>silent</tr>. <i>Way timik ang mintiryu magabíi,</i> There&apos;s not a sound in the cemetery at night.

<p id=18904><form>timing</form> <pos>n</pos> small, square or oblong fish trap made of basket work, set in shallow waters. <form>{pa&N;-|paniming}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> catch fish with this trap.

<p id=18905><form>timpag</form> <xr>= <sc>lumpag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18906><form>timpasaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> splash heavily and resoundingly into the water. <i>Mitimpasaw ngadtus túbig pagkahúlug níya gíkan sa pantalan,</i> He fell off the wharf and landed in the water with a splash. <number>2</number> be hit by the aptness of what s.o. might say about one. <i>Ug átung buhátun mutimpasaw ta niadtung pagyà nga nag-ingun nga maáyus tayáda, way ági,</i> If that is what we do, they&apos;ll be able to apply that old saying to us&mdash;that we&apos;re all talk and no action.

<p id=18907><form>timpiramintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>temperament</tr>. <i>Bisan ang managkalúha lahig timpiramintu,</i> Even twins have different temperaments.

<p id=18908><form>timpiratúra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>temperature</tr>.

<p id=18909><form>timpla</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> add s.t. so as to <tr>season</tr>, <tr>flavor</tr>. <i>Himarat ang nagtimpla sa sabaw,</i> Whoever seasoned the soup likes salt. <i>Maáyung itimpla ang kámay sa kapi,</i> Sugar is good to put into coffee. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> prepare things in which s.t. is mixed or added. <i>Timpláhi si Bíbig gátas,</i> <tr>Mix</tr> some milk for Baby. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <tr>weigh</tr>, <tr>consider</tr> carefully before deciding. <i>Ikaw lay magtimpla kun mukúyug ka ba sa piknik,</i> You <tr>decide</tr> for yourself if you are going to the picnic. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>flavoring</tr>, <tr>seasoning</tr>. <number>2</number> the <tr>proportions</tr> of a mixture. <i>Layaw ra ang timpla sa mása,</i> The concrete mixture is too watery. <i>Unsa may timpla sa minása? Tris dus u kwatru dus?</i> How is the dough to be mixed? Three to two or four to two? <form>{-da|timpláda}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the <tr>solution</tr> or <tr>mixture</tr> that results. <i>Layaw ra ang timpláda sa litsi,</i> The milk is too watery. <number>2</number> <tr>temperament</tr> (slang). <i>Dì sila magkadúul kay nagkaláhì silag timpláda,</i> They can&apos;t go together because their temperaments clash. <form>{-du|timpládu}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. already seasoned, flavored. <i>Ayaw nag kamayi ang sampurádu kay timpládu na,</i> Don&apos;t put sugar in the chocolate porridge because it is already sweetened. <form>{-dur(&rarr;)|timpladur}</form> <pos>n</pos> one who is in charge in mixing. <form>{pa&N;-|panimpla}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>size up</tr> s.o. <i>Kamau siyang manimplag táwu,</i> He knows how to size people up. <i>Panimpláhan nátù siyag ángay bang pangasaw-un,</i> Let&apos;s size her up to see if she is worth marrying. <pos>n</pos> opinion reached on sizing s.o. up.

<p id=18910><form>timplit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>registration plate</tr> of vehicles.

<p id=18911><form>timplíti</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small <tr>pavilion</tr> built for <corr sic=especial>special</corr> <pb n=1016>church services.

<p id=18912><form>timplu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>temple</tr>.

<p id=18913><form>timpránu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>early</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>just in time</tr> for s.t. <i>Timpránu giyud pag-abúta nímu, talilákaw ku,</i> You got here just in time, because I was about to go. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> do s.t. <tr>early</tr> or ahead of schedule. <i>Timpranúhag human pagdáru arun timpránu tang makapugas,</i> Finish the plowing early so we can plant early.

<p id=18914><form>timpu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>time</tr>, <tr>chance</tr>. <i>Wà kuy timpu ihalayhálay,</i> I have no time for relaxation. <number>2</number> <tr>time</tr>, <tr>schedule</tr>. <i>Timpu sa tingkaun ra mi magkitaay,</i> We meet only at mealtime. <number>3</number> <tr>weather</tr>. <i>Mubyáhi ka bísag dautag timpu?</i> Are you travelling even in bad weather? <number>4</number> <tr>season</tr>. <i>Timpu sa pagpangáni karun,</i> It&apos;s harvest season now. <number>4a</number> propitious time to do s.t. <i>Timpu na run sa íyang himbis,</i> According to the scale configuration on its legs, now is the time to fight it. <number>5</number> <tr>era</tr>, <tr>period</tr>. <i>Timpu sa Katsílà pa nang ímung purul,</i> Your shorts go back to the Spanish times. <number>6</number> <tr>tempo</tr>. <i>Swít ang timpu íning sunatáha,</i> This dance is in a slow tempo. <form>{pa&N;-|panimpu}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> do s.t. at the best time. <i>Manimpu siyag súgal, kanà lang dibuynasun,</i> He gambles only when the time is right, when it&apos;s his lucky day. <pos>n</pos> doing s.t. at the best time. <form>timputimpu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c16]</itype> do s.t. at the right season. <i>Itimputimpu (timputimpúhun) ang pagtanum kun way patubig,</i> Planting is done in the right season if there&apos;s no irrigation. <pos>a</pos> <tr>from time to time</tr>. <i>Timputimpu nga musáka us-us ang prisyu,</i> Prices fluctuate from time to time.

<p id=18915><form>timpuraryu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>temporary</tr>. <pos>n</pos> s.o. temporary in a job or position. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> put on a temporary basis. <i>Patrabahúa siya bísag itimpuraryu lang únà,</i> Give him a job even if it is only on a temporary basis.

<p id=18916><form>timríra</form> <xr>= <sc>timbríra</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18917><form>tíms</form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>bus</tr> with the motor not in the front, accommodating twenty or so passengers and plying the provincial highways. (So called from the brand Thames.)

<p id=18918><form>timsung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> theme song. <number>2</number> song chosen by lovers as their song. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make as one&apos;s theme song.

<p id=18919><form>timtim</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> taste or sample liquid. <i>Timtími ang sabaw kun hustu bag timpla,</i> Taste the soup to see if it is all right.

<p id=18920><form>timtisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> temptation, k.o. fast <tr>dance</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> dance the temptation.

<p id=18921><form>timù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>snack</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> have a <tr>snack</tr>. <i>Bastanti nang itimù (timuun) ring biskwit,</i> This biscuit is enough for a snack. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put into one&apos;s mouth. <i>Arun dì masakpan gitimù nákù ang sigarilyu,</i> To avoid being caught, I stuffed the cigarette into my mouth. <form>timùtimù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> eat snacks casually between meals.

<p id=18922><form>tímug</form> <pos>n</pos> wind that hits Cebu from the east.

<p id=18923><form>timun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>rudder</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>clitoris</tr> (humorous euphemism). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN2; b]</itype> steer a boat with a rudder, or with a paddle used like a rudder. <i>Lihíru siyang mutimun (manimun) kúmu mananagat,</i> He steers the rudder well since he is a fisherman. <i>Timuni ang sakayan,</i> Steer the boat. <form>{pa&N;-|panimun}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>steer</tr>, <tr>guide</tr>, <tr>lead</tr> a group. <i>Ang Prisidinti mauy manimun sa násud,</i> The President steers the nation. <i>Ang punduk nga ímung gipanimunan,</i> The group you are the leader of. <form>{-il|timunil}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>helmsman</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> be the helmsman.

<p id=18924><form>timúna</form> <xr>= <sc>kimúna</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18925><form>timuri</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. secret talk where certain phonemes are substituted for others: <ix>u</ix> for <ix>a, t</ix> for <ix>d, p</ix> for <ix>d, r</ix> for <ix>l, n</ix> for <ix>m,</ix> and <ix>y</ix> for <ix>s,</ix> the rest remaining. The word <ix>timuri</ix> is derived from <ix>binali</ix> (&lsquo;done backwards&rsquo;). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> speak in <ix>timuri</ix>. <i>Kumuu kung nutimuri? (Kamau kang mubinali?)</i> Cangre yougre speakgre Hoggre? (Can you speak Hog Latin?)

<p id=18926><form>timus</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. light, brownish <tr>grasshopper</tr> less than <measure reg="2.6 cm">1&Prime;</measure> found in bushes and tall grasses.

<p id=18927><form>tim-us</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>pure</tr>, <tr>sincere</tr>. <i>Ang gugmang tim-us dì mulubad,</i> Pure love doesn&apos;t fade.

<p id=18928><form>timwurk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>teamwork</tr>. <i>Lawgaw ang ámung grúpu kay way timwurk,</i> Our group is no good because it lacks teamwork. <pos>a</pos> have teamwork, right <tr>coordination</tr>. <i>Timwurk kaáyu ang bahista ug ang pyanista,</i> The bass player and the pianist <tr>coordinated</tr> beautifully. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12C; c3]</itype> <tr>team up</tr> with, do s.t. harmoniously together in coordinated effort. <i>Nagkatimwurk ang duruha sa ílang pag-ílad sa sapian nílang iyaan,</i> The two made a perfect team in swindling their rich aunt.

<p id=18929><form>tin.</form> abbreviation for <ix>tinyinti</ix> &lsquo;<tr>lieutenant</tr>&rsquo;.

<p id=18930><form>tína</form> <pos>n</pos> a child born with the umbilical cord wound around the neck. According to folk belief such a child will turn out hot-tempered.

<p id=18931><form>tinà</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. brown-colored rot that affects rice plants stunting their growth or killing them.

<p id=18932><form>tínà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>dye</tr>. <i>Tináa ang milubad nga karsúnis,</i> Dye the faded pants. <i>Natínà sa dugù ang bindáhi,</i> The bandage is <tr>stained</tr> with blood. <form>{(&rarr;)|tinà}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dye</tr>. <form>{-an|tinaan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dyeing vat</tr>.

<p id=18933><form>tinabal</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>tabal</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18934><form>tinabuylu</form> (from <ix>buylu</ix>) <pos>n</pos> the rapid <tr>whirling</tr> motion of a body, as a propeller, motor, etc. <i>Ang tinabuylu sa pála sa barku,</i> The <pb n=1017>whirling motion of the propeller.

<p id=18935><form>tinái</form> (from <ix>tái</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>intestines</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|tinái} sa kawáyan</form> <pos>n</pos> the inner sides of bamboo, stripped off from the hard outer part to use for weaving. <form>layù sa {&mdash;|tinái}</form> <number>1</number> off the target. <number>2</number> for a wound to be minor (humorous). <i>Ayawg hílak layù ra nà sa tinái,</i> Don&apos;t be a sissy. It&apos;s a minor cut. <form>igsumpay, kasumpay ug {&mdash;|tinái}, igpútul, kapútul ug {&mdash;|tinái}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>brother</tr>, <tr>sister</tr>.

<p id=18936><form>tinápa</form> <pos>n</pos> fish packed in small <measure reg="5.1 cm">2&Prime;</measure> by <measure reg="10 cm">4&Prime;</measure> cylindrical can. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> have such fish for one&apos;s meal.

<p id=18937><form>tinápay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bread</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>pastry</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> have bread.

<p id=18938><form>tinatína</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. children&apos;s ball game mainly for girls where the ball is dribbled in a court made up of ten squares and the object is to dribble the ball in each square a specified number of times. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> play such a game.

<p id=18939><form>tin-aw</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>clear</tr>, not turbid or muddied. <i>Tin-aw ang limpiyung túbig,</i> Clean water is clear. <number>2</number> <tr>clear</tr>, <tr>definite</tr>. <i>Tin-aw ang íyang báhad,</i> His warning was clear. <number>3</number> <tr>clear-voiced</tr>. <i>Tin-aw íyang tíngug kay dì siya muinum,</i> He has a clear voice because he doesn&apos;t drink. <form>{&mdash;|tin-aw} ug íhì</form> <pos>a</pos> a woman who can have intercourse again after having had a baby (lit. having clear urine). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> become clear, not muddled or hoarse. <number>2</number> <itype>[AP; a2]</itype> <tr>clarify</tr>. <i>Tin-áwun nátù nga akuy masunud dinhi,</i> Let&apos;s make it clear: you&apos;re supposed to obey me here. <i>Patin-áwig maáyu ang mga labhanan,</i> Rinse out the clothing till the water becomes clear. (Lit. Make what is from the clothing clear.) <form>{-ay(&rarr;)|tin-away}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c3]</itype> confront each other so as to iron out differences. <i>Makigtin-away ku níya báhin niánang tabía,</i> I&apos;ll <tr>have it out</tr> with her about that gossip. <form>{ka-an|katin-áwan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>clarification</tr>, <tr>explanation</tr>.

<p id=18940><form>tináwu</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>táwu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18941><form>tinda</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> sell s.t. which is displayed in a store or on the sidewalk. <i>Mutinda siyag báhawng pán,</i> The bread he sells is not fresh. <i>Gipanakup ang naninda sa asíras,</i> The people that were selling things on the sidewalk were arrested. <pos>n</pos> <tr>goods</tr> for sale in a store. <form>{pa&N;-|paninda}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> go into the selling business. <i>Ang lisinsiyádu ray makapanindag álak,</i> Only licensed dealers can sell liquor. <pos>n</pos> selling <tr>business</tr>. <form>tindáhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>store</tr>. <form>tindíra, tindíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>salesgirl</tr>, <tr>salesman</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> be a salesman, salesgirl.

<p id=18942><form>tindak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> push, kick with the sole of the foot; <tr>stamp</tr> the feet. <i>Kusug siyang mitindak sa bisiklíta,</i> He stepped hard on the bicycle. <i>Itindak ang tiil iniglanguy nímu,</i> <tr>Kick</tr> your feet when you swim. <pos>n</pos> <tr>kick</tr>. <form>{-an|tindakan}, {-anan|tindakanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>treadle</tr>, <tr>pedal</tr>. <form>{-in-|tinindak}</form> <pos>n</pos> two coconut trees planted right next to each other so that it looks as though one is kicking the other. Coconuts planted this way usually mark a boundary. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> plant coconut trees in two&apos;s.

<p id=18943><form>tindaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> visit a fish corral and find out if there is a catch.

<p id=18944><form>tinday</form> <pos>n</pos> adolescent female horse.

<p id=18945><form>tind&icaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>expose</tr>, <tr>show</tr> openly. <i>Mutind&icaron;r sa ílang láwas sa kadaghánan,</i> Expose their bodies in public. <i>Gitindihan mi níya sa tanang sud-an,</i> He laid all the dishes in front of us. <form>tindída</form> <pos>n</pos> in card games, a card placed face-upwards in the stack of discards.

<p id=18946><form>tindíra, tindíru</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>tinda</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18947><form>tindug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB346; c1]</itype> <tr>stand</tr>, cause s.t. to stand. <i>Kinsay nagtindug (nagpatindug) sa pusti,</i> Who set the post up? <i>Nagtindug ang ubang pasahíru,</i> Some of the passengers were standing. <i>Tindúga (itindug, ipatindug) ang butilyang natumba,</i> Set the bottle that toppled back up. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> act as a wedding sponsor. <i>Mayur ang mitindug sa ílang kasal,</i> The mayor acted as their wedding sponsor. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> stand on, <tr>back up</tr> one&apos;s word, idea, etc. <i>Tindúgi giyud nang ímung pasángil,</i> Be sure to back up your charges. <number>3a</number> take responsibility for s.o.&apos;s expenses for him. <i>Akuy mutindug sa ímung matrikula,</i> I will take care of your school obligations. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>height</tr> (said of living beings and objects). <number>2</number> a bride-to-be&apos;s <tr>wedding ensemble</tr>, everything she wears on her person during the wedding ceremony. <i>Namalit na ang mga ginikánan ni Idyun ug tindug álang sa íyang pangasaw-unun,</i> Edion&apos;s parents have bought his bride&apos;s wedding ensemble. <form>{pa-|patindug}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac1]</itype> construct a building. <i>Íning sapía makapatindug na tag balay,</i> With this money we can now construct a house. <pos>n</pos> stake set under beams to add support when there is a considerable distance between the supporting posts. <form>{hi-|hitindug}/{ha-|hatindug}, {hipa-|hipatindug}/{hapa-|hapatindug}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> stand up involuntarily. <i>Nahatindug (nahapatindug) ku sa kakurat,</i> I stood up in shocked surprise. <form>{-in-an|tinindugan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wedding ensemble</tr>, including the accessories. <form>{-um-|tumindug}, {-um-r-|tumitindug}</form> <pos>n</pos> original inhabitants, <tr>natives</tr>. <i>Talagsa ray tumitindug (tumindug) sa syudad,</i> There are few people originally from the city. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|tindugun}</form> <pos>n</pos> the family, relatives, and friends of the groom. They serve the bride and her family (<ix>lingkurun</ix>) at the wedding festivities. <i>Kita kay tindugun, átù ang tanang trabáhu unyà sa adlaw sa kasal,</i> We are in the groom&apos;s party so we have to do the work at the wedding party.

<p id=18948><form>tinduk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. cooking <tr>banana</tr>, a foot or <pb n=1018>more long, somewhat curved and about as big as a man&apos;s arm: <bio>Musa paradisiaca var. magna</bio>.

<p id=18949><form>*tinduk<sub>2</sub></form> <form>{-um-|tuminduk}, {-um-r-|tumitinduk}</form> <pos>n</pos> people <tr>indigenous</tr> to a certain area. <i>Ang mga tuminduk (tumitinduk) sa Misamis mga Suban-un,</i> The Subanos are the <tr>natives</tr> of Misamis. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be a native.

<p id=18950><form>tinduktinduk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shrub</tr> of seashore: <bio>Prosopis vidaliana</bio>.

<p id=18951><form>ting-</form> prefix added to roots which refer to s.t. which happens seasonally to form nouns which mean &lsquo;season or time of the day that [so-and-so] takes place&rsquo;. Most forms with <ix>ting-</ix> have short penults. <i>Sayung buntag nga mauy tinglusad sa manuk,</i> The early morning hours when the chickens come down from their perches. <i>Tingbunga (tingpamunga) sa mangga,</i> The mango season. <i>Tingadlaw (ting-adlaw),</i> The hot season. <i>Tingbálud,</i> The wavy season.

<p id=18952><form>tinga</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> food particle lodged between the teeth. <number>2</number> k.o. reddish breast tumor believed to be caused by eating any k.o. shellfish with nipple-like growths, and treated with steam from those k.o. shellfish. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P]</itype> <number>1</number> have food particles lodged in the teeth. <i>Makatinga (makapatinga) ang karni sa ngípun,</i> Meat sticks in the teeth. <number>2</number> get this k.o. tumor.

<p id=18953><form>*tínga</form> <form>{pa-|patínga}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give advance partial payment. <i>Mupatínga kag katungà kun magpakudak ka,</i> You must pay half in advance if you have your picture taken. <i>Tirsiyu lay ipatínga,</i> Give one third of the cost as advance payment. <pos>n</pos> partial payment given in advance.

<p id=18954><form>tingà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be in the throes of death. <i>Pagkúhag párì kay nagtingà nag pasyinti,</i> Get a priest because the patient is in the throes of death.

<p id=18955><form>ting-ab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> open the mouth to gasp for breath. <i>Nagting-ab intáwun ang hubákun,</i> The poor asthma patient is gasping for breath.

<p id=18956><form>tingabngab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be gaping with a huge opening or hole. <i>Mitingabngab ang bakilid nga gidinamíta,</i> The hill had a big gape in it after it was dynamited. <i>Ayawg tingabngába (itingabngab) ang ímung bàbà kay sudlag lamuk,</i> If you open your mouth wide mosquitoes are going to come in.

<p id=18957><form>tingag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B36; c]</itype> catch, <tr>snag</tr> or hold by piercing. <i>Mitingag (natingag) sa íyang tutunlan ang bukug sa isdà,</i> The fish bone got snagged in his throat. <i>Nagtingag pa sa íyang bukubuku ang báraw,</i> The knife was still sticking <corr sic="on">in</corr> his back. <i>Gitingag níya sa kalindaryu ang dágum,</i> He ran a needle through the calendar. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a]</itype> knock a piece of the circle in the game of <ix>taksì<sub>1</sub></ix>. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> suffer the relapse called <ix>tingag</ix>. <i>Ang kalísang mauy nakatingag (nakapatingag) sa bag-ung nanganak,</i> The intense fright caused the woman who had just given birth to have a fatal relapse. <pos>n</pos> fatal relapse suffered by a woman who has recently had a baby, caused by overstrain or emotional disturbance. <form>bughat {&mdash;|tingag}</form> <xr>= <sc>tingag</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=18958><form>tíngal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1c]</itype> force s.t. into s.o.&apos;s mouth. <i>Tingálun ang bátang purgahun,</i> If you give a child a purgative, you have to force it down his throat. <number>1a</number> force a pig&apos;s mouth open by sticking s.t. into it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>bribe</tr>. <i>Mamakak ang saksi ug dúnay mutíngal níya,</i> The witness will lie if s.o. bribes him. <i>Itíngal ni sa gwardiya,</i> Give this as a bribe to the guard. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> for s.t. to be brought onto one (literary). <i>Dílì ku na hápit maantus ang kapaítan nga gitíngal kanákù sa kapaláran,</i> I can hardly bear the bitter experiences which fate has bestowed on me.

<p id=18959><form>tingála</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256; b3(1)c5]</itype> be <tr>surprised</tr>, <tr>mystified</tr> at s.t. unexpected. <i>Natingála ku sa íyang pagkausab,</i> It surprised me at how he had changed. <i>Gikatingad-an ang butu sa laburaturyu,</i> People were mystified by the explosion in the lab. <i>Dì ikatingála ang íyang pagdaug,</i> It&apos;s not amazing that he won. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26N]</itype> for one&apos;s body processes or health to be upset from being subjected to s.t. to which one is not accustomed. <i>Naningála ang ákung tiyan sa pagkáun ug nangkà,</i> The jackfruit upset my stomach. <i>Natingála ang íyang láwas sa kabugnaw sa irkundisyunir,</i> His body can&apos;t seem to adjust to the air conditioner. <form>{pa&N;-(&rarr;)|paningala}, {pa&N;-|paningála}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>tingála</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr> <number>2</number> be ill at ease from being new to s.t. <i>Naningala ku áning bag-ung kambiyu,</i> I find it hard to adjust to this new gearshift. <form>{ka-|katingála}</form> <pos>n</pos> state of being surprised. <form>katingaláhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. <tr>mysterious</tr>, <tr>wondrous</tr>. <i>Katingaláhan ang búhat sa Diyus,</i> God&apos;s ways are wondrous. <number>2</number> <tr>enchanted</tr>, with <tr>magical</tr> power. <i>Pangáyù bisan unsa sa katingaláhang singsing,</i> Wish for anything at all from the <tr>magic</tr> ring.

<p id=18960><form>tingalaw</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> prepare food for people who are working on the farm. <i>Nagtingalaw kus nagdáru,</i> I&apos;m preparing meals for the men who are plowing.

<p id=18961><form>tingáli</form> <tr>probably</tr>, <tr>maybe</tr>. <i>Tingálig muulan run kay nanag-um,</i> It will probably rain because the clouds are gathering. <i>Ikaw tingáli ang nagsumbung, nu?</i> You&apos;re the one that told on me, weren&apos;t you? <i>Dílì tingáli mahímù <pb n=1019>kay ...<corr>,</corr></i> I don&apos;t think I can do it because ... <form>{pa&N;-|paningáli}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> say &lsquo;perhaps&rsquo; to signify uncertainty. <i>Dì ku manigúru. Maningáli lang ku,</i> I am not sure. Maybe I can. <form>{Culu-|tulutingáli}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <xr>= <sc>{pa&N;-|paningtáli}</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18962><form>tingalngal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> for a cover or shutter to open wide, cause it to do so. <i>Nagtingalngal ang kaban tungud sa kadaghan sa sulud,</i> The chest came open because so many things were inside it. <i>Tingalngála (itingalngal) ug maáyu ang pultahan arun masúd ang bangkù,</i> Open the door shutter wide so that the chair outside can be taken in. <pos>a</pos> <tr>opened wide</tr>.

<p id=18963><form>tingàngà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> for a cover or shutter to be slightly open or ajar; cause it to do so. <i>Nagtingàngà ang pultahan. Sirhi,</i> The door is ajar. Close it. <pos>a</pos> opened a little way.

<p id=18964><form>tingáyi</form> <xr>= <sc>tingáli</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18965><form>tinggà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>metal</tr>, <tr>lead</tr>. <form>{-un|tinggaun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lead-like</tr>, <tr>heavy</tr>. <form>{-un|tinggaun} ug kamut</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>clumsy</tr>, tending to break things easily.

<p id=18966><form>tinggalung</form> <xr>= <sc>singgalung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18967><form>tinggàtinggà</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small <tr>wrasse</tr> of rocks in shallow waters.

<p id=18968><form>tinggil</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>clitoris</tr>. <number>2</number> mild curse word, expressing frustration or exasperation. <i>Tinggil! Napalus na pud,</i> <tr>Darn</tr>! It slipped off again.

<p id=18969><form>tinggu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>debt</tr> (slang for <ix>útang</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> buy s.t. on credit (slang).

<p id=18970><form>tinghab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> gasp one&apos;s last few breaths in dying. <i>Nagtinghab na ang irù nga naligsan,</i> The dog that the car ran over is now gasping for its last breath.

<p id=18971><form>tinghágà</form> <xr>= <sc>tanghágà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18972><form>tinghak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> be <tr>panting</tr>, <tr>gasping</tr> for breath. <i>Nagtinghak siya human sa lumbà,</i> He was panting after the race.

<p id=18973><form>tinghuy</form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>oil lamp</tr> made of a wick of tightly rolled cotton blossoms floating in the oil, used as a wake lamp, kept burning the night through.

<p id=18974><form>tingi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB26; b3]</itype> put s.o. to <tr>shame</tr> or deep <tr>embarrassment</tr>. <i>Ang uyab níyang baklà mauy nagtingi níya sa kadaghánan,</i> His homosexual lover put him to a great shame in public. <i>Natingi ku pagpahalípay níya kay dì man diay adlaw níya,</i> I was very embarrassed when I wished him happy birthday because it turned out it was not his birthday.

<p id=18975><form>tingil</form> <xr>= <sc>singil</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18976><form>tingkad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> do s.t. to the whole of s.t. <i>Wà nímu matingkad paglimpiyu ang sular,</i> You just cleaned part of the yard.

<p id=18977><form>tingkag</form> <xr>= <sc>tangkag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18978><form>tingkagul, tingkágul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> make a loud banging noise. <i>Mitingkagul ang silyang giitsa sa alkúba,</i> The chair thrown to the attic made a heavy <tr>thud</tr>. <number>2</number> be in <tr>prison</tr>. <i>Ang pagkakiriwan mauy nakatingkagul (nakapatingkagul) níya sa prisuhan,</i> His thievery got him thrown into prison. <number>3</number> be thrown into a miserable situation. <i>Anía akung aláut, nagtingkagul sa kagul-ánan,</i> Here I am, wretched and suffering in grief. <pos>n</pos> <tr>banging noise</tr>.

<p id=18979><form>tingkal</form> <pos>n</pos> loosely twisted cotton <tr>thread</tr> made from low-grade cotton used for blankets, wicks, or twisted into fishing lines.

<p id=18980><form>tingkálag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B456N; b4N]</itype> for hair to stand on end. <i>Mitingk&amacracu;g ang ákung balhíbu nga namínaw sa kaági ni Drakula,</i> My hair stood on end while I listened to the story of Dracula. <i>Nagtingk&amacracu;g ang balhíbu sa sunuy nga naggukud sa hingangkan,</i> The feathers of the cock were standing on end while he chased the hen.

<p id=18981><form>tingkalù</form> <xr>= <sc>tuktur</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18982><form>tingkap</form> <pos>n</pos> enamel-coated tin <tr>cup</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> use an enamel cup.

<p id=18983><form>tingkarul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1, 2, 3</number> <xr>= <sc>tingkagul</sc>.</xr> <number>4</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> light one&apos;s way with a <ix>tingkarul</ix> torch. <number>5</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a <ix>tingkarul</ix> torch. <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>kerosene torch</tr> made from bamboo or a bottle into which a tube nearly as big around as the mouth is inserted. So called from the noise this torch makes, and also from the fact that in the k.o. fishing with which it is used, a banging noise is made to draw the fish (<xr><ix>cf.</ix> <sc>dagukduk</sc></xr>).

<p id=18984><form>tingkas</form> <xr>= <sc>tangkas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18985><form>tingkiri</form> <xr>= <sc>kingkiri</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18986><form>tingkiyu</form> <xr>= <sc>tangkiyu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18987><form>tingkù</form> <pos>n, v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>tagultul<sub>1</sub></sc>, <i>n1, v.</i></xr> <number>2</number> pound rice in a mortar at the same time as s.o. else is pounding rice and in rhythm with him.

<p id=18988><form>tingkubù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12P]</itype> <tr>hunch</tr> one&apos;s shoulders forward. <i>Nagtingkubù siya tungud sa íyang kagúlang,</i> He is hunched over because he is old.

<p id=18989><form>tingkuy</form> <pos>n</pos> hollow space in nape of neck. <form>lalum ug {&mdash;|tingkuy}</form> <tr>greedy</tr>, <tr>ungiving</tr> or not sharing what one eats.

<p id=18990><form>tingsì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> draw the lips back in amusement or to <tr>smile</tr>. <i>Nakapasar dagway siya kay nagtingsì,</i> He must have passed the test because he is smiling to himself. <i>Tingsíi lang sila kun kabsan kag isulti,</i> Just smile at them when you run out of things to say. <pos>n</pos> a weak smile. <form>{hi-|hitingsì}/{ha-|hatingsì}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> draw the lips back involuntarily in amusement.

<p id=18991><form>tingsían</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. forest <tr>tree</tr> producing a dark-reddish hardwood.

<p id=18992><form>tingting</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>talingting</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[AC; b(1)]</itype> <pb n=1020>have <tr>sexual intercourse</tr> (slang).

<p id=18993><form>tingub</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do s.t. <tr>all at once</tr>. <i>Tinguba (tingba, itingub) paglaba ang bulingun,</i> Wash all of the clothes at once. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126C23]</itype> be <tr>combined</tr> in one, be entirely devoted to s.t. <i>Magtingub tag pangadyì,</i> Let&apos;s all pray <tr>together</tr>. <i>Kining mga híyas natingub sa íyang pagkatáwu,</i> All these qualities were combined in his person. <i>Natingub ang tanang pagpanggà sa bugtung nílang anak,</i> They devoted <tr>all</tr> of their love and affection to their only child. <i>Ang nasakpan mauy natingban sa tanang pasángil,</i> The one who was caught got all of the blame. <pos>n</pos> s.t. complete in one. <i>Ang tingub ánang idiyáha maúmul sa usa ka púlung,</i> The <tr>entirety</tr> of that idea can be expressed in one word. <pos>a</pos> <tr>complete</tr>, covering everything. <i>Usa ka mubù apan tingub nga pangutána,</i> A short but <tr>all-embracing</tr> question. <form>tingbanan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>storage</tr>, <tr>reservoir</tr>. <form>katilingban</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>society</tr>, <tr>community</tr>. <form>katilingbánun</form> <pos>a</pos> having to do with society, community. <form>{-in-|tiningub}</form> <pos>a</pos> done all at <corr sic=one>once</corr>. <form>tingbanay</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>{-in-|tiningub}</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> done to the fullest extent possible. <i>Tingbanay giyud ning átung pag-ínum,</i> Let&apos;s not just drink. Let&apos;s get completely soused.

<p id=18994><form>tíngud</form> <xr>= <sc>síngud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18995><form>tíngug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S]</itype> produce a <tr>sound</tr>. <i>Ayúha nang tiklang dì mutíngug,</i> Fix the piano keys that don&apos;t sound. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2S; b3c]</itype> <tr>speak</tr>, <tr>speak up</tr>. <i>Unsa pay tinggan nákù nga dì ka man mamínaw?</i> What should I <tr>talk</tr> for, since you won&apos;t listen? <i>Tíngug sa míting ug dúna kay ikatíngug,</i> Speak up in the meeting if you have s.t. to say. <number>3</number> <itype>[C; b6]</itype> be on <tr>speaking terms</tr>. <i>Walà mi magtíngug (magtingganay),</i> We aren&apos;t on speaking terms. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sound</tr>, <tr>voice</tr>. <number>2</number> one&apos;s say or word in the proceedings of. <i>Ang ákung tíngug mauy matúman,</i> They will do whatever I say. <form>{pa-|patíngug}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> turn on radio, TV, make s.t. sound. <i>Patingúga (ipatíngug) ang radiyu,</i> Turn the radio on. <form>tingganay</form> <xr>= <sc>tíngug</sc>, <i>v3.</i></xr> <form>{pa&N;-|paníngug}</form> <pos>n</pos> the way the voice sounds, the manner of speaking. <i>Subù ang paníngug sa namatyan,</i> The bereaved person spoke in a sad <tr>tone of voice</tr>.

<p id=18996><form>tingúhà</form> (from <ix>kúhà</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <tr>aim for</tr>, seek to possess. <i>Matag baksir nagtingúhà sa kampiyunátu,</i> Every boxer aims at the championship. <i>Gitingúhà níyang magbúlag sila,</i> It was her <tr>intention</tr> to separate them. <pos>n</pos> s.t. one intends, aspires to do. <i>Wà kuy tingúhang dautan nímu,</i> I do not have wicked <tr>intentions</tr> against you. <i>Ang mga tingúhà sa bayánì álang sa násud,</i> The hero&apos;s <tr>aspirations</tr> for the country. <form>{pa&N;-|paningúhà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> give one&apos;s utmost in doing s.t. <i>Muasinsu ang táwung maningúhà,</i> He who strives hard will succeed. <i>Paninguháa nga mutáp ka sa tís,</i> Try hard to top the exam. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>court</tr> a woman. <i>Naningúhà ku níya piru gibastid ku,</i> I courted her for all I was worth, but I was turned down. <pos>n</pos> striving, trying hard. <i>Káwang ang paningúhà nga dì nuntan ug kaabtik,</i> It is futile to try hard if you don&apos;t couple it with shrewdness.

<p id=18997><form>tingusbáwan</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>usbaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=18998><form>tiniblas</form> <pos>n</pos> the Wednesday before Easter.&dagger;

<p id=18999><form>tinidur<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> table <tr>fork</tr>. <number>2</number> forked bars that support the front wheel of a bicycle. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|tinidur} sa yútà</formx> spade shaped similar to a pitchfork used to turn the soil. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> use a <tr>fork</tr>.

<p id=19000><form>tinidur<sub>2</sub></form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>tinir</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19001><form>tin-idyir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>teen-ager</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B256; b6]</itype> be a teen-ager.

<p id=19002><form>tininti<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tinyinti</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19003><form>tininti<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tinuntu</sc> (humorous euphemism).</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tuntu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19004><form>tinir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>keep</tr>, <tr>have</tr> in possession. <i>Nagtinir siyag babáyi,</i> He&apos;s keeping a mistress. <i>Wà ku magtinir ug sapátus nga daghan,</i> I don&apos;t have many shoes. <i>Magníwang kag itinir nímu nang kaguúla,</i> You&apos;ll grow thin if you <tr>harbor</tr> that sorrow. <number>2</number> <tr>detain</tr>. <i>Itinir siya ug dì makapiyansa,</i> Detain him if he cannot post bail. <form>tinidur dilibru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bookkeeper</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a bookkeeper.

<p id=19005><form>tínir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>thinner</tr> for paints, lacquers.

<p id=19006><form>tínis</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tennis</tr>. <number>2</number> tennis or <tr>canvas shoes</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; b6]</itype> <tr>play tennis</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> wear tennis shoes. <form>{&mdash;|tínis} kurt</form> <tr>tennis court</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|tínis} plíyir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tennis player</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a tennis player. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|tinisan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tennis court</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>dancing space</tr> out in the open.

<p id=19007><form>tinrawundir</form> <pos>n</pos> boxer who qualifies for ten-round fights. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be a boxer who qualifies for ten-round fights.

<p id=19008><form>tinsiyun</form> <xr>= <sc>atinsiyun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19009><form>tintà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ink</tr>. <number>2</number> ink of squids or octopuses. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b4]</itype> put <tr>ink</tr> in a pen or on s.t. <i>Palíhug rag tintà sa pawuntin pin,</i> Please fill the pen with ink. <i>Natintaan ang mantil,</i> The tablecloth got ink spilled on it. <form>{&mdash;|tintà} sa lumayágan, núkus, tamalà, etc.</form> ink of squid, cuttlefish, octopus. <form>tintíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>inkwell</tr>. <form>tintiruhan, tintirúhan</form> <xr>= <sc>tintíru</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19010><form>tintal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>tempt</tr>, <tr>entice</tr>. <i>Wáyis manintal (mutintal) ang yáwà,</i> The devil tempts in a shrewd way. <i>Ayaw kug tintála ánang ímung páa,</i> Don&apos;t entice me with your legs. <i>Mau nang bukíra ang gitintálan ni Hisus,</i> Jesus was tempted on that mountain. <number>2</number> bother so as to <tr>distract</tr>. <i>Gitintal siya maung nagkasáyup,</i> S.o. distracted him so <pb n=1021>he made errors. <pos>n</pos> <tr>temptation</tr>. <form>{ma&N;-r-|maninintal}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tempter</tr>, <tr>temptress</tr>. <form>{ma-un|matintalun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>enticing</tr>. <form>tintasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>temptation</tr>.

<p id=19011><form>tintin<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> child&apos;s word for <tr>penis</tr> (<ix>útin</ix>).

<p id=19012><form>tintin<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>talingting</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19013><form>tintíru</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tintà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19014><form>tintu</form> <pos>n</pos> red <tr>table wine</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|tintu} dulsi</form> <tr>sweet red wine</tr>, usually served as a lady&apos;s drink. <i>Gisirbíhan ang mga babáyi ug tintu dulsi,</i> The women were served sweet red wine. <form>{&mdash;|tintu} síku</form> <tr>strong liquor</tr>. <i>Ang mga láki ra ang gisirbíhan sa <corr sic="tíntu">tintu</corr> síku,</i> Only the men were served the strong liquor. <form>bínu {&mdash;|tintu}</form> <xr>= <sc>tintu</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=19015><form>tintúra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tincture of iodine</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|tintúra} arnika</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tincture of arnica</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|tintúra} diyúdu, {yúdu|tintúra yúdu}</form> <xr>= <sc>tintúra</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19016><form>tinù, tínù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> insects which make a tiny ticking sound when squashed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B246]</itype> make a tiny popping sound when squashed. <i>Mutínù ang búhì nga lusà kun tusdun,</i> Unhatched eggs of head lice will make a tiny popping sound when you press them between your thumbnails.

<!-- TODO: entry with duplicate definition -->

<p id=19017><form>tínù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>ascertain</tr>, <tr>verify</tr>. <i>Tinúang way bantay inigsulud nátù,</i> <tr>Be sure</tr> there&apos;s no guard when we break in. <pos>a</pos> absolutely <tr>certain</tr>. <i>Tínù nang kadaúgan. Dílì malális,</i> We most certainly will win. There is no dispute about it. <!-- <pos>a</pos> absolutely certain. --> <form>{ka-an|katinúan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>certainty</tr>. <i>Way katinúan nga magnúud ang ákung pangagpas,</i> There&apos;s no certainty that my guess will prove right. <number>2</number> s.t. that proves, verifies. <i>Nagkinahanglag ígung katinúan arun mahukman siya,</i> We need sufficient <tr>evidence</tr> if he is to be convicted.

<p id=19018><form>tinur</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tenor</tr> voice. <number>2</number> <tr>tenor part</tr> in a choral group. <number>3</number> <tr>tenor instrument</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|tinor} saks</form> <tr>tenor saxophone</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> sing tenor.

<p id=19019><form>tinuryu</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>Don Juan</tr>.

<p id=19020><form>tinùtinù</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>herb</tr> of waste places: <bio>Physalis lanceifolia</bio>.

<p id=19021><form>tinutuwa</form> <xr>= <sc>lunaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19022><form>tinúud</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>túud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19023><form>tinyaplába</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>alap-ap</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> medicine for <xr><sc>alap-ap</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> be infected with tinea flava.

<p id=19024><form>tinyinti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lieutenant</tr> in rank. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a lieutenant. <i>Dì ku gustung maultimu, magtinyinti ku,</i> I don&apos;t want to be a private but a lieutenant. <form>{&mdash;|tinyinti} dil baryu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>barrio chief</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a barrio chief.

<p id=19025><form>típ<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tip</tr>, <tr>gratuity</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give, get a <tr>tip</tr>, gratuity. <i>Nakatíp siyag písus,</i> He got a peso tip. <i>Diyis pursiyintu ang hustung itíp,</i> Ten percent is a big enough tip to give.

<p id=19026><form>típ<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tip</tr>, secret information. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>tip off</tr>, give, get secret information. <i>Nakatíp ang písi báhin sa túlis,</i> The <xr><sc>p.c</sc>.</xr> got a tip about the robbery.

<p id=19027><form>típ<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> fasten with, apply adhesive <tr>tape</tr>. <i>Típi ang dinugtungan sa wayir,</i> Tape the wire joints. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>adhesive tape</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>magnetic tape</tr>. <form>iskats {&mdash;|típ}</form> <tr>Scotch tape</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|típ} ríkurd</form> <tr>tape</tr>, <tr>tape recording</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make a <tr>tape</tr> recording. <i>Akuy mutipríkurd sa íyang diskursu,</i> I&apos;ll make a tape recording of his speech. <form>{&mdash;|típ} rikurding</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tape recording session</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>tape recording</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C23]</itype> have a tape recording session. <i>Nagtiprikurding mi sa ámung ispits klas,</i> We had a tape recording session in our speech class. <form>{&mdash;|típ} rikurdir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tape recorder</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain a tape recorder.

<p id=19028><form>tipak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab7]</itype> break, chip a piece from. <i>Natipak ang bàbà sa kupíta,</i> The rim of the goblet is <tr>chipped</tr>. <i>Ayawg tipki ni kay gamay na lang,</i> Don&apos;t break anything off of this piece. It&apos;s already small as it is. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b7]</itype> <tr>take away from</tr> one&apos;s money, time, etc. <i>Mutipak kug tirsiyu sa swildu pára sa buhis,</i> I <tr>chip in</tr> one-third of my salary for taxes. <i>Tipki kug diyútay sa ímung panahun,</i> <tr>Spare</tr> me a little of your time. <number>3</number> <itype>[AB12; a1]</itype> <tr>crack</tr>. <i>Kinsay nakatipak sa tibud?</i> Who cracked the jar? <i>Nagkatipak ang sag-ub nga pirming nabulad,</i> The bamboo bucket is getting cracked because it is constantly left in the sun. <i>Ayawg tipka nang básu,</i> Don&apos;t crack the glass. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a3]</itype> get a <tr>profit</tr> from s.t. <i>Dakù kug natipak sa gúmang ákung gibaligyà,</i> I made a lot from the tires I resold. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> piece broken from s.t. <number>2</number> s.t. taken, deducted from.

<p id=19029><form>tipaka, tipakà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fragments</tr>, small broken pieces. <i>Ang tipaka sa saang nahaságul sa unud,</i> The pieces of the shell got mixed with the meat. <i>Tipaka sa átung napusgay nga kaminyúun,</i> The fragments of our broken marriage. <number>2</number> hard outer <tr>hull</tr>, <tr>husk</tr>, or <tr>shell</tr> of fruits and nuts, <tr>eggshells</tr>, shells of crustaceans. <number>3</number> k.o. land <tr>snail</tr> introduced by the Japanese for food purposes.

<p id=19030><form>tipal-u</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>worm</tr> with legs, about <measure reg="2.6 cm">1&Prime;</measure> long, that tends to seek dark places and gives off phosphorescence when crushed.

<p id=19031><form>tipanu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bamboo flute</tr>.

<p id=19032><form>tipas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> <tr>veer</tr>, go in a new direction. <i>Mitipas siyag láing dálan arun dílì siya hikit-an,</i> He <tr>turned off</tr> onto another road, so they wouldn&apos;t find him. <number>1a</number> take off the way, turn away from one&apos;s goals. <i>Ayawg itipas ang ímung panganduy ngadtu sa kahiláyan,</i> Don&apos;t let your ambitions veer to lustful pleasures. <i>Inay idiritsu níyag hatud ang babáyi gitipas sa awáawng dapit,</i> Instead of taking the girl directly home, he took her off to a deserted place. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> for a conversation to take a new tack. <i>Mitipas ang ílang <pb n=1022>panagsulti ngadtus pulitika,</i> <corr sic=The>Their</corr> conversation shifted to politics. <form>{hi-|hitipas}/{ha-|hatipas}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be caused to veer, deviate. <i>Nahitipas na nà sa maáyung pamatásan,</i> That is far from good manners. <form>{-anan(&larr;)|tipasánan}, {-l-an(&larr;)|tilipásan}, {-an(&larr;)|tipásan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fork</tr> in a road, place where one turns off in a new direction.&dagger;

<p id=19033><form>tipasak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>splash</tr> hard against s.t. <i>Mitipasak ang ulan gíkan sa sandayung,</i> Rain splashed from the gutter. <pos>n</pos> splashing against s.t.

<p id=19034><form>tipasaw</form> <xr>= <sc>timpasaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19035><form>tipasì</form> (from <ix>pasì</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> unhusked rice. <number>2</number> a nobody compared with s.o. big. <i>Mangimbitar kag tipasì sa parti?</i> You&apos;re inviting a bunch of nobodies to the party? <form>{-un|tipasiun}</form> <pos>a</pos> for rice or corn to have lots of unhusked grains mixed in with it.

<p id=19036><form>tipay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. pearl <tr>oyster</tr> with a thin, black shell and brittle, tooth-like projections at the mouth. It is a source of mother-of-pearl. <number>2</number> <tr>mother-of-pearl</tr>. <i>Tipay ang gunitánan sa pistúla,</i> The pistol has a mother-of-pearl handle. <form>{pa&N;-|panipay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> dive for this sort of oyster.

<p id=19037><form>tipdas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>measles</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> have <ix>tipdas</ix>.

<p id=19038><form>tipdas<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b8]</itype> hit lightly, just barely <tr>graze</tr>. <i>Nagaras siya. Ígù lang nakatipdas ang panà,</i> He was scratched. The arrow just grazed him. <i>Way kásu, hitipdasan lang siya sa bála,</i> It&apos;s nothing serious. The bullet just grazed him.

<p id=19039><form>típì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>kill</tr> (slang). <i>Tipía ang saksi kun mupyáit,</i> <tr>Liquidate</tr> the witness if he sings.

<p id=19040><form>típig</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1, 2, 3</number> <xr>= <sc>tápig</sc>, <i>v1, 2, 3.</i></xr> <number>4</number> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> <tr>save money</tr>. <i>Maáyu nang magtípig pára sa pagkatigúlang,</i> It&apos;s good to <tr>save</tr> for your old age. <i>Tipígi ang subra sa galastúhan,</i> Save whatever you haven&apos;t spent. <form>{-in-an|tinipígan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>savings</tr>. <number>2</number> s.t. kept hidden. <i>Dúna siyay tinipígang pagbátì nímu,</i> She has a <tr>secret</tr> love for you. <form>{-anan|tipiganan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hiding place</tr>.

<p id=19041><form>tipik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> take a bit off s.t. <i>Dì giyud ka makatipik ánang kík pára nákù?</i> Can&apos;t you break a bit of that cake off for me? <i>Tipki sad ku sa ímung pagtagad,</i> Let me have a moment of your attention. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>small portion</tr>, a <tr>fraction</tr> of s.t. <i>Ang íyang hinábang tipik lang sa íyang bahandì,</i> His donation is only a fraction of what he has. <number>2</number> <tr>integral part</tr>. <i>Tipik ka na sa ákung kaugalíngun,</i> You&apos;re already a part of my being. <form>{ka-|katipik}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. that forms a whole together with s.t. else. <i>Ang yútà nga ákung gipalit katipik niadtu sa asyinda,</i> The land I bought was formerly <tr>part and parcel</tr> of the hacienda.

<p id=19042><form>tipíyu</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for <tr>Truck Public Utility</tr>, a group of vehicles classed for vehicular licensing purposes.

<p id=19043><form>tiplas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b8]</itype> <tr>graze</tr> slightly. <i>Natiplasan lang íyang agtang sa bála,</i> The bullet just grazed his forehead lightly. <form>{pa-|patiplas}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> aim s.t. so that it just grazes the target. <i>Patiplasa (ipatiplas) lang ang pagtíru sa púga,</i> Just graze the escapee when you shoot him.

<p id=19044><form>tipmisyur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tape measure</tr>.

<p id=19045><form>tipríkurd</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>típ<sub>3</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=19046><form>tipsing</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b8]</itype> hit s.t. at the edge. <i>Natipsingan ra níya ang targit,</i> He just hit the target at the edge. <form>walà sa {&mdash;|tipsing}</form> nothing as compared to. <form>{-in-|tinipsing}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>slivers of wood</tr> left after chopping. <i>Ang tinipsing sa káhuy nga átung gisapsápan maáyung idumálig,</i> The slivers of wood that we chopped are good to use as kindling. <number>2</number> <tr>small amount</tr> as compared to s.t. else. <i>Ang ímung natampu tinipsing lang (walà sa tipsing) sa akúa,</i> Your contribution is nothing compared to mine.

<p id=19047><form>tiptip</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>cut</tr> the tip of s.t. with scissors or shears. <i>Ang mutiptip sa balíli gantíhan,</i> Whoever clips the grass will get s.t. <number>1a</number> <itype>[AP; c1]</itype> cut close to the surface or ground. <i>Ákung gitiptípan (gipatiptípan) ang íyang buhuk kay gikutu,</i> I cut his hair very short because he has lots of lice. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> break s.t. with the teeth. <i>Kalabaw níla ang nagtiptip sa ámung mais,</i> Their carabao chewed up our corn. <pos>a</pos> <tr>cut close</tr> to the surface. <i>Tiptip kaáyung pagkaputul ang mga tuud sa nataran,</i> The stumps in the yard were cut close to the ground.

<p id=19048><form>típu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>liquid measure</tr> of various amounts depending on the locality. <number>1</number> for palm toddy, usually containing six liters. <number>2</number> containing about a ganta (3 liters). <form>tipuhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>container</tr> holding a <i>típu,</i> usually one or two nodes of bamboo.

<p id=19049><form>típu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>contours</tr>, <tr>shape</tr> of face. <i>Daw diyúsa ang típu sa íyang nawung,</i> Her profile is like a goddess&apos;. <form>may {&mdash;|típu}</form> having an <tr>attractive</tr> appearance. <i>May típu giyud nang tawhána dà,</i> That man is sure <tr>good-looking</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>type</tr> of person, <tr>personality</tr>. <i>Ang típu sa babáying ákung gustu kanang igat,</i> I like the type of girl that is a flirt.

<p id=19050><form>típu<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>weight</tr>, <tr>registered weight</tr> on the scale. <i>Pilay típu nímus timbangan?</i> What is your weight? (Lit. How much do you register on the scale?) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B256; c1]</itype> <tr>balance the scales</tr> by placing the rider on the zero mark. <i>Tipúha (itípu) ang timbangan úsà manimbang,</i> Place the rider on the zero mark before you weigh s.t.

<p id=19051><form>típù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>put together</tr>. <i>Kinsay nagtípù sa mga tutbras? Bayag magkabaylu,</i> Who <pb n=1023>put the toothbrushes together? Suppose they get mixed up? <i>Tipúa ang tanang ináni únà bahína,</i> Put all the harvest together before apportioning it. <form>{-an(&larr;)|tipúan}</form> <pos>n</pos> a crank-operated device for twisting strands into a rope.

<p id=19052><form>tipug-uk</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lumpy</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be, become lumpy. <i>Mutipug-uk (matipug-uk) ang harína ug dì ayágun,</i> The flour will become lumpy if it is not strained.

<p id=19053><form>tipuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>rub out</tr>, <tr>liquidate</tr> (slang). <i>Íyang gitipuk ang háwak sa Karbun silbing panimawus,</i> The chief tough of the Carbon market area was <tr>killed</tr> in revenge.

<p id=19054><form>tipuknul</form> <xr>= <sc>tibugul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19055><form>tipuksul</form> <pos>n</pos> lumps bulging out of a surface. <i>Mga tipuksul sa nawung,</i> Lumps on the face. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12P]</itype> <tr>bulge</tr> out of a surface, form a lump on. <i>Ayaw ug ibutang ang pistúla sa bulsa kay mutipuksul,</i> Don&apos;t put the pistol in the pocket because it will bulge.

<p id=19056><form>tipukù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> get on top of s.o. or s.t., hugging and bending it down. <i>Gitipuk-an níya ang bábuy,</i> He jumped on the pig and pinned it down. <number>1a</number> have a woman for intercourse (euphemism). <number>1b</number> use s.t. one sets oneself on. <i>Maay ka lang mutipukù ánang bisiklíta apan dì ka muáyu ug madáut,</i> You are good at using the bicycle, but are you good at fixing it if it breaks? <number>2</number> <tr>crowd around</tr> s.o. or s.t. <i>Mitipukù ang mga táwu sa labasíru,</i> The people crowded around the fish peddler. <i>Gitipuk-an sila sa mga lángaw,</i> A swarm of flies set on them.

<p id=19057><form>tipuk-ul</form> <xr>= <sc>tibugul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19058><form>tipúli</form> <pos>n</pos> the monkey-eating <tr>eagle</tr>: <bio>Pithecophaga jefferyi</bio>.

<p id=19059><form>tipúlu</form> <xr>= <sc>atipúlu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19060><form>típun</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> put, be <tr>together</tr>, <tr>join</tr> in a group. <i>Dì siya mutípun sa mga pundukpunduk,</i> He doesn&apos;t mingle with groups. <i>Iniglaba ayawg tipúna ang putì ug dikulur,</i> In doing the laundry don&apos;t put the white and colored clothes together. <i>Malatà nang prutása ug itípun sa lataun,</i> That fruit will get rotten if you put it together with rotten ones. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2C; c5]</itype> <tr>live together</tr>. <i>Pait ikatípun ning kusug muháguk,</i> It&apos;s terrible to <tr>live with</tr> s.o. who snores. <number>3</number> <itype>[C; c3]</itype> live as a <tr>common-law</tr> couple. <i>Magtípun lang ta, way kasalkásal,</i> Let&apos;s just live together without getting married. <pos>n</pos> being together. <i>Típun mi niadtug kwartu,</i> We were roommates formerly. <form>tipuntipun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible cerith <tr>shells</tr>, <measure reg="1.3&ndash;2.6 cm">&frac12;&Prime;&ndash;1&Prime;</measure> long, mud-colored or black, found on rocks or mangrove trees. <form>{-in-|tinípun}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. that has been put together. <i>Tinípung Bansa,</i> <tr>United States</tr>. <i>Tinípung Kanasúran,</i> <tr>United Nations</tr>. <form>{ka-|katípun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>housemate</tr>. <form>{ka-an|katipúnan}</form> <pos>n</pos> the <ix>Katipúnan,</ix> a secret revolutionary society which aimed at independence from Spain. <form>katipuníru</form> <pos>n</pos> a member of the <ix>Katipúnan</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> become a <ix>katipuníru</ix>. <form>{panag-|panagtípun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>living together</tr>, esp. as a couple. <number>2</number> <tr>gathering</tr>, <tr>coming together</tr>.

<p id=19061><form>tipun-ug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); c1]</itype> be piled up into a big heap. <i>Nagtipun-ug ang hugasan human sa parti,</i> There was a huge stack of dishes after the party. <i>Siya ang gitipun-ugan sa tanang pagbásul,</i> The blame was all dumped on him. <i>Tipun-úga (itipun-ug) lang ang mga sagbut dihà arun dabúkan,</i> Heap the trash there to burn it. <pos>n</pos> <tr>pile</tr>, <tr>heap</tr> of.

<p id=19062><form>típus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>typhus</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be sick with typhus.

<p id=19063><form>*tipúsa, *tipúsu</form> <form>balay, túri nga {&mdash;|tipúsa}</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to the <tr>Blessed Virgin</tr> in prayers.

<p id=19064><form>tipuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>money</tr> (slang). <i>Arang run mi kaambuy, way tipuy,</i> We&apos;re flat broke. Completely busted. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac1]</itype> have some money, have s.t. to use as money. <form>{pa&N;-|panipuy}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> get hold of money. <i>Makapanipuy gánì nà siya, pasíkat dáyun,</i> If he gets his hands on money he starts to show off.

<p id=19065><form>tipyas</form> <xr>= <sc>tiplas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19066><form>tíra</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>shoot</tr>. <i>Tiráhi dáyug langgam inigbátug,</i> Shoot the bird as soon as it lands on the branch. <number>2</number> dynamite fish. <i>Tiráhi bísag duut sa gagmayng isdà,</i> Blast it even if it&apos;s a school of small fish. <number>3</number> go after a girl (slang). <i>Mutíra siya bísag kinsa basta manimáhung babáyi,</i> He courts anybody as long as it smells like a woman. <number>4</number> have a woman for sexual purposes. <i>Mutíra nà bísag kúkuk,</i> He will have sexual intercourse even with prostitutes. <number>5</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>publish</tr>, <tr>appear in print</tr>. <i>Itíra nang balitáa sa pamantaláan ugmà,</i> That news will be published in the papers tomorrow. <pos>n</pos> <tr>shooting</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|tíra} pula</form> in a variety of billiards where only three balls are used, the condition that the player must hit the red ball first whenever he tries to make a carom. <form>{&mdash;|tíra} paságad</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hit-and-miss</tr>, <tr>at random</tr>. <i>Diplánu ang ámung panúlis, dì tíra paságad,</i> Our robberies are planned, not merely hit-and-miss. <i>Dì siya makaigù kay tíra pasàgad siyang manumbag,</i> He can&apos;t hit the mark because he shoots at random. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P]</itype> do s.t. thoughtlessly or indiscriminately. <i>Ayawg tíra paságad. Pilía ang laláking buútan,</i> Don&apos;t pick just anybody. Choose a good man to marry. <form>{-da|tiráda}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a single photographic <tr>exposure</tr>, <tr>shot</tr>. <i>Kining tiradáha didtu makúhà duul sa taytáyan,</i> This shot was taken near the bridge. <number>2</number> <tr>shot</tr> in a billiard game. <form>biyin {&mdash;|tiráda}</form> good shot. <number>3</number> <tr>attack</tr>, verbal or physical. <i>Kusug nga tirádang nakapalukápa níya,</i> A hard <tr>blow</tr> that sent him reeling. <number>4</number> the <pb n=1024>way one tries to persuade or <tr>approach</tr> s.o. (slang). <i>Sayup ímung tiráda hay imbis musugut, nasukù na hinúun,</i> Your <tr>approach</tr> was wrong because instead of consenting he became angry. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>attack</tr> s.o. verbally or physically. <i>Mutiráda ku bísag kinsa,</i> I&apos;ll sock anyone. <i>Gitiradáhan sa past&ucaron;r ang mga maut,</i> The minister <tr>lashed out</tr> at the hypocrites. <form>{-dur(&rarr;)|tiradur}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>slingshot</tr>. <number>2</number> one who lures victims into some sort of swindling operation. <i>Tiradur kanang nagpatúung giáyu sa tambálan,</i> The man who is pretending the doctor cured him is just there to lure victims. <number>3</number> one who engages in dynamite fishing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> shoot with a slingshot. <i>Tiradura ang manuk nga nanuktuk sa binlad,</i> Shoot the chicken that is pecking at the rice with a slingshot. <form>{pa&N;-|paníra}</form> <pos>n</pos> dynamite fishing.

<p id=19067><form>tirána</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>love song</tr> in a minor key of melancholy character. <form>míngaw pay (pa sa) {&mdash;|tirána}</form> <pos>a</pos> lacking in noise and gaiety. <i>Ang ílang pyista míngaw pay tirána (pa sa tirána),</i> The feast in their place was more mournful than the <ix>tirána</ix> love song.

<p id=19068><form>tiranti</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>high waistline</tr>. <i>Human sa lúwis úsu na sad ang tiranti nga karsúnis,</i> Pants with a high waistline became the fad following the low-waist. <number>2</number> <tr>suspenders</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear suspenders.

<p id=19069><form>tirar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> take s.o.&apos;s picture. <i>Pangítà ug táwu nga mutirar (manirar) kay nindut dinhi ug byú,</i> Look for s.o. to take our pictures because there&apos;s a nice view here.

<p id=19070><form>tíras</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lace</tr> used as trimming. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put ornamental lace on s.t. <i>Tirási ang sinínà arun manindut,</i> Put lace on the dress to make it pretty.

<p id=19071><form>tirása</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>terrace</tr>, an extension of the flooring of a house enclosed with a balustrade.

<p id=19072><form>tirasis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>terraced land</tr> or a piece of level land on the top of a mound for planting. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b5]</itype> build terraces.

<p id=19073><form>tiratíra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pull taffy</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make taffy.

<p id=19074><form>tirbis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b(1)]</itype> for men to engage in illicit physical enjoyments with girls on a short term basis. <i>Mutirbis ang bána ug manganak ang asáwa,</i> The husband engages in extra-marital relationships when his wife is in the maternity hospital. <form>{pa&N;-|panirbis}</form> <pos>n</pos> act of playing around with girls illicitly. <form>tirbistirbis</form> <xr>= <sc>tirbis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19075><form>tirbisíya</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26; b8]</itype> <tr>miscarry</tr>, result in failure. <i>Ug dílì mutirbisíya (matirbisíya) ang átung plánu, madátù giyud ta,</i> If our plans don&apos;t miscarry, we will surely be rich. <i>Ang dagkung swildu mauy nakatirbisíya (nakapatirbisíya) sa átung nigusyu,</i> Our business failed because we gave too big salaries. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; b8]</itype> suffer a misfortune. <i>Natirbisíya siya ug karun lúgus na makabisti sa íyang mga anak,</i> He suffered a misfortune and now he can hardly clothe his children.

<p id=19076><form>tirdrap</form> <pos>n</pos> an encased pearl pendant in the shape of a teardrop. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> wear a teardrop pendant.

<p id=19077><form>tiribli</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>horrible</tr>. <i>Tiribli ang nahitabù sa gilunúpang baryu,</i> What happened to the flooded barrio was horrible. <number>2</number> unusual in ability, intensity, degree. <i>Tiribli siyang mubaskitbul,</i> He plays basketball <tr>terribly</tr> well. <i>Tiribli níyang pagkagáhig úlu,</i> He&apos;s <tr>terribly</tr> stubborn.

<p id=19078><form>tiriktirik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> mark with dots. <i>Mga uwat sa buti mitiriktirik sa íyang nawung,</i> <tr>Pock-</tr>*marks dotted his face. <i>Ang birding panaptun giritiktirikan ug putì,</i> The green cloth is dotted with white dots. <pos>n</pos> <tr>dots</tr> all over s.t.

<p id=19079><form>tirírit</form> <xr>= <sc>tarírit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19080><form>tíris</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> an open <tr>terrace</tr> on top of buildings usually utilized as an open-air eating place. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>tirása</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19081><form>tirituryu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>territory</tr>.

<p id=19082><form>tirmina</form> <xr>= <sc>tirminar</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19083><form>tirminal<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>passenger terminal</tr>.

<p id=19084><form>tirminal<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> term in mahjong: <number>1</number> one of the end numbers (one or nine). <number>2</number> a sequence of three one&apos;s or three nine&apos;s of different designs. <form>{-is|tirminalis}</form> <xr>= <sc>tirminal<sub>2</sub></sc>, <i>1</i> (plural).</xr>

<p id=19085><form>tirminar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> give a specific date or time for. <i>Wà siya mutirminar kun anus-a mubálik,</i> He did not give a specific date for when he would come back. <number>2</number> <tr>predict</tr> that s.t. will happen. <i>Way makatirmina sa dadangátan sa kalag sa táwu,</i> No one can predict what will happen to a man&apos;s soul. <i>Gitirminahan nang dáan sa mga maistru nga mulampus siya,</i> The teachers have predicted that he would be a success.

<p id=19086><form>tirminit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>fire</tr> s.o. from his job. <i>Tirminitun (itirminit) ka giyud dáyun kun musúkul ka,</i> You&apos;ll surely be fired if you are insubordinate.

<p id=19087><form>tirminu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>term</tr>, <tr>word</tr>. <number>1a</number> <tr>meaning</tr>, <tr>nuance</tr>. <i>Púlung nga nagdalag láing tirminu,</i> Words that have a meaning other than what is usually understood. <number>2</number> <tr>limit</tr>, <tr>end</tr>. <i>Adúnay tirminu ang tanan. Ang tanan lumalábay lámang,</i> Everything must come to an end. Everything is transient. <number>2a</number> <tr>term</tr>, <tr>tenure</tr> in office. <number>2b</number> specific date or day. <i>Way tirminu ning ákung byáhi kay nag-agad sa panahun,</i> My trip has no fixed date. It depends on the weather. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give a term, <tr>name</tr>. <i>Unsay maáyung itirminu ánang sakíta?</i> What would be a good term for that disease?

<pb n=1025>

<p id=19088><form>tirmumitru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>thermometer</tr>.

<p id=19089><form>tirmus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>thermos bottle</tr>.

<p id=19090><form>tirnu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> man&apos;s <tr>suit</tr>. <number>2</number> formal woman&apos;s <tr>native dress</tr>, of floor length and one piece. <number>3</number> outfit consisting of two or more pieces matching in color. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> wear or make a suit or terno dress. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> for different articles of apparel to match. <i>Nagatirnu ang ímung bág ug sanínà,</i> Your bag and your dress match. <pos>a</pos> <tr>matching</tr>, of the same color.

<p id=19091><form>tirsíra</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>third gear</tr> of a motor vehicle. <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;|tirsíra} klási</formx> <tr>third class</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> put into third gear. <i>Wà ku makatirsíra sa hustung higayun,</i> I wasn&apos;t able to put it into third gear on time.

<p id=19092><form>tirsíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>third in rank</tr>, grade. <number>2</number> one who is a <tr>third grader</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B256]</itype> be in the third grade. <i>Mutirsíru na siya karung abli,</i> He&apos;ll be in the third grade this year.

<p id=19093><form>tirsiya parti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>one-third</tr>.

<p id=19094><form>tirsiyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>one-third</tr>. <i>Tirsiyu ang báhin sa tag-íya sa yútà,</i> The owner gets a third as his share. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2; a12]</itype> divide s.t. into three equal shares.

<p id=19095><form>tirsiyupílu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>velvet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> wear, put velvet on s.t.

<p id=19096><form>*tirtin</form> <form>{&mdash;|tirtin} kards</form> <pos>n</pos> a manner of playing <tr>mahjong</tr> using 13 pieces for each player. <form>{&mdash;|tirtin} tils</form> <pos>n</pos> a winning mahjong hand that has four <ix>iksibisiyun</ix> combinations.

<p id=19097><form>tíru</form> <xr>= <sc>tíra</sc>, <i>v1,</i> 2, 5.</xr> <form>{pa&N;-|paníru}</form> <xr>= <sc>paníra</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19098><form>tírung</form> <pos>n</pos> a supernatural being of dwarfish proportions with a strong body of iron or stone, said to inhabit isolated cliffs and caves. It is popularly said that the machinery in sugar mills is under the control of a <ix>tírung</ix> and it will not function unless he is fed. Hence, children are popularly threatened to be fed to this monster. <i>Hílak arun iláwug ta ka sa tírung,</i> Keep crying and I&apos;ll feed you to the monster.

<p id=19099><form>tirungan</form> <xr>= <sc>tulungan</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>túlung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19100><form>Tiruray</form> <pos>n</pos> an ethnic group in Upi, Cotabato.

<p id=19101><form>tirurismu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>terrorism</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>terrorize</tr>. <i>Mudaug lang siya kun tirurismúhun níya ang butanti,</i> He will win only if he terrorizes the voters.

<p id=19102><form>tirus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>squeeze</tr> nits or lice with the thumbnail or an itchy part of the body between the thumbnails. <i>Tirusa ang mga katul sa ákung likud,</i> Squeeze the itchy places on my back between your nails.

<p id=19103><form>tirúti</form> <xr>= <sc>tarúti</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19104><form>tís<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>tease</tr> the hair. <i>Tísa ákung buhuk,</i> Tease my hair.

<p id=19105><form>tís<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>test</tr> in school. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> have a test. <i>Ákù mung tísun báhin sa asayinmint,</i> I&apos;ll give you a test on the assignment.

<p id=19106><form>tísà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. single-seeded <tr>fruit</tr>, the size and shape of a small pear with bright yellow, inedible skin and flesh which is sweet and fleshy but dry: <bio>Lucuma nervosa</bio>.

<p id=19107><form>tísà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>roofing tile</tr>.

<p id=19108><form>tísà<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tísas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19109><form>tisar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> sit or <tr>stand straight</tr>; have a bent back straightened. <i>Mitisar ang kadíti dáyung salúdu,</i> The cadet stood straight and executed a salute. <i>Matisar pa nang ímung pagkabakù,</i> Your bent posture can still be corrected. <pos>a</pos> <tr>straight</tr> in posture.

<p id=19110><form>tísas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chalk</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> use, apply chalk on s.t. <form>{(&rarr;)|tisas}</form> <xr>= <sc>tísas</sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr>

<p id=19111><form>tisay</form> (from <ix>mistísa</ix>) <pos>n</pos> woman with some Caucasian blood or features (slang).

<p id=19112><form>tisiku</form> <pos>n</pos> one who has <tr>tuberculosis</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be, become a tubercular.

<p id=19113><form>tísirt</form> <pos>n</pos> a sport shirt that slips over the head: <tr>T-shirt</tr>, <tr>polo shirt</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> wear a T-shirt.

<p id=19114><form>tísis<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tuberculosis</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> for a sickness to become tuberculosis. <i>Matísis ang ubung pinasagdan,</i> A cough that is not treated will turn into tuberculosis. <number>2</number> <itype>[a4]</itype> get T.B. <i>Gitísis siya kay kúlag káun,</i> He got tuberculosis because he didn&apos;t eat enough. <form>{-un|tisisun}</form> a tubercular person.

<p id=19115><form>tísis<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>thesis</tr>, <tr>dissertation</tr> for a degree. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> write a thesis.

<p id=19116><form>tiskug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> <tr>stiffen</tr> so as to lose a pliant quality. <i>Mitiskug ang íyang líug sa kalísang,</i> Her neck stiffened in fear.

<p id=19117><form>tiskwir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>T-square</tr>.

<p id=19118><form>tislang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> stand <tr>erect</tr>. <i>Dì na mutislang ang kinatáwu sa tigúlang,</i> An old man&apos;s penis will no longer erect. <i>Magtislang ang buhuk kun dì pamadáhan,</i> Your hair will stand on end if you don&apos;t put pomade in it.

<p id=19119><form>tislaub, tisláub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>fall into</tr> s.t. with a splash. <i>Natisláub (mitisláub) siya sa tunaan,</i> He fell into the mudhole. <i>Mau nang basáka ang íyang gitislaúban,</i> That&apos;s the rice paddy she fell into. <number>1a</number> fall into a state viewed as bad. <i>Mitisláub sila sa bung-aw sa pulitika,</i> They plunged into the sinkhole of politics. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> for an area to get a depression in it. <form>{(&rarr;)|tislaub}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shallow depression</tr>.

<p id=19120><form>tislub</form> <xr>= <sc>tunlub</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19121><form>tislup</form> <xr>= <sc>taslup</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19122><form>tisngì</form> <xr>= <sc>tingsì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19123><form>tispípar</form> <pos>n</pos> papers for a <tr>test</tr>.

<p id=19124><form>tist</form> <xr>= <sc>tís<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=19125><form>tistamintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>testament</tr>, <tr>will</tr>. <form>Bag-ung {&mdash;|Tistamintu}</form> <tr>New Testament</tr>. <form>Dáang {&mdash;|Tistamintu}</form> <tr>Old Testament</tr>.

<p id=19126><form>tist&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>make a will</tr>. <i>Ang kamanghúrang anak mauy gitistahan sa karáang balay,</i> The ancestral home was bequeathed to the <pb n=1026>youngest son.

<p id=19127><form>tistígus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>witness in court</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> act as a <tr>witness</tr> in court. <i>Way mutistígus kay mahadluk nga maapil,</i> Nobody wants to testify because they are afraid of getting involved.

<p id=19128><form>tistimunyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>testimony</tr>. <i>Ang tistimunyu sa tistígus,</i> The witness&apos; testimony. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>give testimony</tr>, <tr>profession</tr>. <i>Gitistimunyu níya ang íyang pagkakábig,</i> She testified as to her conversion.

<p id=19129><form>tisting</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>test</tr>, <tr>try</tr> s.t. <i>Nagtisting pa gánì ta nadáut na,</i> All we were doing was testing it and it broke. <i>Tistíngi ang brík,</i> Test the brakes. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> try s.t. new to have a taste of it. <i>Mutisting kug LSD kun unsay mahitabù,</i> I&apos;ll try LSD and see what it leads to.

<p id=19130><form>tistir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tester</tr> used to detect electric, electronic problems.

<p id=19131><form>tistis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> <tr>joke</tr>. <i>Mu ra kug gitíkun kun siya nay manistis (mutistis),</i> It is as if he tickles me when he tells jokes. <i>Dúna siyay bag-ung itistis káda prugráma níya,</i> He has new jokes for each of his programs. <pos>n</pos> joke. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|tistisan}</form> <pos>a</pos> given to joking. <form>{ma-un|matistísun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>joking</tr>. <i>Matistísung kulukabildu,</i> A joking conversation. <form>{-ay(&rarr;)|tistisay}, {-anay|tistisánay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2; c3]</itype> exchange jokes. <i>Nagtistisay (nagtistisánay) ang mga hubug sa tubaan,</i> The drunks are exchanging jokes at the toddy stand. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> exchanging jokes. <number>2</number> art of telling jokes. <form>{pa&N;-|panistis}</form> <xr>= <sc>{-ay(&rarr;)|tistisay}</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr>

<p id=19132><form>tísu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>erect</tr> in posture. <i>Ang suldádu tísu kaáyu ug láwas,</i> A soldier has a very erect body. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B]</itype> be, become erect. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> carry one&apos;s body straight and erect. <i>Itísu ang láwas inigkaman ug atinsiyun,</i> Stand straight at the command of attention.

<p id=19133><form>tisuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>plant seed</tr> into the ground. <i>Nagtisuk kug nangkà sa nátad,</i> I planted a jackfruit seed in the yard. <number>1a</number> thrust a sharp object on the ground. <i>Gitisuk sa manggugubat ang íyang bangkaw sa atubángan sa rayna,</i> The warrior planted his spear before the queen. <number>2</number> <tr>implant</tr> in the mind. <i>Itisuk sa hunàhúnà ang ákung pahimatngun,</i> Implant my advice firmly in your mind.

<p id=19134><form>tisun</form> <xr>= <sc>tísu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19135><form>tisuríra</form> <xr>= <sc>tisuríru</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=19136><form>tisuriríya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>treasury</tr>.

<p id=19137><form>tisuríru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>treasurer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> be, make a treasurer. <i>Tisurirúhun nímu nang kiriwan?</i> Are you going to make that crook the treasurer?

<p id=19138><form>tisuy</form> <xr>= <sc>tisay</sc> (male).</xr>

<p id=19139><form>tisyirt</form> <xr>= <sc>tísirt</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19140><form>títa</form> <xr>= <sc>títu</sc> (female).</xr> <form>titatíta</form> <xr>= <sc>kitakíta</sc>, <i>2, v2.</i></xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>kita</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19141><form>titanus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tetanus</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> for s.t. to become tetanus. <number>2</number> <itype>[a4]</itype> <tr>get tetanus</tr>.

<p id=19142><form>tithi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>spit</tr> out in a tiny squirt. <i>Naíkug kung mutithi sa bínung labihang isúga,</i> I was ashamed to spit out the strong wine.

<p id=19143><form>títi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>breast</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> suck the breast. <i>Malináwung nagtíti ang masúsu,</i> The infant is peacefully sucking the breast.

<p id=19144><form>titì, títì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dirty</tr> (child talk). <i>Titì kaáyu ang nawung nímu,</i> Your face is very dirty. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be, become dirty.

<p id=19145><form>títì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> address of respect to an elder <tr>brother</tr> or a close male relative. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> call s.o. <i>títì.</i>

<p id=19146><form>títì<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>títi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19147><form>tìtì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>drain</tr>, <tr>consume</tr> to the last drop or bit. <i>Ang íyang bisyu mauy nakatìtì sa ílang tinígum,</i> His vice exhausted their savings entirely. <i>Ákung gitìtì ang katapúsang túlù sa kukakúla,</i> I drained the last drop of Coca-Cola. <number>2</number> use s.t. up in a figurative sense. <i>Natìtì na ang ákung paílub,</i> My patience is exhausted. <form>{ka-un(&rarr;)|katìtiun}</form> <pos>n</pos> state of being used up entirely.

<p id=19148><form>títik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>write</tr>, <tr>print</tr> letters or words. <i>Ngálan sa kandidátu ang gitítik sa karatula,</i> The candidate&apos;s name is printed on the billboard. <pos>n</pos> <tr>letter</tr> of the alphabet. <form>{pa&N;-|panítik}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>spelling</tr>. <form>{ka-an|katitíkan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>writings</tr>, <tr>literature</tr>. <i>Inila siyang magsusúlat sa Katitíkang Bisayà,</i> He is a noted writer in Visayan Literature.

<p id=19149><form>titip, títip</form> <pos>a</pos> very <tr>steep</tr>. <i>Way makasáka ánang titip nga pangpang,</i> No one can climb that very steep cliff. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> consider s.t. steep.

<p id=19150><form>títit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> say beep-beep in pretending to blow one&apos;s horn. <i>Mutítit gánì ku, manlarga na kunúhay ta,</i> When I say beep-beep, let&apos;s pretend we&apos;re leaving. <pos>n</pos> <tr>horn</tr> (child&apos;s talk).

<p id=19151><form>tits<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> humorous, impolite term of address to a man, usually used when negating s.t. he says: <tr>buster</tr>, <tr>buddy roe</tr>. <i>Ilára tits. Úna pa ku nímu sa dúyan,</i> Don&apos;t try to fool me, buster! I wasn&apos;t born yesterday. <i>Hadlúka tits,</i> You can&apos;t scare me, buddy roe. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> call s.o. by this title.<i> À, gitits lang níya si prupísur,</i> He dared call the professor &lsquo;buddy&rsquo;.

<p id=19152><form>tits<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>teach</tr> in school. <i>Nagt&icaron;ts dáyun ku humag graduwar,</i> I taught right after graduation. <form>praktis {-ing|titsing}</form> <pos>n</pos> practice teaching. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> do practice teaching. <i>Ang mga búgù ang ákung gipraktis titsíngan,</i> I have dull students for my practice teaching. <form>{-ir(&larr;)|títsir}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>teacher</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be a teacher.

<p id=19153><form>títu</form> <pos>n</pos> address of respect for an <tr>uncle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c12]</itype> call s.o. <ix>títu</ix>.

<p id=19154><form>tituláda</form> <xr>= <sc>tituládu</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=19155><form>tituládu</form> <pos>n</pos> one who has a <tr>degree</tr>. <i>Dílì ka makasulud <pb n=1027>ug trabáhu ug dì ka tituládu,</i> You can&apos;t get a job if you don&apos;t have a degree. <number>2</number> land having a Torrens Title. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> have a degree.

<p id=19156><form>titulu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> professional <tr>degree</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>title</tr>, name of literary works. <number>3</number> document certifying legal <tr>ownership</tr> of a piece of land. <form>humstid {&mdash;|titulu}, pripatin {&mdash;|titulu}</form> <tr>homestead</tr>, free <tr>patent</tr> title. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>entitle</tr>, name a work. <i>Ang maung lílas gitituluhan ug Tintal,</i> The movie is entitled Temptation. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> make documents certifying to legal ownership of land. <i>Makalún lang ta kun tituluhan nátù ang yútà,</i> We can make a loan only if we have a title prepared for the lot. <form>{&mdash;|titulu} túrins</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Torrens Title</tr>.

<p id=19157><form>titurun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tetoron cloth</tr>.

<p id=19158><form>tiudtiud</form> <xr>= <sc>taudtaud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19159><form>tíug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> be known and talked about. <i>Wà matíug ang ílang panagtrátu kay tinagùtagù man,</i> People don&apos;t know that they are engaged, for they meet in secret. <i>Gikatíug nga aku awuk,</i> They say around here that I&apos;m a vampire. <pos>a</pos> thing talked about. <form>{ba&N;-(&rarr;)|baniug}</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>baniug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19160><form>tiuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>choke</tr> s.o. by putting s.t. around his throat. <i>Ayawg hugta ang kurbáta kay matiuk ku,</i> Don&apos;t tighten the necktie so tight or I will choke.

<p id=19161><form>tíun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>point a weapon</tr> at close range. <i>Íyang gitiúnan ang ákung agtang,</i> He took aim at my forehead. <i>Ayawg itíun nà nákù,</i> Don&apos;t <tr>point</tr> that thing at me.

<p id=19162><form>tiúnay</form> (from <ix>unay</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. deeply imbedded in the flesh such that one must dig to get it out. <i>Gikúhà sa duktur ang tiúnay sa ákung dughan,</i> The doctor removed the arrowhead from my chest. <number>2</number> <tr>true</tr>, <tr>sincere</tr>. <i>Salígi king gugmang tiúnay,</i> Trust this sincere love (of mine). <number>3</number> <corr sic=interest>inherent</corr>, natural property of. <i>Ang kabangis tiúnay sa tawhánung kinaíya,</i> Pugnaciousness is inherent in human nature. <number>4</number> <xr>= <sc>kasya<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be deeply <tr>imbedded</tr>. <i>Gugmang nagtiúnay sa dughan,</i> A love that has penetrated deep into my breast.

<p id=19163><form>tiúruk</form> (from <ix>úruk</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AP; cP]</itype> <tr>dive</tr>, <tr>go down</tr> headfirst. <i>Mitiúruk (mipatiúruk) ang ayruplánu,</i> The airplane took a <tr>nose-dive</tr>. <i>Itiúruk (ipatiúruk) ang tabánug unyà ipasáka na sad,</i> Have the kite nose-dive then let it climb up. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1246]</itype> <tr>fall headfirst</tr>. <i>Nabálì ang íyang líug kay natiúruk pagkahúlug,</i> He broke his neck when he fell headfirst. <form>{&mdash;|tiúruk} sa búhat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> do s.t. <tr>conscientiously</tr>, work without lifting the head. <i>Dì nà siya mutiúruk sa búhat,</i> He is not conscientious in his work. <form>{hi-|hitíuruk}/{ha-|hatíuruk}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be caused to bow one&apos;s head. <i>Nahitiúruk siya sa dihang nauláwan siyag maáyu,</i> He bowed his head in shame.

<p id=19164><form>tiúrus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; a]</itype> <number>1</number> continue <tr>going on</tr>, speed away. <i>Mitiúrus siyag lakaw bisan gitawag,</i> He continued walking away even though s.o. was calling him. <i>Gitiúrus níya ang dágan sa trák,</i> He sped away with the truck. <number>2</number> <tr>slide</tr> down, <tr>swoop</tr> down. <i>Mitiúrus ang ayruplánu ngadtu sa kaáway,</i> The plane swooped down on the enemy. <i>Labihan níyang nakatiúrus sa káhuy sa pagkakità níya sa bitin,</i> How quickly he got down from the tree when he saw the snake.

<p id=19165><form>tius-us</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>daílus</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>us-us</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr>

<p id=19166><form>tiwangwang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> <tr>spread</tr> or <tr>open</tr> apart from a vertex or hinge-like joint. <i>Nagtiwangwang ang mga basahun sa lamísa,</i> The books are laid open on the table. <i>Gitiwangwang níya ang íyang páa,</i> She spread her thighs apart.

<p id=19167><form>tiwas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>finish</tr>, <tr>complete</tr>. <i>Wà ku makatiwas ug káun kay nabukug ku,</i> I didn&apos;t finish eating because a bone got stuck in my throat. <i>Tiwasa úsà ang iskuyla únà ka magminyù,</i> Finish your studies first before you get married. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; b]</itype> give a <tr>finishing blow</tr>, kill in the end. <i>Ang kaguul mauy nakatiwas (nakapatiwas) sa masakitun,</i> Grief finished off the sick man. <i>Ug mulíhuk pa gánì tiwasi (tiwsi),</i> If he still moves, deliver him the coup-de-grace. <number>3</number> <itype>[C2]</itype> conclude a conflict by fighting it out to the death. <i>Huy animal! Kanáug diri arun magtíwas ta,</i> Hey you! Come on down here so we can fight it out to the death. <pos>n</pos> <tr>finished</tr>. <i>Tiwas na ang ákung pípar,</i> My paper is all done. <form>{pa-|patiwas}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> have s.o. bring s.t. to an end. <number>2</number> <itype>[c]</itype> have s.o. get married. <i>Ipatiwas na sila si Tabúra ug si Tunyu,</i> Have Tonio and Tabora get married.

<p id=19168><form>tiwsan</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tiwas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19169><form>tiwtiw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> wave a finger at s.o. to <tr>scold</tr>, <tr>accuse</tr>. <i>Sa íyang pagbuybuy nákù, gitiwtíwan ku,</i> He waved his fingers at me as he listed all the good things he had done for me. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|tiwtiwan}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>nagging</tr>, <tr>scolding</tr> by shaking a finger at. <number>2</number> <tr>gossiping</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> be a nag. <number>2</number> be gossiping.

<p id=19170><form>tiwtiw<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>batiwtiw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19171><form>tiyà, tíyà</form> <pos>n</pos> term of address for one&apos;s <tr>aunt</tr> or the female cousins of one&apos;s parents, or by extension any woman older than the speaker. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> call s.o. aunt. <i>Tiyaa nang tindíra ágig táhud,</i> Call the woman in the store auntie as a sign of respect.

<p id=19172><form>tiyan, tíyan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>stomach</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>pregnancy</tr>. <i>Pila na ka búlan ang ímung tiyan?</i> How many months along are you (lit. is your stomach)? <pb n=1028><form>{(&rarr;)|tiyan}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> hit in the <tr>stomach</tr>. <i>Gitiyan nákù siyag sumbag,</i> I hit him in the stomach. <form>{-un(&larr;)|tiyánun}</form> <pos>a</pos> having prominent stomach.

<p id=19173><form>tiyù, tíyù</form> <pos>n</pos> term of address for one&apos;s parents&apos; brother or male cousins, or by extension, any man older than the speaker. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c12]</itype> call s.o. <tr>uncle</tr>.

<p id=19174><form>tl</form> written representation of a <corr sic=dorso-patatal>dorso-palatal</corr> imploded click used in urging a horse to move.

<p id=19175><form>tling</form> written representation of the sound made by strumming a guitar.

<p id=19176><form>trabáhu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>work</tr>, <tr>go to work</tr>. <i>Nagtrabáhu siya sa kapitul,</i> He is working at the Capitol. <i>Ámung tindáhan ang íyang gitrabahúan,</i> She is working in our store. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A123S]</itype> obtain employment. <i>Lisud makatrabahu ang ikskanbik,</i> An ex-convict has a hard time finding employment. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>work on</tr> s.t. <i>Trabahúa ang íyang sinínà,</i> Work on her dress. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> have <tr>sexual intercourse</tr> (euphemism). <i>Ayawg trabahúa ímung asáwa ug nagrigla,</i> Don&apos;t have intercourse with your wife when she menstruates. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> piece of work. <number>2</number> <tr>job</tr>. <form>trabahadur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>manual laborer</tr>. <pos>a</pos> one who works hard on manual labor. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a <tr>laborer</tr>. <i>Natrabahadur siya sa gihímung karsáda,</i> He was a laborer on a road-building project. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be a hard worker (usually said of manual work). <i>Ang tingúhang muuswag mauy nakapatrabahadur (nakatrabahadur) níya,</i> He was a hard worker because of his desire to prosper. <form>{-a(&larr;)|trabahadúra}</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>trabahadur</sc> (female).</xr> <form>trabahanti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>laborer</tr>, <tr>employee</tr>. <pos>a</pos> hard worker. <i>Ang táwung trabahanti dì gustung mupahúway,</i> A hard worker does not want to rest. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a laborer, employee. <i>Natrabahanti siya sa ákung upisína,</i> He was an employee at my office.

<p id=19177><form>*trabiling</form> <form>{&mdash;|trabiling} bag</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>traveling bag</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|trabiling} nga sinihan</form> <pos>n</pos> commercial movie that moves from place to place.

<p id=19178><form>trabilirs tri</form> <pos>n</pos> traveller <tr>palm</tr>, an ornamental palm with leaves like a banana spread in a fan-like arrangement: <bio>Ravenala madagascariensis</bio>.

<p id=19179><form>trabisíya</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> go around s.t., go the long way around instead of directly to one&apos;s destination. <i>Nakatrabisíya na ang gwardiya sa prisuhan,</i> The guard has made the rounds of the prison. <i>Itrabisíya ang sakayan kun sungsungun ang hángin,</i> Let the boat go round about if you have to go against the wind. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> place a private bet against a member of the crowd in the cockpit. <i>Itrabisíya únà ang kwarta arun mutúbù,</i> First bet the money around among the onlookers so it will grow. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> lie diagonally across s.t. <i>Kun magtrabisíya kita paghigdà masulud kitang tanan niíning katri,</i> If we lie diagonally across the bed, we can all get in it. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> place for onlookers, crowd, etc. around a cockpit. <i>Anhà siya sa trabisíya,</i> He stays in the place for the onlookers. <number>2</number> cockpit audience or crowd. <i>Ang trabisíya nanghugyaw,</i> The crowd in the cockpit yelled.

<p id=19180><form>trabungku</form> <pos>n</pos> in folk belief, a glowing, round stone which confers magical powers on whoever gets hold of it. It is said to be found in the possession of certain snakes.

<p id=19181><form>tradisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> traditional <tr>customs</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become <tr>traditional</tr>.<i> Natradisiyun na dinhi ang pagpanaygun mapasku,</i> It has become a <tr>tradition</tr> here to go caroling at Christmas.

<p id=19182><form>tráha</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>threads</tr> of a screw, pipe, and the like. <number>2</number> mechanical device for forming threads. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> make threads.

<p id=19183><form>tráhi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a complete <tr>men&apos;s suit</tr>. <number>2</number> an article of clothing that is part of a suit. <i>Kining karsunísa tráhi sa amirkána,</i> This is the pair of pants that goes with the suit. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6(1)]</itype> wear a suit. <form>{&mdash;|tráhi} dibayli</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ball gown</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|tráhi} dibúda, {sa kasal|tráhi sa kasal}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wedding dress</tr>.

<p id=19184><form>trahidiya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tragedy</tr>.

<p id=19185><form>trák</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>motor vehicle</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>bus</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> go by bus or truck. <i>Mas dalì ang magtrák kay sa magbarku,</i> Going by bus is faster than by boat. <form>{&mdash;|trák} dikarga</form> <tr>cargo truck</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|trák} dipasahíru</form> <tr>passenger bus</tr>. <form>{-ing|tráking}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>trucking</tr>, the business of trucking. <i>Dúna siyay tráking ug láging nga kumpaníya,</i> He has a trucking and logging company. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> go into the trucking business.

<p id=19186><form>traktur, traktúra</form> <pos>n</pos> farm <tr>tractor</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> use a tractor.

<p id=19187><form>trakúma</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>trachoma</tr>, an infection of the eyes. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> become trachoma. <number>2</number> <itype>[a4]</itype> have trachoma.

<p id=19188><form>trambíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tramway</tr>.

<p id=19189><form>trambutsu</form> <xr>= <sc>tambutsu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19190><form>trampas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>trick</tr> set to deceive, fix s.t. <i>Way trampas tung madyíka. Tinúud giyung madyik,</i> There was no trick in the act. It was a real magic.

<p id=19191><form>trampit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>trumpet</tr> with pistons. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> play a trumpet. <i>Kinsay nagtrampit adtung sunatáha?</i> Who played the trumpet in that piece? <form>{-ir(&rarr;)|trampitir}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>trumpeter</tr>.

<p id=19192><form>trangka</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>bolt</tr> a doorway, shutter, close with a crossbar. <i>Trangkahi (trangkáhi) ang bintánà kay dúna unyay kawatan,</i> Bolt the window, because a robber might come. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN2]</itype> bolt oneself in a room, house, etc. <i>Nasukù siya maung nanrangka (nanarangka, nagtrangka) sa kwartu,</i> She was angry and <pb n=1029>bolted herself in the room. <pos>n</pos> bolt or crossbar. <form>trangkahan</form> <pos>n</pos> gate or door fastened with a bolt. <i>Giúyug sa prísu ang trangkahan,</i> The prisoner shook the gate. <form>{-du|trangkádu}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>locked</tr>.&dagger;

<p id=19193><form>trangkásu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>influenza</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> cause, have influenza.

<p id=19194><form>transaksiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>transaction</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2; c3]</itype> have a transaction with s.o. <i>Dì ku makigtransaksiyun ug tikasan,</i> I won&apos;t do business with a cheat.

<p id=19195><form>transistur</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>transistor</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>transistorized radio</tr>.

<p id=19196><form>transkrip</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>transcript</tr> of academic records.

<p id=19197><form>transmisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>automotive transmission</tr>. <number>1a</number> <tr>transmission</tr> of power. <number>2</number> radio, <tr>TV transmission</tr>.

<p id=19198><form>transmit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>transmit</tr> a message by radio, telegraph, etc. <i>Itransmit dáyun nang tiligráma kay dinalian,</i> Transmit that cable right away because it&apos;s urgent.

<p id=19199><form>transmítir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> radio, <tr>TV transmitter</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>transmitter</tr> site.

<p id=19200><form>transpigurasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> transformation of the bread and wine in the mass into the body and blood of Jesus Christ.

<p id=19201><form>transpir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>transfer</tr> from one school to another, from one job to another. <i>Mutranspir ku sa Yúbi sunud túig,</i> I&apos;ll transfer to <xr><sc>u.v</sc>.</xr> next year. <i>Itranspir dáyun sa publasiyun kadtung duul sa luwag,</i> Workers close to the officials (lit. ladle) don&apos;t take long to get their transfer to town. <pos>n</pos> order or authorization of transfer.

<p id=19202><form>transpurmir</form> <pos>n</pos> electrical <tr>transformer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> use a transformer on. <i>Transpurmíri ang tíbi arun magáwì sa dusbayinting bultáhi,</i> Use a transformer with the television so we can plug it into 220 volts.

<p id=19203><form>transpurtasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>transportation</tr>, mode of travel. <i>Wà nay transpurtasiyun ngadtu human sa bagyu,</i> There was no way to get there after the storm.

<p id=19204><form>transpurti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>transport</tr>, <tr>troop ship</tr>. <i>Galamitun sa gíra nga gikargas dagkung transpurti,</i> War equipment that was loaded on big transports. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> travel, convey in a troop ship.

<p id=19205><form>trantádu</form> <xr>= <sc>tarantádu</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>taranta</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19206><form>trapal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tarpaulin</tr>. <i>Trapal ang gawíun sa paggamag tihíras,</i> They use <tr>canvas</tr> to make cots. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6(1)]</itype> cover s.t. with tarpaulin. <i>Gitrapalan ang mga sinakung simintu pag-ulan,</i> They covered the bags of cement with tarpaulin when it rained.

<p id=19207><form>trápik</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>traffic</tr>. <number>2</number> street intersection with a traffic light in it. <number>3</number> policeman directing traffic. <number>4</number> <formx>way {&mdash;|trápik}</formx> lacking manners. <i>Wà kay trápik. Mulatas ka man sa taliwálà sa mga táwung nagsultihánay,</i> You have no manners. You pass between people talking. <pos>a</pos> heavy traffic. <i>Trápik kaáyu ug alas dúsi,</i> The traffic is heavy at twelve o&apos;clock. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>direct traffic</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a traffic policeman. <number>3</number> <itype>[B6]</itype> for traffic to be heavy, congested. <i>Magtrápik ang karsáda ug dúnay parid,</i> Traffic is congested if there&apos;s a parade. <number>4</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> be caught in a traffic jam. <i>Natrápik ku sa Kulun,</i> I was caught in a traffic jam on Colon Street.

<p id=19208><form>trapiku</form> <xr>= <sc>trápik</sc>, <i>n, v2.</i></xr>

<p id=19209><form>trápu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b1]</itype> <tr>wipe</tr> a large area. <i>Nagtrápu siya sa singut sa bátà,</i> She&apos;s wiping off the child&apos;s sweat. <i>Trapúhi ang lamísa únà basyúhi,</i> Wipe the table before setting it. <i>Trapúhi ring lipstik sa ákung ngábil,</i> Wipe the lipstick off my lips. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> clean s.o. by rubbing with a wet cloth. <i>Trapúhi lang ang bátà kay kahilanatun,</i> Just <tr>wash</tr> the child off with a wet cloth because he&apos;s feverish. <number>3</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> in games: be badly beaten. <i>Sa baskit gitrápu mi sa San Karlus,</i> We were badly beaten by San Carlos in basketball. <number>4</number> <itype>[B1256; c1]</itype> make old garments into rags for wiping. <i>Trapuha (itrapu) na lang ning gisiun nga bláwus,</i> Make this old, worn-out blouse into rags. <number>5</number> <itype>[A1; c16]</itype> finish a big quantity of food. <i>Duha ra ka táwu ang nagtrápu sa usa ka k&umacracu;ng linúgaw,</i> Two people finished off the whole potful of porridge. <form>{(&rarr;)|trapu}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rag</tr> or anything for wiping. <form>{pa&N;-|panrápu}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> <number>1</number> wipe oneself dry. <i>Nanarápu (nanrápu) siya human kalígù,</i> He dried himself after he took a bath. <number>2</number> clean oneself with a washcloth. <i>Dì ku malígù. Manarápu lang ku,</i> I won&apos;t take a bath, I&apos;ll just wash myself with a washcloth.

<p id=19210><form>traski</form> [so-and-so] is bad enough, but in addition [such-and-such] must happen. <i>Traski lisud ang kwartang pangitáun, náa sab kamu nga kusug mag-usik-usik,</i> Money is hard enough to come by without your all having to go and waste it.

<p id=19211><form>traspiri, traspirir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>move</tr>, <tr>change residence</tr>. <i>Mutraspirir mi sa bag-ung balay ugmà,</i> We&apos;ll move to the new house tomorrow. <number>2</number> transfer from one document to another. <i>Itraspirir sa ímung ngálan ang kabtángan sa namatay,</i> The deceased&apos;s property will be transferred to your name.

<p id=19212><form>traspurti</form> <pos>n</pos> vessel used in <tr>transport</tr>. <i>Miabut na ang traspurting hinábang álang sa Byapra,</i> The transports with aid for Biafra have arrived.

<p id=19213><form>tratádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>treaty</tr> between states.

<p id=19214><form>tratar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> treat, bear oneself toward. <i>Maáyung mutratar kaníla ang ílang inaína,</i> <pb n=1030>Their stepmother treats them well. <number>2</number> <tr>attend to</tr> s.t. <i>Mitratar dáyun ang mayur sa prublíma sa mga iskwátir,</i> The mayor immediately attended to the problem of the squatters. <number>3</number> <tr>treat</tr>, <tr>deal with</tr> a question. <i>Unsay gitratar sa párì sa íyang sirmun?</i> What did the priest talk about in his sermon? <form>tratamyintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> treatment accorded to one. <i>Maáyu ang íyang tratamyintu sa mga míd,</i> He treats the maids well. <number>2</number> treatment, dealing with s.t. that needs attention. <number>3</number> <tr>treatment</tr>, discussion of a question.

<p id=19215><form>tratsi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fret</tr> of a stringed instrument. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put, use as a fret.

<p id=19216><form>trátu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sweetheart</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a1c3]</itype> be sweethearts. <i>Musintinyal nákung panguyab níya únà mi magkatrátu,</i> I courted her for nearly a century before we became sweethearts. <form>{(&rarr;)|tratu}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> get for a sweetheart. <i>Nakatratu siyag bungì,</i> He had a harelip for a sweetheart. <form>{pa&N;-|panrátu}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> go get a sweetheart. <i>Unyà ka ra manarátug ugpas ka na?</i> Do you intend to have a sweetheart only after you&apos;ve become all used up? <form>{manag-|managtrátu}</form> <pos>n</pos> sweethearts. <i>Managtrátu sila,</i> They are sweethearts. <form>{panag-|panagtrátu}</form> <pos>n</pos> relationship of being sweethearts.

<p id=19217><form>tráyal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>try</tr> s.t. or s.o. out. <i>Nagtráyal kug duha ka klási nga ripridyirítur,</i> I have tried out two different brands of refrigerator. <i>Pila na ka buuk ang gitrayálan álang niíning trabahúa,</i> They have tried out several applicants for the job. <pos>n</pos> <tr>trial</tr>.

<p id=19218><form>trayanggul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>triangle</tr>. <number>2</number> triangle, k.o. percussion instrument. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make, form a triangle. <i>Trayanggula (itrayanggul) ang purmisyun sa banda,</i> Form the marching band into a triangle.

<p id=19219><form>trayanggulu</form> <xr>= <sc>trayanggul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19220><form>trayinta</form> number thirty. <pos>v</pos> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>disiutsu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19221><form>trayintaydus</form> <pos>n</pos> thirty-two <tr>caliber</tr> gun or <tr>cartridge</tr>.

<p id=19222><form>trayintay-utsu</form> <pos>n</pos> thirty-eight <tr>caliber</tr> gun or <tr>cartridge</tr>.

<p id=19223><form>trayir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>betray</tr>. <i>Nasáyud si Hisus nga si Húdas mutrayir kaníya,</i> Jesus knew that Judas would betray Him. <i>Kinsay nagdamgu nga mutrayir siya kanímu?</i> Who ever dreamed that she could <tr>deceive</tr> you?

<p id=19224><form>trayd&ucaron;r</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>traitor</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>sickness</tr> that attacks without warning. <i>Trayd&ucaron;r kaáyung sakíta nang hayblad,</i> High blood pressure is a treacherous disease. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; b6]</itype> become a traitor. <i>Natrayd&ucaron;r siya tungud sa pasálig sa kaáway,</i> He became a traitor because of the enemy&apos;s promises.

<p id=19225><form>traysikul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tricycle</tr>, <tr>pedicab</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; a1c]</itype> ride, bring on a pedicab. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make into a pedicab.

<p id=19226><form>tráyu</form> <xr>= <sc>tríyu<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=19227><form>tríbu</form> <pos>n</pos> tribe.

<p id=19228><form>tribukar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>divulge</tr>. <i>Ang míd mauy nagtribukar sa paglúib sa asáwa,</i> The maid divulged the wife&apos;s infidelity. <i>Ayaw itribukar nga partíhan nátù siya,</i> Don&apos;t say a word that we are giving him a party. <i>2</i> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be <tr>found out</tr>, <tr>brought out</tr> into the open.

<p id=19229><form>tribunal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tribunal</tr> <tr>court of justice</tr>.

<p id=19230><form>tribusun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB156; a1]</itype> have, set the hair in <tr>ringlets</tr>. <i>Ang byutisyan mauy nagtribusun sa íyang buhuk,</i> The beautician set her hair in ringlets. <i>Nagtribusun ang taas nga buhuk sa bátà,</i> The child&apos;s hair hangs down in ringlets. <pos>n</pos> <tr>ringlet</tr>, long hanging <tr>curl</tr>.

<p id=19231><form>tridayminsiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>three-dimensional</tr> movie. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c16]</itype> make a movie in <tr>three dimensions</tr>.

<p id=19232><form>trid-in</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>trade in</tr> for s.t. better. <i>Itrid-in nang ímung uyab nga bughuan,</i> Trade your jealous girl friend in for a new one.

<p id=19233><form>trígu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wheat</tr>.

<p id=19234><form>trím</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>trim</tr>, <tr>cut</tr> to even lengths. <i>Akuy mutrím sa antuwánga,</i> I&apos;ll trim the hibiscus plants. <i>Trími lag ákung buhuk. Ayawg mubui,</i> Just trim my hair. Don&apos;t cut it short.

<p id=19235><form>trimistral</form> <pos>n</pos> done <tr>every three months</tr>. <i>Trimistral ang báyad sa lisinsiya,</i> You pay for your license once every three months. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do s.t. on a <tr>once-in-three months</tr> basis.

<p id=19236><form>trimistri</form> <pos>n</pos> period of three months.

<p id=19237><form>trín<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> railway <tr>train</tr>. <i>Byáan ka sa trín,</i> You won&apos;t get married (lit. miss the train). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <tr>ride</tr> on the train.

<p id=19238><form>trín<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>train</tr>, <tr>teach</tr> to make proficient. <i>Trína siyag maáyu,</i> Train him well. <number>2</number> train, <tr>discipline</tr>. <i>Gitrín sila sa ílang inahan ug trabáhu,</i> They were trained by their mother to work. <form>{-i|tríni}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>trainee</tr> in military training. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be a trainee. <form>{-ir|trínir}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>trainer</tr>. <i>Akuy gitrínir sa bag-ung tím,</i> I was made the trainer of the new team.

<p id=19239><form>tringka</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>fasten</tr> s.t. securely by binding it fast. <i>Tringkáhan nátù ang átung dala arun dì kawátan,</i> We&apos;ll <tr>tie up</tr> our baggage securely so nothing can be stolen from it.

<p id=19240><form>trinsas</form> <pos>n</pos> U-shaped black <tr>hairpin</tr> for a top-knot or the like. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> use this sort of hairpin. <i>Manrinsas pa ku sa ákung pinangkù,</i> I&apos;m still putting hairpins in my chignon.

<p id=19241><form>trinsíras</form> <pos>n</pos> military <tr>trench</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> make trenches.

<p id=19242><form>*trip</form> <form>{pirst|pirst trip}, last {&mdash;|trip}</form> <pos>n</pos> first or last trip of the day made by scheduled transportation. <form>las {&mdash;|trip}</form> <pos>n</pos> funeral cortege to the cemetery (humorous).

<p id=19243><form>tripilya, tripilyas</form> <pos>n</pos> the small <tr>intestines</tr> of a <pb n=1031>pig.

<p id=19244><form>triplikádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>triplicate</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be made in triplicate.

<p id=19245><form>triplit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>triplets</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> turn out to be triplets.

<p id=19246><form>tripulanti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>crew</tr> on a ship, member of a ship&apos;s crew. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B156; b6]</itype> be a member of the crew. <i>Barkung istranghíru ang ákung gitripulantíhan,</i> I was a crew member on a foreign ship. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> have as a member of the crew.

<p id=19247><form>trís</form> number <tr>three</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B256; c1]</itype> get to be three, make s.t. three. <i>Mutrís na siya karung Marsu,</i> He&apos;ll be three this March. <i>Hápit na siya matrís, di pa gihápun kalakaw,</i> He&apos;s almost three and he still can&apos;t walk. <i>Trísa (itrís) lang ning isdà,</i> Let me have this fish for three pesos (lit. make it three pesos). <number>2</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> give or get three (pesos, centavos, etc.). <i>Kinsang maistráha nagtrís nímu?</i> Which teacher gave you a grade of three? <i>Nakatrís ku sa paglinimpiya,</i> I earned three pesos polishing shoes. <number>3</number> <itype>[b]</itype> incur expenses amounting to three. <i>Hitrísan ku sa búlang,</i> I lost three pesos in the cockpit. <form>alas {&mdash;|trís}</form> <tr>three o&apos;clock</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|trís} andánas</form> <pos>n</pos> three-storey building. <form>{&mdash;|trís} anyus</form> three years. <form>tris-adus</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> vision that is <tr>cross-eyed</tr>. <number>2</number> three-to-two odds in betting. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> be cross-eyed. <i>Nagtris-adus ang ímung panan-aw,</i> You are cross-eyed. <form>{&mdash;|trís} bandas</form> <pos>n</pos> three-sided <tr>billiards</tr>, where the ball is made to bounce off three edges. <form>tris-idus</form> <xr>= <sc>tris-adus</sc>.</xr> <form>{&mdash;|trís} kantus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>three-edged</tr> blade, file, or anything that can have three edges. <form>{&mdash;|trís} kwartas</form> <tr>three-fourths</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|trís} nuybis</form> <pos>n</pos> in mahjong, a combination of three nines of different designs, one of the <ix>iksibisiyun</ix> combinations. <form>{&mdash;|trís} únus</form> an <ix>iksibisiyun</ix> combination in mahjong of three one&apos;s. <form>{-ay|trisay}</form> <pos>n</pos> betting for three (centavos, pesos) each time. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> bet three each play. <i>Magtrisay tag baráha,</i> Let&apos;s play cards with three-peso bets. <form>{-un|trisun}</form> <pos>a</pos> of the three (peso, centavo) kind. <i>Trisun man nang gidak-úna,</i> That size costs three pesos each. <form>{tag-|tagtrís}</form> <pos>a</pos> three centavos (pesos) each. <form>{tag-un|tagtrisun}</form> <pos>a</pos> of the type that costs three centavos (pesos).

<p id=19248><form>trisahiyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a devotion offered to the Blessed Trinity for thanksgiving. <number>2</number> a k.o. <tr>rosary</tr> usually said or sung in Spanish for the souls of children under three years of age: prayed for seven nights in the case of children one or two years old, and three nights for infants.

<p id=19249><form>trísi</form> number <tr>thirteen</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>disiutsu</sc>.</xr> <form>{&mdash;|trísi} kartas</form> <xr>= <sc>*tirtin kards</sc>.</xr> <form>{&mdash;|trísi} klásis</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>Chinese medicine</tr>, a drink made of thirteen kinds of herbs or barks, commonly taken during pregnancy for ease in delivery.

<p id=19250><form>tri síkans</form> <pos>n</pos> in basketball, the violation of having the ball inside the foul line next to one&apos;s goal for more than three seconds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> commit a three-second violation in basketball.

<p id=19251><form>trisiklu, trisikulu</form> <xr>= <sc>traysikul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19252><form>trisipílu</form> <xr>= <sc>tirsiyupílu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19253><form>trísir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tracer</tr> used in dressmaking. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>trace</tr> with a tracer. <i>Trisíran úsà nà unyà subáyug gunting,</i> Trace it, then cut it out with scissors. <form>{&mdash;|trísir} búlit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tracer bullet</tr>.

<p id=19254><form>tris maríyas</form> <xr>= <sc>alundris<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=19255><form>tristi</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sad</tr>. (literary). <i>Pagkatristi ning ákung dughan,</i> How sad this heart of mine is.

<p id=19256><form>trisuríra</form> <xr>= <sc>tisuríru</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=19257><form>triyanggulu</form> <xr>= <sc>trayanggul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19258><form>tríyu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> vocal <tr>trio</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; ac3]</itype> sing a <tr>vocal trio</tr>. <i>Nagtríyu ang Litirmin,</i> The Lettermen sang a trio. <i>Triyúha lang kun way báhu,</i> Make it a trio if there is no bass part.

<p id=19259><form>tríyu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> in mahjong, a set of three cards of the same design and number.

<p id=19260><form>trubinayis, trubináyus</form> <pos>n</pos> stiff-collared <tr>shirt</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> wear, make into a stiff-collared shirt.

<p id=19261><form>trúbul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> stir up trouble so as to <tr>disrupt</tr> a proceeding. <i>Trubúlun nátù ang míting,</i> Let us disrupt the meeting by creating trouble. <pos>n</pos> <tr>fight</tr>, <tr>brawl</tr> (slang). <form>{&mdash;|trúbul} syúting</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>troubleshooting</tr>, looking for defects in a machine. <form>{&mdash;|trúbul} syútir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>troubleshooter</tr>.

<p id=19262><form>trúkis</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC]</itype> for two things to cross each other&apos;s path but not meet; be facing each other but not squarely. <i>Magtrúkis sila sa ílang ispáda,</i> They will <tr>cross</tr> swords. <i>Magtrúkis ang duha ka trín,</i> The two trains will <tr>pass</tr> each other. <i>Upat ka lamísa nga gatrúkis pagkabutang,</i> Four tables placed facing each other in a disorderly way. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC; a2c3]</itype> trade two things for each other that are exactly in opposing functions or positions. <i>Makigtrúkis aku nímu. Pusta ka sa ákung manuk, aku sa ímu,</i> OK, I&apos;ll trade with you. I bet on your cock and you bet on mine. <i>Trukísun ang ílang gúl sa haptayim,</i> They traded goals at half-time. <i>Itrúkis ímung rákit sa iyáha,</i> Trade your racket for his. <number>3</number> <itype>[C; c3]</itype> have a clash of ideas or exchange of words. <i>Nagtrúkis mi si Sír báhin sa ákung swildu,</i> I had a <tr>quarrel</tr> with the boss regarding my salary. <i>Amígu gihápun ta bísag nagkatrúkis átung idíya,</i> We will remain friends even if our ideas clash. <number>4</number> <itype>[C3]</itype> for ideas to contradict each other. <i>Namakak ka kay nagkatrúkis ang ímung katarúngan,</i> You are lying because your reasoning is self-contradictory. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> being in a <tr>crossed</tr> position. <pb n=1032><i>Trúkis kanang duha ka lubi,</i> Those two coconut trees are growing so that they form an X relative to each other. <number>2</number> <tr>argument</tr>. <i>Walay kahusayun ang inyung trúkis,</i> There&apos;s no solving of your argument.

<p id=19263><form>trúling</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>trawling</tr>. <i>Way trúling nga gitúgut sa dapit nga mabaw sa átung kadagátan,</i> Trawling is not permitted in shallow waters. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> do <tr>trawl fishing</tr>.

<p id=19264><form>trumbun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>trombone</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> play the trombone.

<p id=19265><form>trumpa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>trumpet</tr>, funnel-shaped device used for amplifying or directing sound.

<p id=19266><form>trumpit</form> <xr>= <sc>trampit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19267><form>trumpíta</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>trumpet</tr> with or without pistons. <number>2</number> triton trumpets, k.o. large <tr>univalve</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> play a trumpet.

<p id=19268><form>trumpíti</form> <xr>= <sc>trumpíta</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19269><form>trunsal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tuck</tr> or <tr>fold</tr> stitched into a garment for a better fit or for decoration. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make a fold or <tr>dart</tr> in a garment. <i>Ákung gitrunsalan ang háwak arun mahustu,</i> I made a dart in the waistline in order to make the dress fit your body.

<p id=19270><form>trúnu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>throne</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>high position</tr>, <tr>top post</tr> (humorous). <i>Maáyu ka na man giyung pagkamunt&acaron;r dihà sa ímung trúnu, ayaw táwun mig kalimti ang día sa ubus,</i> Now that you are nicely established on your throne, don&apos;t forget those of us left down here below. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> be seated at a higher level than the others in watching an event (humorous).

<p id=19271><form>trúpa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>troop</tr> of soldiers. <number>2</number> <tr>troupe</tr> of entertainers, actors.

<p id=19272><form>trúpi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>trophy</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> win a trophy. <form>{(&rarr;)|trupi}</form> <xr>= <sc>trúpi</sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr>

<p id=19273><form>trupiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tropics</tr>.

<p id=19274><form>trupíya, trupiyu</form> <xr>= <sc>trúpi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19275><form>trúsu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>log</tr>. <form>{mag-r-|manunurúsu}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>logger</tr>. <form>panurúsu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>logging business</tr>. <i>Panurúsu ang ákung pangítà,</i> I&apos;m engaged in <tr>logging</tr>.

<p id=19276><form>tsá</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tea</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> have tea. <i>Magtsá ta ug way kapi,</i> We will have tea if there is no coffee. <form>{-ríra|tsaríra}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>teapot</tr>.

<p id=19277><form>tsalíku</form> <xr>= <sc>salíku</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19278><form>tsalit</form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>bungalow</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a bungalow.

<p id=19279><form>tsamba</form> <xr>= <sc>samba<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=19280><form>tsampáka</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small ornamental <tr>tree</tr> grown for its fragrant flowers: <bio>Michelia alba</bio> and <bio>champaka</bio>. <form>{&mdash;|tsampáka} sa insik</form> k.o. cream-colored <tr>magnolia</tr>: <bio>Magnolia coco</bio>.

<p id=19281><form>tsampiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>champion</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> become the champion. <i>Natsampiyun ang ámung tím,</i> Our team became the champion.

<p id=19282><form>tsampurádu</form> <xr>= <sc>sampurádu<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=19283><form>tsampuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>kyamuy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19284><form>tsáns</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>chance</tr>, <tr>possibility</tr> for s.t. to happen. <i>May tsáns kahang mabúhì siya,</i> Is there a chance that she will live? <number>2</number> <tr>chance</tr>, <tr>opportunity</tr>. <i>Mangupya ang istudiyanti kun dúnay tsáns,</i> The student cheats if he gets the chance. <number>3</number> chances of attaining s.t. <i>Dakug tsáns kang madáwat,</i> You have good chances of getting the job. <i>Wà kay tsáns níya,</i> You don&apos;t have a chance with her. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> get a chance, opportunity. <i>Makatsáns lang mig háluk sa sinihan,</i> We get the chance to kiss only in the movie house. <form>{&mdash;|tsáns} pasindyir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stand-by passenger</tr> without reservations. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> go on a <tr>stand-by</tr> basis. <form>{-ing|tsansing}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> touch s.o. with the intention of making sexual advances (humorous). <i>Dílì kaduúlag babáyi nis Abil. Mutsansing giyud siya dáyun,</i> No woman dares get near Abel because he&apos;ll try her out if she does.

<p id=19285><form>tsápa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>badge</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>washer</tr>, a ring made of metal or other materials. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> wear, put a badge. <i>Tsapáhi ímung púlu arun mu ra kag sírip,</i> Put a badge on your shirt so you look like a sheriff. <number>2</number> put a washer on s.t. <i>Tsapáhi ang ruska arun dì mulubung,</i> Put a washer around the screw so it will not sink in.

<p id=19286><form>tsapirun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chaperon</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3; b(1)]</itype> be accompanied by a chaperon.

<p id=19287><form>tsaplin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chaplain</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a1]</itype> work as, become a chaplain.

<p id=19288><form>tsapstik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chopsticks</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> use chopsticks.

<p id=19289><form>tsapsuy</form> <xr>= <sc>sapsuy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19290><form>tsaptir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B256]</itype> have a <tr>wreck</tr>. <i>Dalì dang mutsaptir (matsaptir) ang mga sakyanang gaan basta kusgun pagpadágan,</i> Light vehicles will easily meet an <tr>accident</tr> if you drive them fast. <i>Nabálì ang kamut ni Pidru sa dihang natsaptir siya sa íyang mutur,</i> Pedro broke his hand when he had a wreck with his motorcycle.

<p id=19291><form>tsardying</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>charging</tr>, an offensive foul called on a player who charges into a guard. <number>2</number> one who commits this foul. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> commit this foul.

<p id=19292><form>tsaríra</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tsá</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19293><form>tsarlistun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Charleston</tr> <tr>dance</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do the Charleston.

<p id=19294><form>*tsarming</form> <form>{pa-|patsarming}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> do s.t. to look <tr>beautiful</tr>, make oneself <tr>charming</tr>. <i>Magpatsarming giyud ta sa ritrátu,</i> We&apos;ve got to make ourselves beautiful for our pictures. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|tsarmingun}</form> <pos>a</pos> charming, beautiful-looking. <i>Nadani siya sa babáying tsarmingun,</i> He was attracted to the charming girl.

<p id=19295><form>tsart</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chart</tr>.

<p id=19296><form>tsarul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>patent leather</tr>. <number>1a</number> patent leather shoes. <number>2</number> <tr>spit shine</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> wear, use <pb n=1033>patent leather. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> give a spit shine.

<p id=19297><form>tsatsa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cha-cha-cha</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>dance</tr> the cha-cha-cha. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> play, dance in cha-cha-cha rhythm.

<p id=19298><form>tsatsuy</form> <xr>= <sc>hatsuy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19299><form>tsáw, tsáwu</form> <xr>= <sc>siyà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19300><form>tsaynamut</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. commercial preparation of the mixture called <ix>trísi klásis</ix>. <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>trísi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19301><form>*tsaynis</form> <form>{&mdash;|tsaynis} bambu</form> <pos>n</pos> small ornamental bamboo: <bio>Bambusa multiplex</bio>. <form>{&mdash;|tsaynis} bras</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>brush</tr> for writing Chinese. <form>{&mdash;|tsaynis} guld</form> <pos>n</pos> twenty-four-carat gold in jewelry. <form>{&mdash;|tsaynis} gwába</form> <pos>n</pos> variety of large guava with few seeds. <form>{&mdash;|tsaynis} payil</form> <pos>n</pos> way of arranging one&apos;s pieces in mahjong. <form>{&mdash;|tsaynis} pitsay</form> <pos>n</pos> variety of <ix>pitsay</ix> that is esp. long and whitish: <bio>Brassica pekinensis</bio>. <form>{&mdash;|tsaynis} tsikir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Chinese checkers</tr>.

<p id=19302><form>tsi</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>tsipi</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> expression denoting <tr>contempt</tr> for s.o. <i>Tsi, hitsúra níyang mangulitáwu nákù,</i> Huh, imagine a guy like that courting me. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> snort at s.o. in contempt. <i>Gitsíhan lang ku níya kay wà man kuy barku,</i> She just snorted at me because I&apos;m not rich (lit. have no ship).

<p id=19303><form>tsì</form> <xr>= <sc>sì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19304><form>tsík<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> mark with a <tr>check</tr>. <i>Tsíki ning brákit kun muurdir ka,</i> Put a check in the bracket if you want to order. <number>2</number> <tr>check</tr>, <tr>correct</tr> s.t. written. <i>Gitsíkan nag átung tirm pípar,</i> Our term papers have been checked. <pos>n</pos> check mark.

<p id=19305><form>tsík<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC2; bc3]</itype> share a cigarette. <i>Magtsík lang ta kay wà nay láin,</i> Let&apos;s just share this cigarette because I haven&apos;t got any more.

<p id=19306><form>tsík<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> say &lsquo;<tr>check</tr>&rsquo;, put an opponent&apos;s king in danger of being checked. <i>Mutsík giyud ka basta muatáki ka sa hárì,</i> You have to say &lsquo;check&rsquo; when you attack the king.

<p id=19307><form>tsikà, tsikalà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>meal</tr>, <tr>refreshment</tr> (slang). <i>Mutambung ta sa kasal kay dúnay tsikà,</i> Let us go to the wedding party because there is going to be a feed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> eat a meal or refreshment (slang). <i>Adtu ta mutsikà sa ristawran,</i> Let&apos;s eat in the restaurant.

<p id=19308><form>tsik-ap</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>check up</tr>, <tr>examine</tr>. <i>Ispisyalista ang nagtsik-ap nákù,</i> A specialist examined me. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> check up on s.o.&apos;s activities. <i>Nagtsik-ap ku ug nagsígi bag tunghà ang ákung bátà,</i> I am checking up to see if my son is attending classes.

<p id=19309><form>tsik-awut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>check out</tr> from a place of work. <number>2</number> check out from a hotel. <pos>n</pos> check-out time. <i>Alas singku ang átung tsik-áwut,</i> We check out at five o&apos;clock.

<p id=19310><form>tsíki</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>check</tr>. <i>Kás, dílì tsíki ang ámung dawátun,</i> We accept only cash, no checks. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> issue a check. <i>Kinsa may nagtsíki nímu nga miuntul?</i> Who issued you a bouncing check?

<p id=19311><form>tsíkin<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for a male to be <tr>chicken</tr>. <i>Tsíkin kaáyu ka. Ngánung dì man nímu kumplimintuhan siya?</i> You sure are chicken. Why don&apos;t you compliment her? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become chicken.

<p id=19312><form>tsíkin<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>good looking</tr> (slang). <i>Tsíkin pa níya ang íyang manghud,</i> Her younger sister is more <tr>beautiful</tr> than she.

<p id=19313><form>tsíkin<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>dance</tr> characterized by a scratching-like motion of the feet. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> dance the <ix>tsíkin</ix>.

<p id=19314><form>tsik-in</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>check in</tr> to one&apos;s place of work. <i>Kinahanglan tang mutsik-in únà musúgud ug trabáhu,</i> We have to check in before we start work. <number>2</number> check into a hotel. <number>3</number> check in for a flight. <pos>n</pos> <tr>check-in time</tr>.

<p id=19315><form>tsikiníni</form> <pos>n</pos> telltale toothmark or scratch on the skin as a result of torrid necking.

<p id=19316><form>tsíkin pid</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for a large amount to be negligible in cost to a person with lots of money. <number>2</number> for s.t. hard to be easy for a person with great capability. <i>Kanang bár tsikin pid ra nà nímu,</i> The bar exam is too easy for you. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> consider a large amount negligible or consider s.t. difficult quite easy.

<p id=19317><form>tsíkin sálad</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>chicken salad</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, have chicken salad.

<p id=19318><form>tsíkir<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; b6c3]</itype> play <tr>checkers</tr>. <i>Magtsíkir ta palabay sa panahun,</i> Let&apos;s play checkers to pass the time. <pos>n</pos> <tr>checkerboard</tr>.

<p id=19319><form>tsíkir<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>checker</tr>, person who checks incoming or outgoing things. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> be a checker.

<p id=19320><form>tsíkird</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>checkered cloth</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> wear s.t. of checkered cloth.

<p id=19321><form>tsikitilya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vest</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> wear a vest.

<p id=19322><form>tsiku</form> <pos>n</pos> familiar term of address to male, usually to one&apos;s peer or younger. <i>Basta ikaw, tsiku, arigládu,</i> So long as it is you, <tr>my friend</tr>, it will be done. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> call s.o. <tr>chico</tr>.

<p id=19323><form>tsíku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sapodilla</tr>, a small tree cultivated for its sweet, juicy fruit: <bio>Achras zapota</bio>. <form>{(&rarr;)|tsiku}</form> <formx>{&mdash;|tsiku} karabaw</formx> <xr>= <sc>gwayabanu</sc>.</xr> <form>{&mdash;|tsiku} kapúti</form> <xr>= <sc>tsíku</sc>.</xr> <form>tsíkus</form> <xr>= <sc>tsíku</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=19324><form>tsikut</form> <xr>= <sc>kutsi</sc> (slang).</xr>

<p id=19325><form>tsimaníya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chimney</tr> or <tr>stack</tr>, esp. of a ship. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make, put a chimney s.w.

<p id=19326><form>Tsína</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>China</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>Chinese</tr> (female).

<p id=19327><form>*tsindying</form> <form>{&mdash;|tsindying} gips</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c2]</itype> <tr>exchange gifts</tr>, as at Christmas. <pos>n</pos> exchanging gifts. <form>{&mdash;|tsindying} paybut</form> <pos>n</pos> in basketball, the violation of pivoting and then stepping. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> commit this violation.

<p id=19328><form>tsinílas</form> <xr>= <sc>sinílas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19329><form>tsíning</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>chin</tr> oneself. <i>Managkù <pb n=1034>átung buktun ug magtsíning ta,</i> Your arms will grow large if you chin yourself. <pos>n</pos> <tr>chinning</tr> exercise. <form>{&mdash;|tsíning} bar</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chinning bar</tr>.

<p id=19330><form>tsínu</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>kamísa</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19331><form>tsíp</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chief</tr>, <tr>head</tr> of an office. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> call s.o. chief. <i>Ayaw kug tsípa kay paríhu ra ta,</i> Don&apos;t call me chief because we are the same. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> become, be chief. <form>{(&rarr;)|tsip}</form> term of address to s.o. superior in authority, particularly a law officer. <i>Wà táwun ku mangáwat tsip,</i> I didn&apos;t steal anything, officer.


<p id=19332><form>tsipi</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>tsi</bx>. expression used to drive away cats. <i>Tsipi! Nagpanan-aw na pud ning irínga sa pinirítung isdà,</i> <tr>Scat</tr>! That cat is looking at the fried fish.

<p id=19333><form>tsipun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>chiffon</tr> fabric or cloth material. <number>2</number> <tr>chiffon cake</tr>.

<p id=19334><form>tsíris</form> <xr>= <sc>siráli</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19335><form>tsirman</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chairman</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB56; c1]</itype> be chairman.


<p id=19336><form>tsís<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tsísir</sc>.</xr> <form>{-ir|tsísir}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chaser</tr> taken after liquor. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> have a chaser. <i>Túbig lay átung itsísir kay way kúk,</i> We will just have water as chaser since we do not have Coke.

<p id=19337><form>tsís<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; b6c3]</itype> play <tr>chess</tr>. <i>Balà siyang mutsís,</i> He plays chess poorly. <i>Makigtsís ku nímu kun dúnay pusta,</i> I&apos;ll play chess with you if we bet. <pos>n</pos> <tr>chess</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|tsís} burd</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chessboard</tr>.

<p id=19338><form>tsís<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cheese</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> have cheese.

<p id=19339><form>tsismis</form> <pos>n</pos> idle <tr>gossip</tr>. <i>Nagpakasal na lang sila paglikay sa tsismis,</i> They got married to stop the gossip. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12C; c]</itype> engage in idle gossip. <i>Bísag unsa lay itsismis níya nákù báhin sa ílang bag-ung silíngan,</i> She tells me everything about her new neighbors.

<p id=19340><form>tsismúsa</form> <pos>a</pos> given to <tr>gossip</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become a <tr>gossipmonger</tr>.

<p id=19341><form>tsismúsu</form> <xr>= <sc>tsismúsa</sc> (male).</xr>

<p id=19342><form>tsitsà, tsìtsà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> take <tr>light refreshments</tr> or snacks (slang). <pos>n</pos> <tr>eating</tr>.

<p id=19343><form>tsitsiríka</form> <xr>= <sc>sitsiríka<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=19344><form>tsitsiríyas</form> <xr>= <sc>sitsiríyas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19345><form>tsk</form> spelling to represent the sound produced by clicking the tip of the tongue against the alveolar ridge with an implosion. <number>1</number> in calling animals. <number>2</number> in expressing an adverse reaction to a mistake. <i>Tsk, tsk, dì na ni mahímù,</i> <tr>Tsk</tr>, now we can&apos;t do anything about it.

<p id=19346><form>*tsu</form> <form>mau diay {&mdash;|tsu}</form> (humorous for <ix>mau diay tu</ix>) So that&apos;s the way it is! <i>Mau diay nasuud sila kay uyab man. Mau diay tsu,</i> <tr>Oh, I see</tr>. They are close because they are sweethearts.

<p id=19347><form>tsù</form> <xr>= <sc>tsuy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19348><form>tsug</form> word used in writing to represent the sound of an arrow piercing an object.

<p id=19349><form>tsuk</form> word used in writing to represent the sound of s.t. darting and piercing into s.t. like an arrow.

<p id=19350><form>tsúk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chalk</tr>. <form>{ka-|katsúk}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be covered with chalk marks. <i>Nagkatsúk ang bungbung,</i> The wall is covered with chalk marks.

<p id=19351><form>tsúk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>choke</tr> a motor or engine. <i>Ug dílì muandar tsuki,</i> If it doesn&apos;t start, choke it.

<p id=19352><form>tsúkir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>choker</tr>, a short necklace that fits closely around the neck. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> use, wear a choker.

<p id=19353><form>tsuktsuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>masturbate</tr> (slang). <i>Gitsuktsuk níya ang ákung útin,</i> She banged away at my penis.

<p id=19354><form>tsukuláti</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>), <form>tsukulit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chocolate drink</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> have, make a chocolate drink. <form>{ka-|katsukuláti}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> get chocolate all over it. <i>Nagkatsukuláti ang mantil,</i> The tablecloth has chocolate all over it.

<p id=19355><form>tsulítas</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. dish of breaded pork chops, where the meat is pulled to the bottom of the rib bone. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make <tr><ix>chuletas</ix></tr>.

<p id=19356><form>tsunggu</form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>monkey</tr>.

<p id=19357><form>tsup</form> <pos>n</pos> word used in writing to represent the smacking sound of a kiss.

<p id=19358><form>tsupà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>suck off</tr> (coarse slang). <i>Dì ku musugut nga tsupaun ang ákù nga way báyad,</i> You&apos;re going to have to pay me if you want to suck me off.

<p id=19359><form>tsupir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>driver</tr>, <tr>chauffeur</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> work as a driver, chauffeur. <i>Natsupir siya sa ámung dyíp,</i> He was the driver of our jeep.

<p id=19360><form>tsupun</form> <pos>n</pos> rubber nipple of a bottle or pacifier. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c6]</itype> suck on a pacifier.

<p id=19361><form>tsúra</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>hitsúra</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19362><form>tsurísu</form> <xr>= <sc>surísu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19363><form>tsuwinggam</form> <xr>= <sc>swinggam</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19364><form>tsúwit</form> <pos>n</pos> child&apos;s word for <tr>chocolate candy</tr>.

<p id=19365><form>tsuy</form> (from <ix>atsuy</ix>) <pos>n</pos> term of address to male, suggesting familiarity or informality. <i>Ása ta run mag-ínum tsuy,</i> Where are we going to have a drink, <tr>pal</tr>? <form>{(&larr;)|tsúy}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> call s.o. pal.

<p id=19366><form>tu<sub>1</sub></form> (from <ix>tuu</ix>) command for a carabao to turn right.

<p id=19367><form>tu<sub>2</sub></form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>kadtu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19368><form>tú<sub>1</sub></form> (from <ix>kadtu</ix>) <tr>those</tr> (pointing to s.t. far from both speaker and hearer).

<p id=19369><form>tú<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tulu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19370><form>túa</form> <xr>= <sc>atúa</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19371><form>tuab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> for a group to burst into loud and boisterous laughter. <i>Natuab (mituab) ug pangatáwa ang íyang giisturyáhan ug kataw-anan,</i> The group broke into boisterous laughter when he told them s.t. funny.

<p id=19372><form>túab</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>neckhole</tr> or <tr>armholes</tr> in a dress. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> cut the neckhole or armhole of a garment.

<pb n=1035>

<p id=19373><form>tuagsik</form> <xr>= <sc>tuásik</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19374><form>tuak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>strangle</tr>. <i>Mu rag mutuak nákù ning huut nga kwilyu,</i> This tight collar is about to <tr>choke</tr> me. <i>Gituak sa manyak ang íyang biktima,</i> The maniac strangled his victim. <form>tuaktúak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> eat so greedily one seems to choke. <i>Ayawg tuaktuáka (ituaktúak) nang ímung pagkáun kay mabukug ka,</i> Don&apos;t eat your food greedily because you might choke on a small bone.

<p id=19375><form>tuáli</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2S3(1)6; c1]</itype> be, turn <tr>upside down</tr>. <i>Kinsay nagtuáli íring bangà?</i> Who turned this jar upside down? <i>Magtuali ang kabug kun maghúp,</i> Bats hang upside down when they perch.

<p id=19376><form>tualya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>towel</tr>. <form>itsa sa {&mdash;|tualya}</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>itsa</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19377><form>tuang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23P]</itype> for rain, flood, flow of blood to <tr>let up</tr> or <tr>stop</tr>. <i>Manlákaw ta ug mutuang ang ulan,</i> We are going out when the rain stops. <i>Tambal nga makapatuang (makatuang) sa pagdugù,</i> Medicine to stop the flow of blood. <form>tuangtúang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B456]</itype> keep raining off and on, stopping and starting.

<p id=19378><form>tuáruk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B256; b6]</itype> <tr>fall</tr> headfirst. <i>Patay untà kun simintu pay gituarúkan sa bátà,</i> The child would have died if it had been concrete he had landed on with his head.

<p id=19379><form>tuásik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S3; b6]</itype> <tr>spatter</tr>, for little things to fall in all directions. <i>Mituásik ang bawud nga misúgat sa pambut,</i> The waves dashing against the motorboat splashed in all directions. <i>Nagtuasik ang mga bála dihang gimasinggan mi,</i> We were machine-gunned, and bullets fell all over the place. <form>{-in-|tinuásik}</form> <pos>n</pos> spattering given off by s.t.

<p id=19380><form>tuaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>exclaim</tr> in surprise or wonderment. <i>Nakatuaw ug nakapanghisus siya sa kahibúlung,</i> She exclaimed and uttered &lsquo;Jesus&rsquo; in amazement. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>cry out</tr>. <i>Náa siya nagtuaw sa gawas naghangyù nga mubálik ka,</i> He is outside, crying out, imploring you to come back.

<p id=19381><form>tuay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B456; c6]</itype> for s.t. attached to hang <tr>limp</tr> from its base. <i>Nabálì sigúrug íyang buktun kay nagtuay man,</i> His arm must be broken because it is hanging limp. <i>Ituay ímung úlu ingun sa patay ka,</i> Let your head hang limp as if you were dead. <number>2</number> <itype>[B123(1)]</itype> become bent over in maturity. <i>Ug matuay na ang mga mais, aníhun na nátù,</i> If the corn is quite bent over, we can harvest it. <pos>a</pos> for corn to be bent over when it is mature.

<p id=19382><form>túba</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. croton plant: <bio>Croton tiglium</bio>. <form>{&mdash;|túba} nga bákud</form> <xr>= <sc>tubatuba</sc>.</xr> <form>tubatuba</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. shrub, the leaves of which are used as a poultice and the seeds of which produce oil for soap: <bio>Jatropha curcas</bio>. <form>tubatubang murádu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <ix>tubatuba</ix> with reddish leaves: <bio>Jatropha gossypifolia</bio>.

<p id=19383><form>tubà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> fermented and processed toddy from coconut palms. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> give water for toddy. <i>Ang buluk dílì mutubà pag-áyu sa ting-init,</i> The flower bud doesn&apos;t produce much water during the hot season. <number>2</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> get toddy all over it. <i>Natubaan ang ákung púlu,</i> My shirt got toddy all over it. <number>3</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> be the one who has to treat others to toddy. <i>Hingtubaan ku kay napildi ku sa pustahánay,</i> I had to pay for a round of toddy because I lost the betting. <form>{pa&N;-|panubà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> go out to get toddy. <pos>n</pos> s.t. for buying toddy. <i>Gái kug diyis, panubà ba,</i> Let me have ten centavos to buy a glass of toddy. <form>{ka-(&larr;)|katúbà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> get toddy all over it. <form>{-an|tubaan}</form> <pos>n</pos> stand which sells toddy. <form>{hi&N;-|hinubà}, {hi&N;-(&larr;)|hinúbà}</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of toddy. <form>{-un|tubaun}</form> <pos>a</pos> for a cock to be colored like red palm toddy.&dagger;

<p id=19384><form>tubà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> cut down a banana stalk for the fruit. <i>Tub-a na nang saginga kay gúwang na,</i> Cut down that banana because the fruits are mature.

<p id=19385><form>tubag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1c6]</itype> <tr>answer</tr>. <i>Akuy mutubag sa pangutána,</i> I&apos;ll answer the question. <i>Tubaga ang nangutána,</i> Answer the person who asked a question. <i>Pahiyum lay íyang itubag sa ákung hangyù,</i> The only answer she gives to my plea is a smile. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> answer correspondence. <i>Wà ku makatubag dáyun sa ímung sulat,</i> I couldn&apos;t answer your letter right away. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> <tr>talk back</tr>, <tr>retort</tr>. <i>Hisagpaan siya kay mitubag sa inahan,</i> She got a slap in the face because she talked back to her mother. <number>1c</number> <itype>[C3; c36]</itype> exchange heated words. <i>Nagkatúbag mi dihang giinsultuhan ku níya,</i> We exchanged heated words when he insulted me. <number>1d</number> <itype>[A23; b5]</itype> for an uncommon event to recur or be followed by s.t. similar (in folk belief, a not-so-common event is followed by s.t. similar). <i>Tubagun (tubagan) pa nang ímung swirti sa láing táwu,</i> S.o. else will have good luck in response to your good luck. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2N; a12]</itype> <tr>answer for</tr>, <tr>take responsibility</tr>. <i>Ángayng tubagun nimu ang dadangátan sa ímung kirída,</i> You ought to take responsibility to whatever happens to your mistress. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A2; a1]</itype> bear s.o.&apos;s expenses. <i>Tubagun sa sigúru ang bayranan nímu sa uspital,</i> The insurance will <tr>cover</tr> your hospital bills. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> answer. <number>2</number> s.t. which happens after s.t. in response to it. <form>{&mdash;|tubag} pangutána, úyun, etc.</form> question, agreement, etc. given in answer. <i>&lsquo;Náa ka na diay?&rsquo; tubag tuksù ni Kulasing,</i> &lsquo;Are you really there now?&rsquo; asked Kulasing in answer. <form>{pa&N;-|panubag}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> <tr>answer</tr> questions. <i>Pasar siya sa intirbiyu kay maáyu siyang <pb n=1036>manubag,</i> She passed the interview because she answered the questions well. <i>Unsay ákung ipanubag ug imbistigarun ku?</i> What shall I answer if I am investigated? <form>tubagtubag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>talk back</tr> insolently. <i>Ayawg tubagtubaga ang ímung magulang kay gabáan ka,</i> Don&apos;t talk back insolently to your elder brother or you will get divine retribution visited on you. <form>matubagtubagun</form> <pos>a</pos> inclined to talk back insolently. <form>tubagtúbag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1c]</itype> sing, read s.t. alternatingly or with a responsive reading. <i>Tubagtubágan ta pagbása ang kasulátan,</i> Let us read the scriptures responsively. <form>{-in-ay(&larr;)|tinubágay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>tubag</sc>, <i>v1c.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>tubagtubag</sc>.</xr> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> heated exchange of words. <number>2</number> responsive or alternate making of sound. <i>Ang tinubágay sa mga langgam mabuntag,</i> The alternating sounds of birds in the morning. <form>{-in-an|tinubagan}</form> <pos>n</pos> manner of answering. <form>{-l-un(&larr;)|tulubágun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>responsibility</tr> that one has to answer for. <i>Tulubágun sa tsapirun ug unsay mahitabù níla,</i> It is the chaperon who has to answer if s.t. happens to them. <number>2</number> material from which a responsive reading or singing is read.

<p id=19386><form>tubas</form> <pos>n</pos> off-season for fruit-bearing trees. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B23]</itype> for trees to stop bearing fruit. <i>Nagkatubas na ang pamúnga sa kaimítu,</i> The fruit-bearing season for star apples is coming to a close. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> stop raining. <i>Ug mutubas na ang ulan, dì na ta magpáyung,</i> If the rains stop, we won&apos;t need an umbrella any more. <number>3</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> get, be <tr>rain-soaked</tr> (lit. be in the rain till it stops). <i>Gitubasan (hingtubasan) ku sa ulan,</i> I got soaked by the rain.

<p id=19387><form>tub-as</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B23]</itype> for the season of a certain fruit or crop to be over. <number>2</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> be drenched with rain. <pos>n</pos> off-season for crops or fruits.

<p id=19388><form>túbaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a]</itype> for the husks to come off of pounded grains. <i>Gáhì matúbaw ang humay nga pínug lugas,</i> It is difficult to get the husk off fine-grained rice.

<p id=19389><form>túbay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; b(1)]</itype> <tr>keep on</tr> doing s.t. <i>Dì siya mutúbay ug trabáhu kay pul-ánun,</i> He does not keep working for long because he gets bored easily. <i>Aku ray nakatúbay ug pamínaw sa taas nga sirmun,</i> I was the only one left that kept on listening to the long sermon. <i>Nagtúbay silag ínum hangtud sa buntag,</i> They kept their drinking spree going until morning. <form>{ma-un|matubáyun}</form> <pos>a</pos> s.o. capable of keeping on doing s.t. <i>Matubáyun sa trabáhu,</i> One who sticks to a piece of work.

<p id=19390><form>túbig</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>water</tr>. <form>buyag sa {&mdash;|túbig}</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>buyag</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr> <form>{&mdash;|túbig} sa butung</form> water in the young coconut. <i>Túbig sa butung ang ákung gustung imnun,</i> I want to drink water of the young coconut. <number>2</number> score in a game of <ix>tubigtúbig</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> become water. <i>Natúbig ang ayis drap,</i> The popsicle <tr>melted</tr>. <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;|túbig} sa úlu</formx> <itype>[a12]</itype> <tr>master</tr> in one&apos;s mind. <i>Tubíga sa ímung úlu kining kúd,</i> Master this code. <form>{(&rarr;)|tubig}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put, <tr>mix with water</tr>. <i>Tubigi ang wiski ug ísug ra,</i> <tr>Add water</tr> into the whiskey if it is too strong. <number>2</number> <itype>[AP; bP]</itype> <tr>irrigate</tr>. <i>Gipatubigan (gitubigan) ang basak,</i> The rice paddy was irrigated. <number>3</number> <itype>[B456]</itype> <tr>water</tr>, produce liquid. <i>Mutubig ákung bàbà ug makakità kug sambag,</i> My mouth waters if I see tamarinds. <i>Nagtubig ang íyang núka,</i> His sore is watering. <form>{pa&N;-(&rarr;)|panubig}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> fill glasses with water. <i>Panubig diri,</i> Give us some water. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> get one&apos;s water s.w. <i>Ang mga taga isla adtu manubig sa unay,</i> People from small islands get their water from the mainland. <form>{hi&N;-|hinúbig}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> <tr>bail</tr> water out. <i>Sígi kung hinúbig kay milikì ang luwang,</i> I kept bailing water out because the bilge leaked. <pos>n</pos> instrument for bailing. <form>{hi&N;-an(&rarr;)|hinubigan}</form> <pos>n</pos> place water is bailed out from. <form>{pa-(&rarr;)|patubig}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>irrigation system</tr>. <form>tubignun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>water spirit</tr>. <form>tubigtubig</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>skin disease</tr> characterized by itchiness and tiny pustules with watery discharge. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146; a4b4]</itype> have <ix>tubigtubig</ix>. <form>tubigtúbig</form> <pos>n</pos> child&apos;s game played with two teams of an offensive and defensive side. Two rows of adjacent squares are drawn, two squares for each defensive player. The offensive team aims to get in and back through the series of squares without being touched by the defensive team whose movements are restricted. A point, called <i>túbig,</i> is made when a player gets in and back through the squares untouched. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> play <ix>tubigtúbig</ix>. <form>tubigtubigan</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>well-to-do</tr>; s.o. having much money on hand. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b8]</itype> become well-off.

<p id=19391><form>túbil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> pour fuel in a tank or container. <i>Íya nang gitubílan ug gás ang sugà,</i> He has already poured kerosene into the lamp. <i>Trayinta litrus ang itúbil sa trák,</i> Fill the truck with thirty liters. <number>2</number> pour drinks for s.o. (colloquial). <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> liquid poured into a container. <number>2</number> drink poured.

<p id=19392><form>tubitubi, tubìtubì, tubiltubil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>answer back</tr> when one is reprimanded. <i>Íya kung gitubiltubilan, maung ákù siyang gilúsì,</i> He <tr>talked back</tr>, so I pinched him. <form>{ma-un|matubitubiun}, {-un|tubitubiun}</form> <pos>a</pos> given to answering back when reprimanded.

<p id=19393><form>tublag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>dilute</tr> s.t. <i>Ákung gitublágag túbig ang súkà,</i> I diluted vinegar with water. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> for a food ingredient added as a seasoning or sweetening to be well diffused. <i>Dílì makatublag ang diyútayng asúkar <pb n=1037>sa usa ka tásang kapi,</i> A little sugar cannot sweeten a cup of coffee. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; c5]</itype> for everybody to get some of s.t., usually food. <i>Dílì makatublag sa tanan ug maglútù lang kug gamay,</i> If I don&apos;t prepare but a little, not everyone will get s.t. to eat. <i>Natublag ang tanan sa ákung gilútù,</i> I prepared enough to take care of everybody.

<p id=19394><form>tubli</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. shrub growing along streams and in secondary forests, the leaves and branches of which are used as fish poison: <bio>Derris elliptica</bio>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> poison fish with <ix>tubli</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> give off a terrible odor, enough to make one groggy. <i>Ang báhù sa íyang utut makatublig búnug,</i> When he breaks wind it could kill a goby. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be tired of the same old thing: hearing the same story, music, etc. <i>Natubli na ku ánang ímung isturyang balikbálik,</i> I&apos;m tired hearing the same story over and over again. <form>{pa&N;-|panubli}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c6]</itype> catch fish with <ix>tubli</ix>. <form>tinublíhan</form> <pos>n</pos> fish caught with <ix>tubli</ix>.

<p id=19395><form>tubluk</form> <xr>= <sc>tulbuk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19396><form>tubtub<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1b7]</itype> <tr>cut</tr> s.t. at its base, very close to the surface. <i>Tubtúba pagputul ang ságing arun sayun ang pagpanáhà,</i> Cut the banana stalk close to the ground so it will readily grow suckers. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> cut around s.t. cylindrical, usually bamboo poles, little by little with short hacks, resulting in a clean finish. <i>Tubtúbi (tubtúba) ang tumuy sa kawáyan arun malimpiyu,</i> Cut around the tip of the bamboo pole so it will be clean. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a toddy container out of a length of bamboo. <pos>a</pos> being cut close to the surface. <i>Tubtub rang pagkaputúla ang íyang buhuk,</i> Her hair was cut too close to the roots. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> section cut from a long piece. <i>Usa ka tubtub nga láwas sa lubi,</i> A section of a coconut tree trunk. <number>2</number> one node length of bamboo, usually used as a container, esp. for palm toddy.

<p id=19397><form>tubtub<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> for chickens to charge, flapping the wings and kicking the feet. <i>Mutubtub ug táwu ang íyang hiniktan,</i> His gamecock will charge at people. <pos>n</pos> action of charging.

<p id=19398><form>tubu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sugar cane</tr>. <form>{-ng|tubung} palinà, {pula|tubung pula}</form> red sugar cane. <form>{&mdash;|tubung} lumhan, {putì|tubung putì}</form> green sugar cane. <form>{pa&N;-|panubu}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> cut sugar cane for milling. <i>Manubu ku sa ílang asyinda,</i> I shall apply as a laborer to cut sugar cane stalks on their hacienda. <form>katubhan</form> <pos>n</pos> sugar cane plantation.

<p id=19399><form>túbu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tube</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>water pipe</tr>. <number>3</number> chimney of a lamp. <i>Gianuúsan ang túbu sa lampara,</i> The lamp chimney is covered with soot. <form>hínis sa {&mdash;|túbu}</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>hínis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19400><form>túbù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b17]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>grow</tr>, <tr>become larger</tr>. <i>Mutaas pa siya kay nagtubù pa,</i> She will <tr>grow</tr> taller because she is still growing. <i>Dus pulgádas ang ákung gitubúan,</i> I grew two inches taller. <i>Gitubúan na ang sinínà,</i> She has <tr>outgrown</tr> her dress. <i>Ang gitubúan sa dákit,</i> Where the banyan tree was <tr>growing</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>earn interest</tr>. <i>Mutúbù ang kwartang ibangku,</i> Money put in the bank earns <tr>interest</tr>. <number>3</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> <tr>develop feelings</tr>. <i>Gitubúan kug kasína sa íyang paglampus,</i> I grew envious over his success. <number>4</number> <itype>[A2S]</itype> for water, dough, land to <tr>rise</tr>. <i>Hurnúha ang harínang gimása ug mutúbù na,</i> Put the dough in the oven when it rises. <i>Síging magtubù ang dágat ug dì pa makalantung,</i> The sea continues to rise until it reaches its highest point at high tide. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>growth</tr>. <i>Kusug ang túbù sa tanum,</i> The plant grows fast. <number>2</number> <tr>interest</tr> on loan. <form>bag-ung {&mdash;|túbù}</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>bag-u</sc>.</xr> <form>{pa-|patúbù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> lend money with interest. <i>Patubúan diay nímu tung ákung gibaylu?</i> Are you going to charge interest on the money I borrowed? <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>leavening</tr> agent. <number>2</number> wall stud of bamboo. <form>{pina-|pinatúbù}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>grown</tr>, <tr>raised</tr>. <i>Sankis nga pinatúbù sa Kalipurníya,</i> California-grown sunkist. <form>{-in-an|tinubúan}, {-in-an(&rarr;)|tinubuan}</form> <pos>n</pos> outgrown outfit. <form>tubùtúbù</form> <pos>n</pos> growth on the skin. <i>Mu rag áwum nang íyang tubùtúbù piru nagkadakù,</i> Your growth looks like a mole, but it is getting bigger. <form>halinub-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having a tendency to grow fast even with no care. <i>Halinub-un ning sagbúta, pirmi lang hagbásan,</i> This k.o. grass grows fast. It has to be trimmed frequently.&dagger;

<p id=19401><form>túbù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible white <tr>mushroom</tr> that grows on decaying trees. It has a tougher stipe and pileus than the <i>úhung.</i>

<p id=19402><form>tubud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>flow</tr> in a steady stream. <i>Mitubud ang dugù sa dakung samad,</i> Blood flowed from the big wound. <i>Sandayung ang tuburan sa ulan,</i> The rain flowed out of the gutter. <number>2</number> <itype>[B46]</itype> for liquid to <tr>leak</tr> out of a container or boat. <i>Nagtubud ang sakayan maung sígi kung gahinúbig,</i> The boat sprung a leak so I kept bailing out water. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> water <tr>spring</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>leak</tr>. <form>{pa-|patubud}, {pa-(&larr;)|patúbud} sa úhung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make people believe s.t. about oneself which is impossible (lit. make a water flow from a mushroom). <i>Nagpatúbud na sad sa úhung ang hambugíru,</i> The boaster is bragging again. <i>Ayaw pagpatúbud dinhi kay suhítu mi sa ímung kaláki,</i> Don&apos;t try to <tr>talk big</tr> around here because we know what you are. <form>tuburan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>spring</tr>. <number>2</number> source of s.t. that gushes in abundance. <i>Diyus nga tuburan sa kalúuy,</i> All-merciful (lit. giver of all mercy) God. <form>tinubdan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>source</tr>, <tr>origin</tr>. <i>Tinubdan sa sapà,</i> The brook&apos;s source. <i>Tinubdan sa balità,</i> Source of news.

<pb n=1038>

<p id=19403><form>tubug</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. medium-sized <tr>tree</tr> having small, round, green, inedible fruits in bunches growing directly from the trunk and branches: <bio>Ficus sp</bio>.

<p id=19404><form>tubuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b36]</itype> commit <tr>suicide</tr>. <i>Mau nang pangpánga ang íyang gitubukan,</i> That is the cliff he jumped to his death from.

<p id=19405><form>túbuk</form> <xr>= <sc>tulbuk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19406><form>tubul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hard stools</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B]</itype> for stools to become hard. <number>2</number> <itype>[a4]</itype> have <tr>constipation</tr>. <i>Gitubul siya maung dúgayng nalibang,</i> It took him long to have his bowel movement because he is constipated.

<p id=19407><form>tubung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cut down abaca plants at the base before stripping off the outer stalks.

<p id=19408><form>tubus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>redeem</tr>, <tr>save from</tr>. <i>Ang ímung bahandì dì makatubus sa mahúgaw mung ngalan,</i> Your wealth cannot redeem your filthy name. <i>Gitubus sila ni Muysis gíkan sa kaulipnan,</i> They were saved from slavery by Moses. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> in games where several people play in turns, take a player&apos;s turn for him to keep him from losing his turn (e.g. when a player is in a difficult position, for s.o. better to play for him for that one move). <number>2a</number> take s.o. else&apos;s place in his absence or in the event of his inability. <i>Akuy mutubus ug káun sa ímung báhin kay dì ka man muadtu,</i> I&apos;ll eat your share because you aren&apos;t going. <i>Dì ku makatubus sa ímung trabáhu kay mulakaw man ku,</i> I can&apos;t take your work over for you because I&apos;m going out. <form>katubsánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>redemption</tr>. <form>{ma&N;-r-(&larr;)|manunubus}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>redeemer</tr>; <tr>Christ the Redeemer</tr>.

<p id=19409><form>tub-us</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> cut down off the main part with a sharp cutting instrument, esp. in one stroke. <i>Ang hábul sundang dì makatub-us ug ságing,</i> A dull machete can&apos;t cut a banana plant down.

<p id=19410><form>túbuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> hold, put upward and above the rest. <i>Makatúbuy ku ánang barbil,</i> I can raise that barbell above my head. <i>Daw tubúyun (itúbuy) siya sa lángit kun pahiyuman siya ni Adilayda,</i> It was as though he was being raised to the heavens when Adelaida smiled at him. <number>2</number> <itype>[C; c6]</itype> <tr>put up for election</tr>. <i>Itúbuy nátù siya pagkakunsihal,</i> We will put him up as councilor.

<p id=19411><form>túda</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fast</tr>, <tr>rapid</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>hard</tr>, with much force. <number>3</number> doing to a high degree or in excess. <i>Túda siyang mukáun,</i> He eats ravenously. <i>Túda siyang matúlug,</i> He sleeps soundly. <i>Túda siyang mangasábà,</i> He scolds very severely. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> do s.t. <tr>fast</tr>, <tr>rapidly</tr>. <i>Ayaw tudáhig lakaw,</i> Don&apos;t walk too fast. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> do s.t. with much force. <i>Tudáhag (tudáhig) lísù ang takub,</i> Turn the cap with a good deal of force. <form>{pa-|patúda}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>drive fast</tr>. <i>Gipatudáhan sa kapitan ang dágan sa yáti,</i> The captain made the yacht go fast.

<p id=19412><form>tud-an</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tula</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19413><form>túdas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> be totally <tr>lost</tr> or <tr>used up</tr>, cause s.t. to be so. <i>Akuy mutúdas ánang ímung baligyà basta barátu,</i> I&apos;ll take all of your wares if you let me have them cheap. <i>Ang ákung mga anak nga kiat mauy nagtúdas sa ákung mga básung tarungtarung,</i> The children played around and broke all my decent glasses. <i>Natúdas ang ákung singsing nga mihiplus sa ákung tudlù,</i> The ring slipped off my finger and is lost. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> draw the card that makes the hand complete. <i>Búnut na kay tudásun ku na ni,</i> Draw a card because I am going to go out now. <number>3</number> <itype>[AB126; a1]</itype> murder (slang). <i>Tudásun nátù nang hambugírung dakù,</i> We will kill that bigmouth. <pos>a</pos> completely used up, lost, killed<corr sic=",">.</corr> <i>Hansákan ku bítaw sa tris kantus, túdas lagi,</i> I stabbed him with a three-bladed knife. That was the end of him. <pos>n</pos> the card in a game of <ix>tudasay</ix> that completes the last pair. <form>{pa&N;-|panúdas}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> for s.o. who is desperate, and sure to die anyway to kill s.o. to die along with him. <i>Manúdas na lang ku kay wà na man kuy mahímù,</i> I&apos;ll just kill s.o. to die along with me because I am at the end of my rope. <form>tudastúdas</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. coin-tossing game where three coins are tossed up and the bettors win only if it is three heads or three tails. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC2; b6(1)]</itype> play <ix>tudastúdas</ix>. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|tudasan}</form> <pos>n</pos> card that allows one to go out in <ix>tudasay</ix>. <form>walay {-an(&rarr;)|tudasan}</form> be no match for s.o. <i>Haníti kaáyu nà. Wà kay tudasan ug musúkul ka,</i> He is very skillful. You won&apos;t have a chance if you play against him. <form>{-ay(&rarr;)|tudasay}</form> <pos>n</pos> card game with drawing and discarding in which the object is to compete to get three pairs from a hand of five cards. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> play <ix>tudasay</ix>.

<p id=19414><form>tudkan</form> <xr>= <sc>tugkan</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>turuk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19415><form>tudling</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>furrow</tr> the field for planting. <i>Magtudling ta arun katamnan ang uma,</i> We will furrow the field so we can plant on it. <i>Tudlínga ang daruhan humag sudlay,</i> Furrow the field after harrowing. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a furrow in the field. <number>2</number> row of plants. <number>3</number> <tr>column</tr> in a periodical. <form>{&mdash;|tudling} púlung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sentence</tr>.

<p id=19416><form>tudlis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>prick</tr> with a needle to get s.t. out. <i>Akuy mutudlis sa ímung tunuk sa tiil,</i> I will prick your foot to get the thorn out. <i>Tudlísa ang hubag arun mugulà ang nánà,</i> Prick the boil so the pus can come out. <pos>n</pos> needle or the like to get s.t. out. <form>{&mdash;|tudlis} sa tabákù</form> <xr>= <sc>paliyu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19417><form>tudlù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> point at, out. <i>Kun mutudlù si Sír nímu sulayi lag tubag,</i> If the teacher <pb n=1039>calls on you just try to answer. <i>Tudlúa ang sinumbung,</i> <tr>Point out</tr> the one who did it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>point</tr>, give <tr>directions</tr>. <i>Kinsay gatudlù nímung nía ku magpuyù?</i> Who told you that I live here? <number>3</number> <tr>teach</tr>. <i>Nagtudlù siya sa pablik,</i> She is teaching in the public schools. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> <tr>appoint</tr>. <i>Ang prisidinti nagtudlù níya pagkahuwis,</i> The president appointed him judge. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>index finger</tr>. <number>2</number> the <tr>fingers</tr> in general. <form>hamuy sa {&mdash;|tudlù}</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>hamuy</sc>.</xr> <number>3</number> <formx><r>[<ix>numeral</ix>]</r> ka {&mdash;|tudlù}</formx> [so-and-so] many fingers wide. <number>4</number> <formx>{&mdash;|tudlù} sa tiil</formx> <tr>toes</tr>. <number>5</number> <formx>{&mdash;|tudlù} dalága, {dátù|tudlù dátù}</formx> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>dalága<sub>2</sub></sc>,</xr> <xr><sc>dátù<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr> <form>tudlùtudlù</form> <pos>n</pos> eatery where the food for sale is put in a case on display. <form>{-in-|tinudlù}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>appointee</tr>. <form>{ka-an|katudluan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>appointment</tr>. <form>{mag-r-|magtutudlù}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>teacher</tr>.

<p id=19418><form>tudluk</form> <xr>= <sc>tusluk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19419><form>tudlun dátù</form> <xr>= <sc>tudlù dátù</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>dátù<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=19420><form>tudlus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>hand</tr> s.t. to s.o. <i>Tudlúsi ku diri ug lansang,</i> Hand me some nails up here. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; c6]</itype> extend one&apos;s hand to give a handhold. <i>Mitudlus siya sa íyang kamut nákù ug nanggúnit ku,</i> He extended his hand to me and I held on to it. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> give aid or small things. <i>Tudlúsan nátù ug diyútayng inasal ang átung mga silíngan,</i> Let us give a little roast pig to our neighbors.

<p id=19421><form>tudtud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> hit on the fingers or toes. <i>Tudtúrun ku nang ímung tudlù ug mangáp ka,</i> I will rap your fingers if you touch anything. <i>Hitudturan ákung kumagkù paglansang nákù,</i> I hit my thumb while I was driving a nail.

<p id=19422><form>tuduk</form> <xr>= <sc>turuk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19423><form>tudulukyíri</form> a woman who is <tr>promiscuous</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be, become promiscuous. <i>Natudulukyíri nang bayhána human byái sa bána,</i> That woman became promiscuous after her husband left her.

<p id=19424><form>tudu pudirúsu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>All-Powerful</tr>. <i>Ang Diyus tudu pudirúsu,</i> God is All-Powerful.

<p id=19425><form>túdus<sub>1</sub></form> <tr>all</tr>, <tr>everyone</tr>, <tr>everybody</tr>. <i>Bíi, Tay, Nay, Ingku Imuk, túdus,</i> Good evening Father, Mother, Uncle Imuk, and everybody. <form>{&mdash;|túdus} lus Santus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>All Saints&apos; Day</tr>.

<p id=19426><form>túdus<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> in a game, to double the bet by placing the entire amount or quantity won from the preceding game. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> bet all the preceding game&apos;s winnings.

<p id=19427><form>tudútut</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>turútut</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tarúrut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19428><form>tudyuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>prick</tr>, <tr>pierce</tr> with s.t. large and pointed. <i>Kinsay nagtudyuk ug dinágum sa ákung pabúrut?</i> Who pricked my balloon with a pin? <i>Lúya na tung ihúa kay natudyukan ku na tu sa sápang,</i> That shark must be weak by now because I have pierced it with my spear. <pos>n</pos> prick in a piercing action with s.t. pointed.

<p id=19429><form>*tuga</form> <form>{pa-|patuga}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> dare do s.t. in unreasonable disregard of one&apos;s capacity to do it. <i>Magpatuga siyag minyù bísag way pangítà,</i> He dares to get married without a job. <form>magpatugatuga</form> <xr>= <sc>patuga</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19430><form>túga<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> for God or nature to bestow, endow. <i>Gitugáhan siyag diyútay nga kaísug,</i> He has been endowed with a little courage. <i>Ang kaálam itúga sa Diyus niadtung nagtáhud kaníya,</i> God bestows wisdom on whoever shows Him reverence. <pos>n</pos> s.t. esp. given, directly from God. <i>Túga sa lángit nang ímung anak,</i> Your child is a gift from heaven. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> be given s.t. exclusively by a supernatural being. <i>Si Hárì Artur gitugáhan ug usa ka ispáda,</i> King Arthur was given a sword by a supernatural being. <pos>n</pos> s.t. presented exclusively to s.o. by a supernatural being.

<p id=19431><form>túga<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cap and gown</tr> worn for graduation. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> wear a cap and gown. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> make a cap and gown.

<p id=19432><form>tug-ab</form> <xr>= <sc>dug-ab</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19433><form>tugábang</form> <xr>= <sc>kukug banug</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>kuku</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19434><form>tugábung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>artificial chignon</tr>. <i>Úsu niadtu ang tugábung,</i> Chignons used to be in vogue. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear, make into an artificial <tr>chignon</tr>.

<p id=19435><form>tugahálà</form> (from <ix>túga ni Bathálà</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. done or sent by divine will. <i>Usa ka dakung tugahálà nga nahibalik na ang kurúna sa úlu sa Birhin,</i> It was a great gift of the Lord that the crown was restored to the Virgin&apos;s head. <number>2</number> <tr>miracle</tr>. <i>Usa na lang ka tugahálà ang makaluwas kaníya gíkan sa silya iliktrika,</i> Only a miracle can save him from the electric chair.

<p id=19436><form>tugáhuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>clitoris</tr>.

<p id=19437><form>túgal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3N; b5]</itype> <tr>disturb</tr>, <tr>bother</tr> order or peace. <i>Way mutúgal (manúgal) ug wà kay útang,</i> Nobody disturbs you if you don&apos;t have any debts. <i>Gitúgal (gitugálan) ang baryu sa mga tulisan,</i> Robbers disturbed the peace of the village.

<p id=19438><form>tugalbung</form> <xr>= <sc>tigalbung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19439><form>tugalhab</form> (from <ix>galhab</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having a gaping tear or wound. <number>2</number> no longer a virgin. <i>Tugalhab na nang babayhána kay kadaghan na paangki,</i> That woman is no longer a virgin for she has had several illegitimate children. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1; b]</itype> get torn wide open. <i>Nagkatugalhab ang gisì kay wà dáyun sursíhi,</i> The tear became a gaping hole because she didn&apos;t darn it at once. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> lose one&apos;s virginity.

<p id=19440><form>túgan</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>túlug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19441><form>tug-an</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>reveal</tr>, report s.t. revealing. <i>Mitug-an ang sinumbung sa íyang saláud,</i> The accused confessed his crime. <i>Tug-áni ku <pb n=1040>sa ímung sikrítu,</i> Tell me your secret. <i>Itug-an tikawng Tátay nga ímu kung gisumbag,</i> I&apos;ll report you to Father that you hit me. <number>2</number> <tr>confess</tr>. <i>Ug dílì ka mutug-an, kastigúhun ka,</i> If you don&apos;t confess, I will beat you.

<p id=19442><form>tugas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>molave</tr>, k.o. <tr>wood</tr> producing extremely hard timber: <bio>Vitex parviflora</bio>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make s.t. out of molave. <i>Tugasun nátù ang sáwug arun lig-un,</i> Let us make the flooring out of molave so it will be durable.

<p id=19443><form>tugastugas</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small marine <tr>crab</tr>, poisonous to eat.

<p id=19444><form>tugasub, tugásub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> fall into the water with a deep sound. <i>Mitugasub ang batu nga gilábay sa dágat,</i> The stone was thrown into the water and fell with a loud splash. <pos>n</pos> deep sound, like one produced by a heavy object falling into water.

<p id=19445><form>tugáuk</form> <xr>= <sc>tuktugáuk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19446><form>tugaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>disturbed</tr> from a peaceful state. <i>Tugaw na ang mga bábuy sa pangayam maung namalhin,</i> The hunting has disturbed the wild pigs so they have gone elsewhere. <form>walay {&mdash;|tugaw}</form> there&apos;s nothing to disturb. <i>Maáyu dinhi isturyáhan kay way tugaw,</i> This is a good place to talk because there is nothing to disturb us. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>disturb</tr> one&apos;s peace. <i>Manira ku arun way makatugaw sa ákung pagtuun,</i> I will lock myself in the room so no one disturbs my study. <i>Ayawg tugawa ang natúlug,</i> Don&apos;t disturb the man sleeping.

<p id=19447><form>tugbábaw</form> <xr>= <sc>tigbábaw</sc>.</xr> <form>{pa-|patugbábaw}</form> <xr>= <sc>patigbábaw</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>babaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19448><form>tugbang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> give s.t. as <tr>counterpart</tr>; <tr>match</tr>. <i>Ug muámut ka ug kanding sa kumbira mutugbang ku ug ámut ug bábuy,</i> If you give a goat for the feast, I will give a pig to match it. <number>2</number> <itype>[C; b6]</itype> sit across or in front of each other. <i>Nagkatugbang mi ug lingkud sa dyip,</i> We happened to sit across from each other in the jeep. <number>3</number> in activities where people are paired off: be s.o.&apos;s opposite. <i>Dílì ku makigtugbang nímu sa kuntis kay maáyu ka,</i> I don&apos;t want to be matched against you in the contest because you&apos;re good. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> thing given as <tr>counterpart</tr>. <number>2</number> one&apos;s opposite in a contest. <number>3</number> s.t. which happens which makes up for s.t. else. <i>Kining átung mga pag-antus run tugbang sa átung kalípay niadtu,</i> Our sufferings now are exact payment of our happiness formerly. <number>4</number> s.t. <tr>commensurate</tr> in degree or weight. <i>Ang tugbang sílut sa pagpatay mau ang pagbítay,</i> Hanging is the punishment <tr>appropriate</tr> for murder. <number>5</number> <xr>= <sc>ka-</sc>.</xr> <form>{&mdash;|tugbang} púlung</form> <tr>antonym</tr>. <i>Ang tugbang púlung sa &lsquo;layù&rsquo;, &lsquo;duul&rsquo;,</i> The antonym of &lsquo;far&rsquo; is &lsquo;near&rsquo;. <form>{ka-|katugbang}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>analogous</tr>, <tr>counterpart</tr>. <i>Ang inbiay tugbang sa ipbiay sa istíts,</i> The NBI is the counterpart of the FBI in the States.

<p id=19449><form>tugbaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lofty</tr>, <tr>high</tr> up. <i>Tugbaw kaáyung miuntul ang búla,</i> The ball bounces high. <i>Hilabihang katugbaw sa garbu!</i> What a great pride! <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B246; a3]</itype> <tr>rise</tr> to a considerable height. <i>Mitugbaw ang tíngug ni Níning sa kasukù,</i> Nening&apos;s voice rose in anger. <i>Natugbaw sa íyang hunàhúnà ang mga hudlat ni Maks,</i> Max&apos;s threats came to his thoughts. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> put s.t. high up or way up. <i>Itugbaw (tugbáwa) pagdala nang isdà arun dílì maabut sa irù,</i> Lift the fish you are carrying high so the dogs can&apos;t reach it. <form>{ma-un|matugbáwun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lofty</tr> (literary). <i>Matugbáwung damgu,</i> Lofty dreams. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12C1; a2]</itype> match in height, popularity, or ability. <i>Walay makatugbaw sa kataas ni Pidru,</i> No one is as tall as Pedro. <i>Tugbáwun ku ang kaálam níya sa makina,</i> I&apos;ll try to learn as much about machine as he knows.

<p id=19450><form>tugbù</form> (from <ix>túbù</ix>) <pos>n</pos> new <tr>sprouts</tr> of leaves. <i>Utána ang tugbù sa alugbáti,</i> Make a soup of the <ix>alugbáti</ix> sprouts. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> for leaves to <tr>sprout</tr>. <i>Mitugbù (nanugbù) nag mga dáhun sa kamunggay nga gipul-úngan,</i> The leaves of the pruned malunggay are now sprouting.

<p id=19451><form>tugbung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2c]</itype> go, bring to the town or coastal area from the mountains or country. <i>Mitugbung siya kay mipalit ug ginamus,</i> He went down to the town to buy fish paste. <i>Kinsay nagtugbung sa utanun?</i> Who brought the vegetables to town?

<p id=19452><form>tugdà</form> <pos>n</pos> stumps of cornstalks left in the field after cutting off the stalks.

<p id=19453><form>tugdan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a <tr>pole</tr> or stem-like <tr>handle</tr>. <i>Ang tugdan sa latigu sa kabáyù,</i> The handle for the horsewhip. <i>Tugdan sa timbà,</i> A bamboo pole to which the bucket for drawing water is attached. <number>2</number> <tr>cornstalk</tr>.

<p id=19454><form>tugdang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB23(1); c1]</itype> <tr>sink</tr> to the bottom of water, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Mitugdang na ang lawug, ug tin-aw na ang túbig,</i> The mud in the water has <tr>settled</tr>, and it is clear now. <i>Natugdang na ang bapur digíra,</i> The battleship has sunk. <i>Nakatugdang na ka sa taliwálà ánang línaw?</i> Have you gone to the bottom in the middle of that lake? <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> land hard after being projected or dropped. <i>Didtu siya mutugdang sa bunbun pagluksu níya,</i> He landed on the sand when he jumped.

<p id=19455><form>tugduk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; ab2]</itype> for s.t. pointed to pierce or thrust into, not necessarily sticking. <i>Natugduk ang tumuy sa bangkaw sa bukubuku sa túru,</i> The end of the spear pierced the back of the bull. <i>Hingtugdukan ang <pb n=1041>ákung tiil sa tumuy sa kutsilyu,</i> The knife hit my foot when it fell.

<p id=19456><form>tugdun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>alight</tr>, <tr>set down</tr> from the air. <i>Mitugdun ang buyug sa búwak,</i> The bee alighted on the flower. <i>Gipálid siya sa alimpús. Diin siya itugdun?</i> The whirlwind carried her away. Where was she set down? <form>{-anan|tugdunanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> place where s.t. lands. <i>Tugdunánan sa ayruplánu,</i> Airplane <tr>landing field</tr>.

<p id=19457><form>tughang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> break and pulverize hardened soil for planting. <i>Lisud pagtughang sa yútà kay nabantuk na kaáyu,</i> It is difficult to break up the soil because it has gotten very packed down. <pos>a</pos> no longer a virgin.

<p id=19458><form>tughaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lukewarm</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2; a]</itype> be, become lukewarm, cause liquids to do so. <i>Magtughaw kug túbig para ikalígù,</i> I&apos;ll heat some water for bathing.

<p id=19459><form>tughù</form> <xr>= <sc>dughù<sub>1</sub></sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr>

<p id=19460><form>tughuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; b(1)]</itype> appear suddenly, unexpectedly. <i>Walà ku damha nga muanhi siya, mitughuk lag abut,</i> I never expected him to come. He just arrived suddenly. <i>Trabáhu kay tughúkan unyà tag dúaw sa átung agálun,</i> Keep working. Our boss might come without notice.

<p id=19461><form>tughuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> formal asking of a girl&apos;s hand by the groom&apos;s parents, always accompanied with food brought by the groom&apos;s delegation. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b5]</itype> formally ask for a girl&apos;s hand. <i>Mutughuk gihápun ta bísag burus na ang babáyi?</i> Do we still have to make a formal proposal when the girl is already pregnant?

<p id=19462><form>tughung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cook leftover cooked staple which stuck to the pot by adding water and usually boiling it with sugar. <i>Tughúnga nang dukut,</i> Recook the leftover rice stuck to the pot. <form>{-in-|tinughung}</form> <pos>n</pos> food prepared by the process of <ix>tughung</ix>.

<p id=19463><form>tughuy</form> <xr>= <sc>tarugsuy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19464><form>tugkad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> touch the bottom standing in water. <i>Makatugkad ka ba dihà?</i> Can you stand there? <number>2</number> <itype>[B456]</itype> for the feet or s.t. dangling to reach the ground. <i>Dílì makatugkad ang íyang tiil sa salug ug kanang siyáhay lingkúran,</i> His feet don&apos;t touch the ground if he sits in that chair. <i>Nagtikwangtikwang ang lamísa kay wà magtugkad ang usa ka tiil,</i> The table is jiggling because one of the legs isn&apos;t touching the ground. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>fathom</tr>, <tr>comprehend</tr> s.t. mysterious. <i>Way makatugkad sa ákung hunàhúnà,</i> Nobody can read my mind. <i>Lisud tugkárun ang sumbíngay sa páras,</i> It is hard to <tr>understand</tr> the meaning of the Parable of the Vine. <form>tugkaran</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>yard</tr> of a house. <number>2</number> foot of a hill. <form>tulugkárun</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. that takes deep understanding.

<p id=19465><form>tugkalan</form> <xr>= <sc>tugkaran</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tugkad</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19466><form>tugkay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stalk</tr> of a leaf or flower.

<p id=19467><form>tugmadan</form> <xr>= <sc>tugkaran</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tugkad</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19468><form>tugnà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>dip</tr>, <tr>dunk</tr> into liquid. <i>Dì pa ku malígù, apan mutugnà lang úsà ku sa túbig,</i> I won&apos;t swim yet, I&apos;ll just immerse myself quickly. <i>Ang balanghuy laming itugnà sa mantíkà,</i> Cassava tastes good if you dip it into pork fat.

<p id=19469><form>tugnaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>cold</tr> to the touch, feel. <i>Tugnaw kaáyu sa Bagyu,</i> It&apos;s very cold in Baguio. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B]</itype> become cold weather. <i>Mutugnaw (matugnaw) ang panahun inigka Disimbri,</i> The weather gets cold in December. <number>2</number> <itype>[a4]</itype> <tr>feel cold</tr>. <i>Gamítag hítir kun tugnawun ka,</i> Use the heater if you feel cold. <number>3</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> be exposed to the cold. <i>Gisip-un siya kay hitugnawan,</i> He caught cold because he was exposed to the cold. <pos>n</pos> <tr>cold</tr>. <i>Dì kung kaagwanta sa tugnaw,</i> I can&apos;t take the cold. <form>{ka-|katugnaw}</form> <pos>n</pos> state of being cold. <i>Nagkuray siya sa katugnaw,</i> She is shivering with cold. <form>{pa&N;-|panugnaw}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chills</tr>. <i>Ang panugnaw mubálus sa hilánat,</i> Chills come right after fever. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> get the chills. <form>{ting-|tingtugnaw}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cold season</tr>.

<p id=19470><form>tugnub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>dip</tr> s.t. or oneself into a liquid. <i>May disinpiktanti ang gitugnúban sa mga hiraminta sa duktur,</i> The liquid the doctor dipped his instruments into has disinfectant. <i>Itugnub ang plúma sa tintiruhan,</i> Stick the pen into the inkwell.

<p id=19471><form>tugnus</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small <tr>anchovy</tr> with a silver stripe, which comes seasonally in great abundance, most commonly eaten preserved in salt. <form>{ting-|tingtugnus}</form> <pos>n</pos> season for <ix>tugnus</ix> fish.

<p id=19472><form>tugpa</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B346; b6]</itype> for s.t. that flies to <tr>land</tr>. <i>Mitugpa ang salampáti sa atup,</i> The dove <tr>alighted</tr> on the roof. <i>Nagtugpa na ang ayruplánu,</i> The airplane has landed. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> jump from a high place. <i>Ang tulay nga íyang gitugpáhan,</i> The bridge he jumped off from. <form>tugpahánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> place where airplanes land: <tr>airport</tr> or <tr>runway</tr>. <number>2</number> place where persons jump off, <tr>diving board</tr>.

<p id=19473><form>tugpù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>toss</tr> s.t. up in the air. <i>Itugpù ang búla kay akuy mubumba,</i> Toss the volleyball and I will spike it. <number>2</number> put up s.o. as candidate. <i>Siyay átung itugpù pagkamayur,</i> We will put him up as candidate for mayor. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a coin-tossing game with three coins where one wins when all heads or all tails appear. <number>2</number> one&apos;s turn to toss the coin.

<p id=19474><form>tugpù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> tease unmarried people by pairing them off. <i>Ug akuy mutugpù, magkadáyun giyud pagkaminyù,</i> If I tease people by pairing them off in marriage, they end up getting married.

<pb n=1042>

<p id=19475><form>tugsad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> hit, reach the ground from an elevated position. <i>Milayat siya ug didtu mutugsad sa píkas tampi,</i> He jumped and landed on the opposite bank. <i>Gibukhárag panaptun ang gitugsáran sa rayna gíkan sa hagdanan,</i> A cloth was laid over the area the queen stepped on when she came down from the stairs.

<p id=19476><form>tugsaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a3b]</itype> <tr>plunge</tr> into water, <tr>dunk</tr> s.t. straight into a liquid. <i>Nagtugsaw ang íyang tiil sa dágat samtang nagdagan ang pambut,</i> His feet were <tr>immersed</tr> in the water while the boat was moving. <i>Natugsaw siya sa kanal,</i> He fell into a ditch.

<p id=19477><form>tugsuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> strike s.t. pointed into s.t. <i>Nagtugsuk siyag káhuy silbing timáan,</i> He planted a stake as a marker. <i>Tugsukun níya ang linung-ag ságing sa tinidur,</i> He will <tr>stick</tr> a fork into the boiled banana. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> stick one&apos;s finger into liquid and immediately remove it. <i>Ang binditahan nga ákung gitugsúkan sa ákung tudlù,</i> The font of the holy water into which I <tr>dipped</tr> my finger. <pos>n</pos> <tr>skewer</tr>, s.t. to stick into s.t. <i>Ambi ra ang tugsuk kay átung isuway sa amúti,</i> Let me have a stick so I can see if the sweet potatoes are done.

<p id=19478><form>tugsuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; b6]</itype> for s.t. to appear as an elongated shape. <i>Unsa nang mitugsuy sa ímung bursa, ságing?</i> What is that thing protruding in your pocket, a banana? <i>Nagtugsuy lang nang níwang mu rag kawáyan,</i> That skinny person looks tall and thin like a bamboo pole. <pos>a</pos> thin and <tr>elongated</tr>. <i>Tugsuy ug simud,</i> Long-snouted.

<p id=19479><form>tugtug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> play a piece of music, an instrument. <i>Mitugtug ang urkistra,</i> The orchestra played a piece. <i>Tugtúga ang &lsquo;Lawra&rsquo;,</i> Play &lsquo;Laura&rsquo;. <pos>n</pos> music piece being played. <form>{ma&N;-r-|manunugtug}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.o. that provides the music.

<p id=19480><form>tugub</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>full</tr>, having s.t. in abundance. <i>Tugub sa sustansiya ang gátas,</i> Milk is full of nutrients. <i>Tugub na ang barku sa pasahíru,</i> The boat is full of passengers. <i>Tugub nga áni,</i> <tr>Abundant</tr> harvest. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a2]</itype> become, make full, rich. <i>Natugub siya sa kalípay,</i> She was filled with joy.

<p id=19481><form>tug-ud</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stem</tr> of large, grassy plants or trunks of palm trees. <form>{&mdash;|tug-ud} sa buli</form> <pos>n</pos> unopened buri palm frond together with its stem.

<p id=19482><form>túgun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1c6]</itype> leave or send s.o. with instructions to do s.t. <i>Tugna siya pagpalit ug asin inigtugbung níya,</i> Give him the message to buy some salt when he goes to town. <i>Unsay ímung itúgun inig-adtu nákù sa Manílà?</i> What do you want me to do for you when I go to Manila? <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> word of instruction to do or get s.t. <number>2</number> final message of a dying man. <form>Bag-ung {&mdash;|Túgun}</form> <tr>New Testament</tr>. <form>Dáang {&mdash;|Túgun}</form> <tr>Old Testament</tr>. <form>{pa&N;-|panúgun}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> ask s.o. to get and bring s.t. back. <i>Nagpanugun tus Búbuy sa íyang duláan,</i> Boboy keeps asking you to bring him a toy. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> give final instructions, will at deathbed. <i>Nanúgun na ang himatyun,</i> The dying man is giving his final instructions.

<p id=19483><form>túgut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> pay out line. <i>Tugúti ang lambu hangtud malúya ang isdà,</i> Pay out the line until the fish gets weak. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>permit</tr>, <tr>allow</tr>. <i>Mulangyaw untà ku kun mutúgut ka,</i> I would like to go abroad if you permit me. <i>Dílì itúgut ang paghulam íning librúha,</i> No one is permitted to borrow this book. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> sell s.t. at a price lower than that quoted. <i>Ákù ning palitun ug itúgut nímug písus,</i> I&apos;ll buy it if you give it to me for one peso. <form>{(&rarr;)|tugut}</form> <pos>n</pos> line which one pays out, esp. a kite string.

<p id=19484><form>tug-ut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> tie hemp fibers end to end to form a long strand for weaving. <i>Magtug-ut ka ug bayinti ka bituul pára ihulug,</i> Tie up twenty skeins of hemp to use as warp threads.

<p id=19485><form>tugway</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> lengthen a tether. <i>Tas-ig tugway ang kábaw,</i> Give the carabao more rope. <i>Tugwáyi ang kanding arun makapanabsab,</i> Give the goat more rope so it can graze. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> pasture an animal by lengthening or untying the tether. <i>Manugway kug kábaw mahápun,</i> I pasture the carabao each afternoon. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> rope used to <tr>tether</tr> animals. <number>2</number> length of tether allowed. <form>{-anan|tugwayanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> place where animals are tethered. <form>{ma&N;-r-|manunugway}</form> <pos>n</pos> one who pastures animals with a tether.

<p id=19486><form>tugyan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>entrust</tr>, put into s.o.&apos;s power or disposal. <i>Ang hárì gustu nang mutugyan sa trúnu ngadtu sa íyang anak,</i> The king wants to abdicate the throne in favor of his son. <i>Ayawg itugyan níya ang ímung kaugalíngun antis mu makasal,</i> Don&apos;t surrender yourself to him until you are married. <form>{-in-an|tinugyanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> one to whom s.t. has been turned over. <form>{&mdash;|tinugyanan} sa baláud</form> <tr>policeman</tr>. <i>{&mdash;|tinugyanan} sa lungsud</i> <tr>public servant</tr>, specifically, <tr>congressman</tr>.

<p id=19487><form>túhab</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>peck</tr> a piece of s.t. <i>Dílì makatúhab ang langgam sa búnga nga giputus,</i> The bird could not peck at the fruit that was wrapped. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> cut a large opening or swath. <i>Kinsay maistráhang nagtúhab sa úlus ákung anak?</i> Which teacher was it that cut a wide swath into my son&apos;s hair? <i>Bistídu nga mu rag sáku nga gituhában pára agiánas buktun,</i> A dress like a sack with pieces snipped off for armholes. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23; a12]</itype> affect s.t. as though diminishing it. <i>Sígas plaslayit nga mitúhab sa kangitngit,</i> A flashlight <pb n=1043>beam that pierced the darkness. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> large hole left, large portion removed. <number>2</number> large opening in a dress. <form>{(&rarr;)|tuhab}</form> <pos>n</pos> a woman who is no longer a virgin (humorous). <form>{-in-an|tinuhában}</form> <pos>n</pos> place s.t. was pecked off. <i>Makáun pa ning kapayása. Abisa lang nang tinuhában,</i> You can still eat the papaya. Just cut out the holes. <form>{-in-an(&rarr;)|tinuhaban}</form> <pos>n</pos> fruits that have peck marks.

<p id=19488><form>tuhak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>peck at</tr>. <i>Kwaknit ang nagtuhak sa mga prútas,</i> Bats pecked at the fruits. <i>Gituhak sa manuk ang íyang mata,</i> The chicken pecked at his eyes. <number>2</number> strike with a pecking-like motion. <i>Mituhak ang dakung sawa,</i> The big snake struck. <pos>n</pos> feed of chickens, fowls or birds. <form>kakha {&mdash;|tuhak}</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>kakha</sc>.</xr> <form>{-l-an(&rarr;)|}tuluhakan</form> <pos>n</pos> dish for feeding chickens.

<p id=19489><form>tuhaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B23(1)6]</itype> <number>1</number> spring forth unexpectedly, appear suddenly, <tr>pop up</tr>. <i>Mituhaw lang pagkalit ang anak hung nawálà,</i> My lost son suddenly appeared in our house. <i>Mituhaw sa íyang hunàhúnà ang usa ka maanindut nga láraw,</i> A beautiful plan popped into his mind. <number>2</number> do s.t. suddenly and without cause. <i>Nabúang kang mituhaw ka man lag kasukù,</i> Have you gone crazy, flaring up like that? <pos>a</pos> done or appearing suddenly and unexpectedly.

<p id=19490><form>tuhay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> for the mind to be at peace. <i>Matuhay (mutuhay) pag ákung hunàhúnà ug manláyas mu,</i> I&apos;ll have <tr>peace of mind</tr> only if you all get out of here. <number>2</number> do or accomplish s.t. to the finish without any hitch or disturbance. <i>Dì matuhay (mutuhay) ang ákung trabáhu ug samúkun ku,</i> My work won&apos;t go smoothly if I am disturbed.

<p id=19491><form>tuhi</form> sound imitating spitting to show contempt. <i>Tuhi! Hitsúra lang,</i> <tr>Pff</tr>, the nerve of him. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> say <ix>tuhi</ix> to s.o.

<p id=19492><form>tuhib, túhib</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>peck at</tr> s.t., esp. food. <i>Mga langgam nga nagtuhib sa hinug kapáyas,</i> The birds pecking at the ripe papaya. <number>2</number> <tr>nibble</tr>, bore a hole in s.t. <i>Ang ilagà mauy mitúhib sa kísu,</i> A mouse nibbled at the cheese. <form>{(&rarr;)|tuhib}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bill</tr>, <tr>beak</tr>. <form>{-in-an|tinuhíban}</form> <pos>n</pos> place pecked at, hole nibbled into s.t.

<p id=19493><form>tuhik, túhik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab]</itype> <tr>peck</tr> with a sharp, pointed beak to eat or inflect a wound. <i>Nagtuhik ang manuk sa wati,</i> The chicken is pecking at an earthworm. <i>Ilábay ang gituhikan nga prútas,</i> Throw away the fruits that have holes pecked in them. <form>{ma&N;-|manuhik}</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>fish</tr> that is particularly vicious.

<p id=19494><form>tuhil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> poke or tap s.t. small or a tiny portion of s.t. so as to move it. <i>Ayaw punáyig tuhil ang itlug sa irù kay mapaakan ka,</i> Don&apos;t keep poking the dog&apos;s testicles. He might bite you. <i>Mataktak ang búwak bísag ígù lang tuhilun,</i> The flowers will fall off even if you just touch them lightly. <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to poke.

<p id=19495><form>tuhu, tuhù</form> particle following the first word of the predicate, used in negating s.o.&apos;s statement and stressing the contrary. <i>Namutbut siya. Mutan-aw tuhù nà siyag sini,</i> She is lying. She is so going to the movies. <i>Dílì tuhù nà siya indyinir,</i> No, he&apos;s not. He is not an engineer.

<p id=19496><form>tuhud</form> <xr>= <sc>tulud</sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr>

<p id=19497><form>túhud</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>knee</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> hit in the knee. <i>Gitúhud siyag búnal maung napaluhud,</i> He was whipped on his knees and it made him fall to his knees. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2456]</itype> reach nearly as high as the knees. <i>Mutúhud na ang túbig sa dálan,</i> The water in the street is nearly up to the knees. <form>{(&rarr;)|tuhud}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>túhud</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a1]</itype> ask for a girl&apos;s hand from her parents, not necessarily in a formal way with ceremony and bargaining. <i>Mituhud na siya kay disidídu giyung mangasáwa,</i> He asked the girl&apos;s parents for her hand because he really is determined to marry her. <form>{taga-(&rarr;)|tagatuhud}</form> up to the knees.&dagger;

<p id=19498><form>túhug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> pierce through with a string, stake, or s.t. else, hang s.t. on s.t. long. <i>Magtúhug kug pirlas arun ímung ikwintas,</i> I&apos;ll <tr>string</tr> some pearls for you to wear as necklace. <i>Natúhug ang isdà sa panà,</i> The fish got <tr>impaled</tr> on the spear. <i>Tuhúga sa uway ang kubit,</i> <tr>String</tr> the catch by passing a rattan strip through it. <i>Tuhúgi rag hílu nang dágum,</i> <tr>Thread</tr> that needle. <i>Siyay nagpas-an sa bugsay diin itúhug ang bukag,</i> He carried the paddle over his shoulder and hung the basket over it. <form>{&mdash;|túhug} sa ilung</form> lead around by the nose. <i>Matúhug ka ba lang níya sa ilung?</i> Can she lead you about by the nose? <number>2</number> <itype>[A123S]</itype> follow or put in memory the thread of a story, idea, lecture. <i>Way nakatuhug sa isturya níyang naglikùlíkù,</i> Nobody could follow his incoherent story. <number>2a</number> <tr>understand</tr>, <tr>comprehend</tr>. <i>Bísag bungul siya, makatuhug siya sa ímung isulti nga magtan-aw lang sa ímung ngábil,</i> Even if he is deaf, he can understand what you are saying by just reading your lips. <form>{(&rarr;)|tuhug}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>string</tr> or s.t. used to string or pierce through s.t. <i>Nabugtù ang tuhug sa dunggan sa bábuy,</i> The string that was fastened through the pig&apos;s ears broke. <number>2</number> hole punched into the nose or ears. <number>3</number> quantity contained on a string of s.t. <i>Tagpíla ang tuhug sa isdà?</i> How much is a string of fish? <form>tuhugtúhug</form> <pos>n</pos> children&apos;s game, taking a coconut midrib and fishing out in turns rubber bands buried in the sand. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|tuhugan}</form> <xr>= <sc>tuhugtúhug</sc>.</xr>

<!-- TODO -->

<p id=19499><form>tuhuktuhuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B456; b6]</itype> have tiny marks <pb n=1044>(like pin marks) all over. <i>Tawumtum nang nagtuhuktuhuk sa panaptun,</i> That is mildew that has made tiny spots on the cloth. <i>Gituhuktuhukan ang íyang náwung sa úwat sa bugas,</i> His face is <tr>pockmarked</tr> by pimple scars. <pos>n</pos> tiny marks all over s.t.

<p id=19500><form>tuhup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>permeate</tr>. <i>Mituhup ang katugnaw sa sinínà,</i> The cold <tr>seeped</tr> through the dress. <number>2</number> for s.t. wet to <tr>seep through</tr>, permeate. <i>Gituphan sa kabasà ang yútà,</i> Moisture permeated the earth. <number>3</number> be affected with a feeling or emotion. <i>Tuphun kug kahingáwa matag byáhi níya,</i> I get anxious whenever he goes on a trip. <form>{ma-un(&larr;)|matuhúpun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>penetrating</tr>.

<p id=19501><form>túhus</form> <xr>= <sc>túlus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19502><form>tuhuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> get out of s.w. suddenly and with haste. <i>Dì pa gánì mahuman kug súgù, mutuhuy dáyug lakaw,</i> I can&apos;t even finish giving my orders before he rushes up to get going. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; b3cP]</itype> be sticking out straight. <i>Mituhuy ang túbig sa hús,</i> The water from the hose is spurting out far. <i>Nagtuhuy ang tintin sa báta. Básig kaihiun,</i> The child has an erection. He probably has to urinate. <i>Ayawg ituhuy (ipatuhuy) nang ímung buhuk dapit sa agtang. Mu ra kag tin-idyir,</i> Don&apos;t let your hair stick out over your forehead. You look like a teen-ager. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> carrying oneself in a straight but artless way. <number>2</number> <tr>sticking out</tr>.

<p id=19503><form>túig</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>year</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56; b4]</itype> be almost, last for a year. <i>Mutúig nákung pinaábut nímu,</i> I waited for you for almost a year. <i>Nagtúig ang ámung pagbúngul,</i> It&apos;s been one year now that we haven&apos;t been on speaking terms. <i>Dì na matuígan ang ímung kinabúhì,</i> Your life won&apos;t last for another year. <form>tuigtúig</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>every year</tr>; <tr>yearly</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c16]</itype> be, become yearly, do s.t. on a yearly basis. <form>{-in-(&rarr;)|tinuig}</form> <tr>annual</tr>. <i>Tinuig nga tígum,</i> <tr>Annual meeting</tr>. <form>{ka-an|katuígan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>years</tr>. <i>Nanglábay ang daghang katuígan,</i> Many years passed. <number>2</number> <tr>Easter obligation</tr>, the obligation of every Roman Catholic to go to confession and Holy Communion once a year on a definite period specified by the church&mdash;that is, in the period between Easter Sunday and November 2, All Souls&apos; Day. <form>{pa&N;-(&rarr;)|panuig}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> first planting season in the calendar year (during June and July); crops planted during this season. <i>Aníhun sa Disyimbri ang humay sa panuig,</i> The first crop of rice is harvested in December. <number>2</number> extraordinarily big. <i>Panuig man pud nang librúha, dílì man madaug ug bátà,</i> That sure is a big book. A child couldn&apos;t lift it. <form>{pa&N;-un|panuígun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>age</tr>. <form>may {&mdash;|panuígun}</form> <number>1</number> be old enough to do s.t. <i>May panuígun na si Lítang muiskuyla,</i> Lita is old enough now to go to school. <number>2</number> be no longer young. <i>May panuígun na siya pagkaminyù,</i> She was well along in years when she got married. <form>{pa&N;-un(&rarr;)|panuigun}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be of [such-and-such] an age. <i>Nagpanuigun siyag diyis,</i> He is ten years old.

<p id=19504><form>tuis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>twist</tr>. <i>Siyay nagtuis sa ákung buktun,</i> He twisted my arm. <number>2</number> <tr>distort</tr> a fact or truth. <i>Way mutuu nímu kay maáyu kang mutuis sa tinúud,</i> Nobody believes you because of the way you distort the truth. <form>{&mdash;|tuis} sa pálad, kapaláran</form> <pos>n</pos> turn of fate. <i>Usa ka tuis sa kapaláran nga ang kanhi banyágà karun nagpakilúuy na,</i> It is a turn of fate that the ruthless scoundrel now has to beg for mercy.

<p id=19505><form>tuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> word used in writing to indicate a knocking sound. <number>2</number> in bowling, a hit scored through the center, opening up a clear path. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> for a hit to turn out to be of this sort.

<p id=19506><form>túk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> stick a stick into s.t. to serve as a <tr>marker</tr>. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> marker stuck into s.t. <i>Gibutangan nákug túk ang gilubngan sa bahandì,</i> I stuck a stick to mark the spot where I buried the treasure. <number>2</number> clitoris (slang).

<p id=19507><form>tukà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>strangle</tr> with the hands. <i>Tuk-un ta kag musinggit ka,</i> I&apos;ll choke you if you scream. <number>2</number> <itype>[A123P; b4(1)]</itype> choke on s.t. ingested. <i>Makatukà nang tag-as nga bíhun,</i> You can choke on long noodles. <i>Hituk-an ku pag-inum nákù sa wiski,</i> I choked when I drank the whiskey. <number>2a</number> get <tr>jammed</tr> or <tr>stuck</tr> into s.t. as if choking on it. <i>Papil ang nakatukà (nakapatukà) sa kasilyas,</i> Paper clogged the toilet up. <i>Ug matuk-an ang makina gáhì na tuyúkun,</i> If a sewing machine gets stuck it is hard to turn.

<p id=19508><form>tukà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>peck</tr> at to eat. <i>Gustung mutukà ug tibuuk mais ang manuk,</i> Chickens like to peck at whole kernels. <i>Dúna pa bay tukaun ang sunuy?</i> Are there any grains left for the rooster to peck at? <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>beak</tr>, <tr>bill</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>feed</tr> for fowls or birds. <form>kakha {&mdash;|tukà}</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>kakha</sc>.</xr> <form>{pa-|patukà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> feed fowls.

<p id=19509><form>túkab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>open</tr> by pushing s.t. aside, lifting a cover. <i>Kinsay nagtúkab sa kúlun?</i> Who took the cover off the pot? <i>Tukába ug dakù ang bintánà kay galhà,</i> Open the windows wide because it is warm. <pos>n</pos> distance s.t. opens.

<p id=19510><form>tuk-ab</form> <xr>= <sc>dug-ab</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19511><form>tukabtukab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> <tr>gasp</tr> for breath, <tr>pant</tr>. <i>Nagtukabtukab ang íyang gininhawaan sa pagdinágan,</i> He panted for breath after running so much.

<p id=19512><form>tukad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2c]</itype> <tr>go</tr>, bring up to the mountain, or country from town. <i>Mutukad ku karung tingsanggì,</i> I&apos;ll go to the country this <pb n=1045>coming harvest. <i>Butung ray ákung tukarun,</i> I&apos;m going to the country just to get young coconuts. <i>Itukad ring abúnu,</i> Bring this fertilizer to the country.

<p id=19513><form>tukadur</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dresser</tr>, a chest of drawers with a large mirror and a flat space for cosmetics. <number>2</number> a plain <tr>mirror</tr> of considerable size. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b]</itype> look at oneself in a mirror. <i>Tukaduri ra nang nawung mug tan-áwag angayan ka ba,</i> Look at yourself in the mirror and see if you look nice. <form>{pa&N;-|panukadur}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> look at oneself in a mirror.

<p id=19514><form>tukag, túkag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB2S6; cP]</itype> place s.t. long in a position <tr>vertical</tr> or <tr>crosswise</tr> relative to s.t. else; cause it to be so. <i>Ayúhag butang ang gabas kay mutúkag sa kahun,</i> Lay the saw down carefully crosswise in the toolbox. <i>Nagtukag ang bukug sa íyang tunlan,</i> A bone is lodged cross-ways in his throat. <i>Itúkag (ipatúkag) ang lipak sa takup arun dílì mutak-up,</i> Prop the shutter open with a stick of bamboo. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2S6]</itype> for s.t. slender to be jutting out. <i>Ang mga tiil sa dakung bátà mutukag kun kugúsun,</i> The legs of a big child dangle if he is carried. <form>{(&rarr;)|tukag}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. placed athwart s.o. <number>2</number> sticking out. <i>Tukag siyag dawunggan,</i> He has ears that stick out.

<p id=19515><form>tukal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gap</tr> formed as a result of shrinkage between two juxtaposed materials, esp. wood. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)]</itype> form a gap. <i>Mitukal (natukal) ang mga sawug paglúbag,</i> Cracks developed between the floor boards when they shrunk. <form>tukaltukal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> hang loosely from a loose attachment. <i>Nagtukaltukal ang bungbung sa báy,</i> One side of the walling of the house is hanging loosely.

<p id=19516><form>tukámud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b8]</itype> <tr>fall</tr> face first to the ground. <i>Nasapiti siya ug natukámud,</i> He tripped and fell face first to the ground.

<p id=19517><form>tukang</form> <xr>= <sc>tuklang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19518><form>tukar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>play</tr> a musical instrument, piece. <i>Hanas siyang mutukar sa marimba,</i> He plays the marimba well. <i>Tanggu tukara,</i> Play a tango. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> for a musical group to <tr>perform</tr>. <i>Dúna silay tukaran nga parti karung gabíi,</i> They will perform at a party tonight. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> have an attack of a recurring illness or undesirable behavior. <i>Mutukar ang riyuma kun ting-ulan,</i> Rheumatism flares up on rainy days. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> music played. <i>Magsáyaw ta inigsúgud sa tukar,</i> Let&apos;s dance when the music starts. <number>2</number> <tr>performance</tr> by a musical group. <form>{pa-|patukar}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> turn on a phonograph, radio for music. <i>Patukara ang púnu,</i> Turn on the phonograph. <i>Bítuls ang ipatukar,</i> Play a Beatles record.

<p id=19519><form>tukarul</form> <xr>= <sc>tingkarul</sc>, <i>4.</i></xr>

<p id=19520><form>tukas</form> <xr>= <sc>tuklas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19521><form>tukaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>stay awake</tr> at night doing s.t., keep <tr>vigil</tr>. <i>Magtukaw ku karung gabíi paghuman sa tirm pípar,</i> I&apos;ll be awake all night finishing my paper. <pos>n</pos> <tr>wake</tr>. <i>Sa tukaw nagdala silag baráha arun dílì sila tulgun,</i> They brought a deck of cards to the wake so they wouldn&apos;t feel sleepy.

<p id=19522><form>tukaw<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> tower over. <i>Mga pipila ka túig mutukaw na siya nákù,</i> In a few years he will be towering over me. <i>Usa ka lubing láyug ang nagtukaw sa ílang payag,</i> A tall coconut tree is towering over their hut.

<p id=19523><form>tukaw<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a unit of length reckoned from the tip of the thumb to the tip of the index finger extended. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> measure s.t. in <ix><corr sic="tukaw&apos;s">tukaws</corr></ix>.

<p id=19524><form>tukáya</form> <xr>= <sc>tukáyu</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=19525><form>tukáyu</form> <pos>n</pos> one who has the same name as s.o. else. <i>Tukáyu siya nákù kay Dyun usab íyang ngán,</i> He&apos;s my <tr>namesake</tr> because his name is John too. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC2; ac3]</itype> call s.o. or each other <ix>tukáyu</ix>. <form>{(&rarr;)|tukayu}</form> <pos>n</pos> term of address to one&apos;s <ix>tukáyu</ix>.

<p id=19526><form>tukbil</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>touch</tr> slightly. <i>Wà siyay gána ug ígù lang mitukbil sa kan-un,</i> She had no appetite and barely touched the food. <i>Mutak-up dáyun ang hibìhibì ug tukbílun,</i> The touch-me-not plant closes as soon as you touch it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> touch the emotions or on s.t. that provokes feelings. <i>Ikaw pay nakatukbil sa ákung dughan,</i> You were the first to have touched my heart. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> mention s.t. in passing. <i>Sa íyang diskursu mitukbil siya sa pulitika,</i> In his speech he mentioned politics in passing. <form>{-l-un|tulukbílun}, {-l-un(&rarr;)|tulubilun}</form> <pos>a</pos> delicate, engendering arguments or hard feelings. <i>Kanang mga paagíha tulukbilun (tulukbílun) kaáyu,</i> That procedure is very much open to argument. <form>{&mdash;|tulukbilun} ug buut</form> short-tempered.

<p id=19527><form>tukbù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>grasp</tr> by encircling the fingers around. <i>Nagtukbù siyag ságing,</i> He is grasping a banana. <i>Tukbúa ang buktun sa bátà kun matukbù ba,</i> Put your fingers around the child&apos;s arm if they can go all the way around it. <number>2</number> <tr>bundle</tr> long things together to form a bunch big enough to be clasped in one or both hands. <pos>n</pos> bundle of s.t. that can be clasped in one or both hands.

<p id=19528><form>tukbuy</form> <xr>= <sc>talukbuy<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=19529><form>tukdab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> <tr>cut</tr> s.t. down at the base with one stroke. <i>Kining dapíta ang ákung gitukdaban sa mga tuud sa mga gagmayng káhuy,</i> This is the place where I cut the stumps of the small tree down.

<p id=19530><form>tukdug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN46]</itype> for s.t. to stand out straight and bare. <i>Mitukdug (nanukdug) ang mga <pb n=1046>mais human hugpái sa dúlun,</i> The corn plants stood straight and bare after a swarm of locusts settled on them. <pos>n</pos> ribs of umbrella.

<p id=19531><form>tukgaw</form> <xr>= <sc>lukgaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19532><form>tukhi, tukhì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>toothpick</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into toothpick. <i>Maáyung tukhíun ang tukug,</i> Coconut midribs make good toothpicks. <form>{pa&N;-|panukhi}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> pick one&apos;s teeth.

<p id=19533><form>tukì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>investigate</tr>, <tr>examine</tr>. <i>Ang kumiti mauy mutukì sa anumalíya,</i> The committee will investigate the anomaly. <i>Madiskubrihan ang tíkas kun tukiun ang libru,</i> They will discover the embezzlement if the books are examined. <number>2</number> <tr>ask</tr>, <tr>interrogate</tr>. <i>Gitukì siya apan wà mutug-an,</i> He was questioned but he didn&apos;t tell. <number>3</number> <tr>discuss</tr> with the idea of analyzing, explaining. <i>Unsay tukiun sa míting?</i> What is going to be discussed in the meeting? <form>{ma-un(&larr;)|matukíun}</form> <pos>a</pos> characterized with persistent, methodical, and detailed application of a procedure. <i>Kining instruksiyun sa libru masabtan sa matukíung pagbása,</i> The instructions in the book can be understood only if you read it with care and analysis.

<p id=19534><form>túkib</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>detailed</tr>, <tr>complete</tr>, and <tr>well-described</tr>. <i>Túkib kaáyu ang íyang isturya sa aksidinti,</i> His account of the accident is complete to the minutest detail. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> delve into s.t. so as to have a thorough knowledge of it.<i> Buut kung tukíbun ang tanghágà sa íyang kinabúhì,</i> I want to delve into the riddle of his life. <i>Dì matúkib ang kaguul sa namatyan,</i> The grief of the bereaved one cannot be described. <form>{-l-un|tulukíbun}</form> <pos>a</pos> that which hides a mystery, riddle. <i>Tulukíbun ang pahiyum sa katingaláhang istranyu,</i> The mysterious stranger has a sphinx-like smile.

<p id=19535><form>tukig</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>stiff</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become stiff. <i>Mitukig ang kasáhus nga gibulad,</i> The jerked meat is stiff. <i>Ang ispísu nga amirul mauy nakatukig (nakapatukig) sa muskitíru,</i> The thick starch made the mosquito net stiff. <i>Nagkatukig ang ákung líug,</i> My neck is getting stiff.

<p id=19536><form>tukíkà</form> <xr>= <sc>tikúkà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19537><form>tukikì, tukìkì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> laugh with a partly suppressed high-pitched laughter. <i>Mitukikì siya sa ákung tistis,</i> He snickered at my joke. <i>Unsay inyung gitukìkían?</i> What are you snickering about?

<p id=19538><form>túkis</form> <pos>n</pos> talkies, talking movies. <i>Dì pa túkis ang sini sa panahun ni Púpuy,</i> There weren&apos;t any talkies in Grandpa&apos;s day.

<p id=19539><form>tuklang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> put a piece of wood s.w. to inhibit motion, either by propping s.t. under it and keeping it from falling or by laying it in the way and stopping it from proceeding. <i>Tuklángun (tuklángan) ang takup sa dúlung arun dílì musira,</i> <tr>Prop up</tr> the hood so it won&apos;t slam shut. <i>Ituklang nis bintánà arun dílì matúkab,</i> <tr>Wedge</tr> the window shut with this so it can&apos;t come open. <number>1a</number> <tr>prop</tr> s.t. up. <i>Taas nga káhuy ang ituklang sa hayhayan arun dì masagyad ang hinayhay,</i> Use a long bamboo pole to hold the clothesline to keep the wash from touching the ground. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN3; b6]</itype> put up the hands to keep s.o. at arms&apos; distance, as if bracing oneself. <i>Nanuklang siya kay gipiit siya sa ílang pagbayli,</i> She kept her hand up because her partner danced too close to her. <form>{pa&N;-|panuklang}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> brace oneself or keep s.o. away from one&apos;s body. <i>Kun wà pa siya makapanuklang mahaplà untà siya,</i> Had she not braced herself she would have fallen flat. <pos>n</pos> stick used to prevent motion.

<p id=19540><form>tuklas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; a1]</itype> <tr>open</tr> a shutter, curtain or s.t. that covers, be opened. <i>Natukas ang atup pagbagyu,</i> The roof was blown off in the storm. <i>Natukas ang íyang sayal paghángin,</i> Her skirt was lifted up by the wind. <i>Inánayng nagkatukas ang tilun,</i> The curtain slowly opens. <pos>a</pos> be <tr>open</tr>. <i>May nangáwat kay tukas nag paradur,</i> There has been a robbery because the cabinet is open.

<p id=19541><form>tuklì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> turn a page. <i>Tuklía ang mga dáhun ug hínay arun dílì mu hinglaktawan ang litrátu,</i> Turn the pages slowly so you will not miss the picture.

<p id=19542><form>tukling</form> <xr>= <sc>tuklid</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19543><form>tuklid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> give s.o. a sudden <tr>push</tr>. <i>Kinsay nagtuklid nímung nahayang ka man?</i> Why did you fall? Who pushed you? <i>Wà ka ituklid, hibanggaan ka lang,</i> Nobody pushed you. S.o. just accidentally bumped into you.

<p id=19544><form>tuklù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> steal by catching s.t. at the neck, esp. chicken. <i>Gituklù ang manuk sa nangharána,</i> The chicken was swiped by the serenaders. <i>Gituklù sa naglágut nga bána ang líug sa asáwa,</i> The husband was so angry he grabbed his wife&apos;s neck and squeezed it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a1]</itype> dart or <tr>strike</tr> instantly with the head. <i>Pagbantay kay ang bitin mutuklù lag kalit,</i> Watch out for a snake might just strike out suddenly. <i>Ang manuk nakatuklù ug duha ka bakì,</i> The chicken has caught two frogs pecking at them.

<p id=19545><form>tuklud</form> <xr>= <sc>tuklid</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19546><form>tuklung</form> <pos>a</pos> for rice or corn to have overripe grains. <i>Tukung na kaáyu ang humay nga wà maáni dáyun,</i> The rice in the fields is bent over now because it was not harvested right away. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> get grains that are overripe.

<pb n=1047>

<p id=19547><form>tuklus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> hand s.t. to s.o. <i>Ituklus ang suwat,</i> <tr>Hand over</tr> the letter. <number>2</number> <itype>[b5]</itype> <xr>= <sc>pa&N;-</sc>.</xr> <form>{pa&N;-|panuklus}</form> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> go to a banquet with the primary purpose of eating. <i>Manuklus ta sa íla kay dakù silag híkay,</i> Let&apos;s go to their house for a free meal, because they have prepared quite extensively. <number>2</number> attend any k.o. entertainment without invitation. <i>Manuklus tag bayli sa ílang iskuyláhan,</i> Let&apos;s go attend the dance in their school.

<p id=19548><form>tukmà</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>exact</tr>, <tr>exactly</tr>. <i>Náa sa libru ang tukmà nga tubag,</i> The exact answer is in the book. <i>Tukmà nga alas syíti ang pagsúgud sa prugráma,</i> The program starts at exactly seven o&apos;clock. <i>Tukmà sa gikasabútan,</i> Exactly as agreed. <i>Tukmang usa ka búlan ugmà sukad sa íyang paggíkan,</i> It will be exactly one month tomorrow since the day he left. <i>Kining ruskáha tukmà kaáyu ánang pirnúha,</i> This nut fits that bolt very nicely. <number>2</number> <tr>suitable</tr>, <tr>appropriate</tr>. <i>Tukmà ang tíma sa ukasiyun,</i> The theme <tr>fits</tr> the occasion exactly. <i>Kining tanúma tukmà giyud sa bugnawng klíma,</i> This plant is perfectly <tr>adapted</tr> for a cold climate. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26C; c]</itype> <tr>coincide</tr>, <tr>correspond</tr> with. <i>Mitukmà ang ákung pangagpas sa nahitabù,</i> My guess coincided with what actually happened. <i>Nagkatukmà ang pista ug ang ákung adlaw,</i> The fiesta and my birthday fall on the same date. <number>1a</number> <itype>[C3; c6]</itype> for edges to fit, abut perfectly. <i>Itukmag maáyu ang mga ngilit,</i> Make the edges abut perfectly. <number>2</number> be, make <tr>suitable</tr>, <tr>appropriate</tr>. <number>3</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> <tr>come upon</tr> s.o. quite unexpectedly. <i>Hitukmaan níya ang bátà nga mikúut sa kúkis,</i> She came upon the child getting some cookies. <form>{hi-|hitukmà}/{ha-|hatukmà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b8]</itype> <number>1</number> come out to be the same as or appropriate. <number>2</number> <tr>come upon</tr> s.t. in a place. <i>Sa íyang paglatagaw nahitukmà siya sa usa ka payag,</i> In his wandering he came upon a hut. <form>{pahi-|pahitukmà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make s.t. coincide. <i>Kinahanglang ipahitukmà ang prugráma sa gubyirnu sa kinahanglanun sa násud,</i> The government&apos;s program must be made to correspond with the country&apos;s needs. <form>{-in-an(&rarr;)|tinukmaan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>joint</tr>. <i>Ang tinukmaan sa túbu tulù,</i> The pipe joint is leaky.

<p id=19549><form>tukmu</form> <pos>n</pos> the Philippine <tr>turtledove</tr>: <bio>Streptopelia bitorquata</bio>.

<p id=19550><form>tukmud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>push</tr> abruptly and hard. <i>Nasarásay siya dihang ákung gitukmud,</i> He reeled when I pushed him hard. <number>2</number> <tr>goad</tr>, <tr>prod</tr>. <i>Ang kaugalíngung kahígal mauy mitukmud kaníya sa panlúgus,</i> His own lust goaded him to rape. <form>{-in-|tinukmud}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>spurred</tr>, <tr>urged</tr>. <i>Tinukmud sa tingúhang mulampus nanlimbásug siya,</i> He strove hard under the goad of the drive to succeed.

<p id=19551><form>tuknul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>hand</tr> s.t. to s.o. <i>Dawáta ug dúnay kwarta nga ituknul sa lídir,</i> Accept it if the political leader hands you some money.

<p id=19552><form>tukpaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> push s.t. upward. <i>Akuy mutukpaw nímu ngadtus atup arun ka makasaka ngadtu,</i> I&apos;ll give you a <tr>boost</tr> onto the roof so that you can climb up there. <number>2</number> induce s.o. to do s.t. bad for him. <i>Ang íyang mga amígu nakatukpaw níya sa mga bisyu,</i> His friends induced him into a life of sin. <i>Ayaw siya itukpaw ngadtu ni Satanas,</i> Do not lure him into the ways of the devil. <number>3</number> jump from one point to another. <i>Ang ági sa makina mutukpaw,</i> The sewing machine <tr>skips</tr>. <i>Gitukpaw níya ang isturyag láin,</i> He <tr>skipped over</tr> to s.t. else to change the subject. <i>Ingun ug magatukpaw ang átung sulti, wà diay makapasar si Tunyu sa búrd,</i> To <tr>change the subject</tr>, so Tony didn&apos;t pass the board examination. <form>tukpawtukpaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> work skipping about, not systematically. <i>Gitukpawtukpaw níya pagpintal, man nga nagkábang ang ági,</i> He did not paint it square at a time and so it came out splotched. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> move with a jerky up and down motion. <i>Nagtukpawtukpaw ang sakayan sa bawud,</i> The boat <tr>bounced</tr> up and down in the waves.

<p id=19553><form>tuksì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> slice or prod off the outer layer of s.t. <i>Pagtuksì ug lapnis nga ibugkus sa kináhuy,</i> Pull off some of the outer strips of the abaca to tie the firewood up with. <i>Tuksía ang pakpak sa mais,</i> Loosen the corn husks. <pos>n</pos> instrument used to prod an outer layer loose.

<p id=19554><form>tuksu, tuksù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>query</tr> in a pressing way. <i>Akuy mutuksù níya kun tinúud tung ímung gisulti,</i> I will <tr>ask</tr> him if what you said was true. <pos>n</pos> <tr>query</tr>. <i>Makalíbug ang mga tuksù sa abugádu,</i> The lawyer&apos;s <tr>questions</tr> were confusing.

<p id=19555><form>tuktugáuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for cocks to <tr>crow</tr>. <i>Mutuktugáuk na gánì ang mga manuk, sa átù pa duul na ang kabuntágun,</i> When the cock crows, we know morning is near. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> vomit due to excessive drinking of alcoholic beverages (slang). <i>Kanang ímung kan-un ímu ra sang ituktugáuk ug magpalabi kag ínum,</i> You will vomit out what you are eating if you drink too much. <pos>n</pos> cock&apos;s <tr>crow</tr> or noise of a similar sort.

<p id=19556><form>tuktuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>knock on</tr>. <i>Tuktúka ang pultahan únà musúd,</i> <tr>Knock</tr> on the door before you go in. <number>2</number> <tr>peck at</tr> repeatedly. <i>Gituktuk sa sunuy ang íyang higut,</i> The cock <tr>pecked</tr> at its tether. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>knocking</tr>. <number>2</number> feed for chickens. <form>{pa-|patuktuk}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> feed grains to. <pb n=1048><i>Patuktuka ang sunuy ug tibuuk mais,</i> Feed whole kernels to the cock. <i>Tipasì lay ipatuktuk sa himungáan,</i> Feed unhusked rice to the hen.

<p id=19557><form>tuktuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> give enlightenment to (confined to set phrases). <i>Tuktúkan kay may salabútan,</i> <tr>Enlighten</tr> him because he can understand. <form>{hi&N;-|hinuktuk}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> keep still as if in deep thought. <i>Naghinuktuk si Pidru kay wà tugúti,</i> Pedro is <tr>brooding</tr> because they didn&apos;t let him do it. <number>2</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> <tr>ponder</tr> s.t. <i>Hinuktúki kini pag-áyu únà ka magpárì,</i> <tr>Consider</tr> it carefully before you enter the priesthood.

<p id=19558><form>tuktuk<sub>3</sub></form> (from <ix>taluktuk</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B346]</itype> for s.t. long to stand on its end unsupported. <i>Mutuktuk ang lipak kun maáyung pagkabalansi,</i> A bamboo stick will stand on its end if it is well balanced. <i>Makatuktuk na ang bátà, hápit nang kalakaw,</i> The child can stand alone now. It is about to walk. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>taluktuk</sc>.</xr> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>taluktuk</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> straight above in the sky. <i>Alas dúsi na kay tuktuk na ang adlaw,</i> It is twelve noon because the sun is at its <tr>zenith</tr>.

<p id=19559><form>tuktur</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. bird, a <tr>night jar</tr>, which flies after dusk, the eggs of which are the source of the <ix>tagulílung</ix> charm: <bio>Eurostopodus macrotis</bio>. The name derives from its call: &lsquo;trrk-trrk&rsquo;.

<p id=19560><form>tuku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prop</tr> stick or post. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>prop up</tr> with a pole or post. <i>Magtuku mi sa báy nga naghirig,</i> We are going to prop up the house which is leaning. <i>Tukhi ang hayhayan arun dì magtuntun,</i> Prop up the clothesline so it doesn&apos;t sag. <form>{pa&N;-|panuku}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> for a girl to push her partner at arm&apos;s length in dancing. <i>Maáyu si Tirya nga baylíhan kay dílì manuku,</i> It&apos;s nice to dance with Terry because she does not keep you at arm&apos;s length. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> be hesitant to do s.t. mainly due to rules of propriety. <i>Nagpanuku ang nubyu paghaluk sa nubya,</i> The groom was hesitant to kiss the bride.

<p id=19561><form>tukù</form> <xr>= <sc>tikì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19562><form>tukub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> for a beast of prey to devour. <i>Makatukub ug bábuy ang higanting sawa,</i> A giant snake can devour a pig. <form>tukbunun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prey</tr>. <form>{ma&N;-r-(&larr;)|manunúkub}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>beast of prey</tr>.

<p id=19563><form>túkud<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>brace</tr>, <tr>prop</tr>. <i>Tukúra ang kapáyas kay malúad unyà inigbagyu,</i> Brace the papaya. It might fall when the storm comes. <i>Itúkud ímung kamut sa bungbung unyà barug sa usang tiil,</i> Prop your hand against the wall. Then stand on one leg. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>erect</tr> a house, building. <i>Anhi tukúra (itúkud) ang munisipyu,</i> The municipal hall will be erected here. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> form, <tr>found</tr> an organization, establishment. <i>Kinsay nagtúkud sa Siliman?</i> Who founded Silliman University? <i>Gitúkud ang buluntaryu panahun sa Hapun,</i> Volunteer troops were <tr>organized</tr> during the Japanese occupation. <number>4</number> put up a business. <i>Ang nigusyung tukúrun kanang gikinahanglan sa lungsud,</i> The business you <tr>put up</tr> should be one which the town needs. <form>{(&rarr;)|tukud}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to prop or brace s.t. <form>{tag-(&rarr;)|tagtukud}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>founder</tr>, <tr>organizer</tr>. <form>katukúran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>founding</tr>, <tr>establishment</tr>. <i>Nagsaúlug sila sa katukúran sa syudad,</i> They are celebrating the founding of the city. <form>{mag-r-|magtutúkud}</form> <xr>= <sc>tagtukud</sc>.</xr> <form>patukuránan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>foundation</tr>, <tr>basis</tr>. <i>Way patukuránan ang ímung pasángil,</i> Your charges are without foundation. <form>tukudtúkud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> fabricate a story, esp. one with a dubious motive. <pos>n</pos> <tr>fabrication</tr>, <tr>concoction</tr>. <i>Pulus tu tinukudtúkud (tukudtúkud) ang ílang isturyang naglaki ang ímung asáwa,</i> Those stories about your wife&apos;s carrying on with other men are all fabrication anyway. <form>tinukudtúkud</form> <xr>= <sc>tukudtúkud</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <form>{pa&N;-|panúkud}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> hold oneself at arm&apos;s length when dancing.

<p id=19564><form>túkud<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cut a style of dress. <i>Tukúra lag yánu ning ákung sinínà,</i> Just make my dress in a simple style. <pos>n</pos> <tr>style of dress</tr>. <i>Ang túkud sa sinínà nagbalikbálik lang,</i> The same dress styles keep coming back again. <form>{(&rarr;)|tukud}</form> <xr>= <sc>túkud<sub>2</sub></sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr>

<p id=19565><form>túkud<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>plow</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make a plow.

<p id=19566><form>tukug</form> <pos>n</pos> midrib of a coconut or buri palm leaf.

<p id=19567><form>túkug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2N; b6]</itype> <tr>bulge</tr> or <tr>stick out</tr>, sometimes causing slight inconvenience. <i>Nanúkug ang mga bukug sa síku tungud sa kaníwang,</i> He is so thin his elbow is sticking out. <i>Nabuslut ang sáku nga gitukúgan sa pusil,</i> The sack developed a hole where the gun was sticking out.

<p id=19568><form>tukul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> <tr>nurse a grudge</tr>. <i>Mauy nakaáyu kanímu kay dì giyud ka mutukul kun buyagun ka sa ímung sayup,</i> One thing good about you is you never nurse a grudge against people who call your attention to your mistakes.

<p id=19569><form>tukul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> disobey by keeping silent and failing to act. <i>Dílì ángayng tukulan ang tambag sa ímung ginikánan,</i> You should not disobey your parent&apos;s advice. <form>{pa&N;-|panukul}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be <tr>hesitant</tr> in doing s.t. <i>Nagpanukul ku ug uban ninyu sa piknik,</i> I am hesitant about going with you on the picnic.

<p id=19570><form>tukun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>prop up</tr>. <i>Tukna ang ságing kay harag na kaáyu,</i> <tr>Prop</tr> the banana tree up because it is leaning way over. <number>2</number> propel oneself by pushing on a pole. <i>Nagtukun mi <pb n=1049>sa baybay kay nabálì ang bugsay,</i> We poled ourselves toward the shore because the paddle broke. <i>Tukna ang dágat kun lawum ba,</i> Put the pole to the floor of the sea to see if it is deep. <pos>n</pos> pole for propelling or for supporting.

<p id=19571><form>tukung<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tuklung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19572><form>tukung<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> tailless bird or fowl. <i>Ilhan ku ra tung ákung piríku kay tukung,</i> I will recognize my parrot because it lost its tail. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; a12]</itype> become tailless.

<p id=19573><form>tuk-ung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>squat</tr> or lie with the knees bent up double against the body nearly touching the chin. <i>Nagtuk-ung ang bátang nagdúwag húlin,</i> The child playing marbles is squatting. <number>2</number> be s.w. looking as though it were squatting (literary). <i>Ang pitrumaks nagtuk-ung dihà sa bangkíwà,</i> The petromax lantern was located squatting atop of the mast.

<p id=19574><form>túkuy</form> <pos>n</pos> word used to call dogs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> call a dog, saying <ix>&lsquo;túkuy&rsquo;.</ix> <i>Tukúya ang irù arun pakan-un,</i> Call the dog so it can eat. <number>2</number> draw irresistibly toward s.t. <i>Ang kadalù mauy mutúkuy sa táwu pagpaníkas,</i> Greed leads a person to cheat. <number>3</number> in folk belief, induce a person to walk in his sleep by tying a string to a finger and pulling it rhythmically. <i>Kamau siyang mutúkuy ug táwung natúlug,</i> He knows how to make a person walk in his sleep. <form>{(&rarr;)|tukuy}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>puppy</tr>.

<p id=19575><form>tukwa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bean curds</tr> done to a dough-like consistency. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make, cook with <tr>bean paste</tr>.

<p id=19576><form>tukwang<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tuklang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19577><form>tukwang<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tikwang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19578><form>tukway</form> <xr>= <sc>bukway</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr>

<p id=19579><form>túl</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tulle</tr>, a fine, silk, open-meshed material used for veils.

<p id=19580><form>tula</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> set food or drinks aside for s.o. <i>Tud-i (tulahi) ug sud-an ang ulahing mukáun,</i> Set some food aside for those who are going to eat later. <number>2</number> bestow certain feelings on one. <i>Tud-ig diyútayng kalúuy ang mga bátà,</i> Show the children a little pity.

<p id=19581><form>túla</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>stew</tr> fish or chicken. <i>Magtúla ta kun dúnay lab-as,</i> We can have stewed fish if there are fresh fish. <form>{-in-|tinúla}</form> <pos>n</pos> stewed fish or chicken.

<p id=19582><form>tulà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> feed fowls and pet animals. <i>Akuy magtulà sa mga manuk mabuntag,</i> I feed the chickens each morning. <i>Gitulaan ang irù ug karni,</i> They fed meat to the dog. <pos>n</pos> feed for pets or poultry.

<p id=19583><form>tulabhù</form> <xr>= <sc>tilabhù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19584><form>tulábung</form> <pos>n</pos> a small, white <tr>heron</tr> often found perching on the backs of water buffaloes, eating insects.

<p id=19585><form>túlag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B14; a12]</itype> be in a <tr>disorderly</tr>, topsy-turvy condition. <i>Panghípus mu kay nagkatúlag lang ang kwartu,</i> Fix the room because it&apos;s a <tr>mess</tr>.

<p id=19586><form>tulak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b4(1)]</itype> stop raining. <i>Pil-a nag páyung kay mituwak nag uwan,</i> Fold the umbrella now because the rain has stopped. <i>Didtu mi hitulaki sa ulan sa Karkar,</i> The rain stopped falling when we got to Carcar.

<p id=19587><form>túlak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>push</tr> or move s.t. with the arm. <i>Kami mauy mitúlak sa awtu nga nalubung,</i> We were the ones who pushed the car that got stuck in the mud. <i>Íya kung gitúlak ngadtus swíming pul,</i> He pushed me into the swimming pool. <number>2</number> lift s.t. up to one&apos;s head or higher and throw to an elevated place. <i>Kami mutúlak sa sáku ngadtu sa tinumpì,</i> We will throw the sack up onto the pile. <i>Itúlak ang kahun sa istanti,</i> Throw the box up onto the top of the shelf. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126; b8]</itype> <tr>fall</tr> from a height accidentally when one loses his hold, slips, support is taken away, and the like. <i>Ayawg padaplin kay matúlak ka unyà,</i> Don&apos;t sit too close to the edge or you might fall. <form>{tig-(&rarr;)|tigtulak}</form> <pos>n</pos> person who tosses or pushes s.t. heavy upwards onto s.t.

<p id=19588><form>tulakhang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>kaling</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> woman who has lost her virginity (derogatory). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> have lost one&apos;s virginity.

<p id=19589><form>tulakì, tulákì, tulakig</form> <xr>= <sc>ísul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19590><form>tulala, tulála</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <tr>idiot</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be a <tr>moron</tr> or like one.

<p id=19591><form>tul-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>knee</tr> joint of human beings or large animals. <number>2</number> <tr>legs</tr> or <tr>lower limbs</tr> of man or animals. <i>Maglatà mig tul-an pára karung udtu,</i> We&apos;ll boil beef shanks for dinner.

<p id=19592><form>tulandus</form> <xr>= <sc>bulandus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19593><form>*tulápus</form> <form>ílu nga {&mdash;|tulápus}</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>ílu<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p id=19594><form>túlas</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>tongue irritations</tr> caused by hot spices. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; b4]</itype> have tongue irritations, as when burned.

<p id=19595><form>tulawug</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>spring pole</tr>. <i>Kusug mulibkas ang balag-ung kay gáhì ug tulawug,</i> The trap springs fast because the spring pole is stiff. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make, attach a spring pole.

<p id=19596><form>tulay</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>bridge</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b]</itype> put a bridge. <i>Kinsay nagtulay ug lubi sa kanal?</i> Who put a coconut trunk across the canal? <i>Kinahanglang tulayan ning subáa kay dì malabang,</i> This river needs a bridge over it because no one can get across it.

<p id=19597><form>túlay</form> <xr>= <sc>bantúlay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19598><form>tulbuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>poke at</tr> a point. <i>Nakatulbuk ka na bag bilyar?</i> Have you tried your hand at (lit. poked at) billiards? <i>Tulbúka ang timbri,</i> <tr>Push</tr> the doorbell. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put a period or dot. <i>Tulbúki nang ímung ay,</i> <pb n=1050>Put a dot over your letter I. <pos>n</pos> <tr>period</tr> or <tr>dot</tr>. <i>Náay gagmay nga tulbuk ang ímung nawung,</i> There are small <tr>spots</tr> on your face.

<p id=19599><form>tulbung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b4(1)]</itype> <tr>rise</tr>, <tr>ascend</tr> to appreciable height or level. <i>Gidagkutan ang kwítis, misíyuk, unyà mitulbung,</i> The rocket was lit, sizzled, and then rose straight up.

<p id=19600><form>tulda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tent</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>pitch</tr> a tent. <i>Nagtulda ang mga kampirs,</i> The campers pitched a tent. <i>Hábul lay itulda,</i> Use a blanket as a tent. <form>{pa&N;-|panulda}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> for pants to bulge due to erection of the penis (humorous). <i>Ngánung nanulda ang ímung karsúnis?</i> What is that pole sticking out in the front of your pants?

<p id=19601><form>túlì</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>circumcise</tr>. <i>Tambálan ang nagtúlì nákù,</i> A folk doctor circumcised me. <i>Tulía ang bátà pipila ka adlaw human ianak,</i> Circumcise the child a few days after it is born. <number>2</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> get one&apos;s <tr>comeuppance</tr> or <tr>just deserts</tr>. <i>Natúlì ang mangingilad dihang gihatágan siya ug minì nga kwarta,</i> The con-man got his just deserts when he was given fake money. <form>{(&rarr;)|tulì}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> one who has been circumcised. <number>2</number> action of having been circumcised. <form>{&mdash;|túlì} andaw</form> <pos>n</pos> s.o. born with the glans penis exposed. <form>{ma&N;-r-|manunúlì}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.o. who circumcises.

<p id=19602><form>tulibag</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>diverging</tr>, going off <tr>at an angle</tr>. <i>Tulibag ang ímung tinubagan. Dílì tukmà,</i> Your answer doesn&apos;t get at what I asked. It&apos;s not to the point. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> go off at an angle. <i>Mutulibag ang íyang tinan-awan ug mahakalit,</i> He becomes cross-eyed when he looks at s.t. suddenly. <i>Nagtulibag man ning ímung tinahian,</i> You sewed your seams <tr>crooked</tr>.

<p id=19603><form>tulibagbag</form> <xr>= <sc>tulibag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19604><form>tul-id</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>straight</tr>. <i>Tul-id nga linya,</i> A straight line. <number>2</number> <tr>straight towards</tr>. <i>Lakaw lag tul-id ánang dálan ug musangkù ka sa simbahan,</i> Just walk straight on that street and you will reach the church. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB; a]</itype> <tr>straighten</tr>. <i>Akuy mutul-id (mupatul-id) sa balikug nga alambri,</i> I&apos;ll straighten the crooked wire. <i>Mitul-id siya sa íyang pagyukù,</i> He <tr>straightened up</tr> after he had bent over. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB; a2]</itype> <tr>reform</tr>, <tr>correct</tr>. <i>Dì na matul-id ang dautan níyang pagkatáwu,</i> His bad ways cannot be reformed. <form>katul-íran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>reform</tr>, <tr>amendment</tr>.

<p id=19605><form>tulílik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S46]</itype> <tr>reel</tr> around unsteadily. <i>Mitulílik ang ayruplánung nawad-ag kuntr&ucaron;l,</i> The plane that lost control turned round and round. <i>Nagtulilik ang kasing nga taliundang nag túyuk,</i> The top which is about to stop whirling is reeling unsteadily. <form>{-ay(&rarr;)|tulilikay}</form> <xr>= <sc>tulílik</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19606><form>tulimbang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB56; c]</itype> for bells to <tr>toll</tr>, <tr>peal</tr>, toll bells. <i>Ang kampaníru mauy mutulimbang sa kampána,</i> The sexton will toll the bell. <i>Human nag mísa kay nagtulimbang nag kampána,</i> The mass is over because the bells are ringing. <pos>n</pos> <tr>pealing</tr> or <tr>tolling</tr> of bells.

<p id=19607><form>túlin</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>move forward</tr>. <i>Pagbulhut sa hángin mitúlin ang sakayan,</i> When the wind blew, the boat moved <tr>forward</tr>. <number>2</number> cover a certain distance. <i>Mutúlin ang dálan ug kilumitru úsà mulikù sa tuu,</i> The road will <tr>go on</tr> for a kilometer before it turns to the right. <i>Pila may tulínan sa usa ka baril nga aspaltu?</i> How far can a barrel of asphalt go? <number>2a</number> <tr>accomplish</tr> a certain amount. <i>Dí ta mutúlin ug kanúnay kag sámuk,</i> I won&apos;t accomplish anything if you keep making a nuisance of yourself. <number>2b</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>expand</tr>, take space in the direction of. <i>Ámù nang yútà ang gitulínan sa gihímung karsáda,</i> The road they made has <tr>encroached</tr> on our land. <number>3</number> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> become <tr>fast</tr>, <tr>swift</tr>. <i>Mutúlin (matúlin) ang pambut kun habwáag karga,</i> The motorboat will move fast if we take the cargo off. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>accomplishment</tr>, distance covered. <i>Gamay ra siyag túlin kay naglangaylángay man,</i> He made little <tr>progress</tr> because he was just loafing. <number>2</number> <tr>speed</tr>, <tr>forward motion</tr>. <i>Hínay ang túlin sa bangkà kun way hángin,</i> The sailboat&apos;s speed is slow if there is no wind. <pos>a</pos> <tr>fast</tr> and <tr>swift</tr>. <i>Túlin nga nanglábay ang katuígan,</i> The years passed <tr>swiftly</tr>. <form>{pa-|patúlin}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> extend measurements in constructing s.t. <i>Ug padak-an ang balay, adtu patulíni sa luyu,</i> If you enlarge the house, extend the construction to the rear. <number>2</number> increase the speed of s.t. moving forward. <i>Magpatúlin ta arun sayu tang maabut,</i> Let&apos;s increase our speed, so we arrive early.

<p id=19608><form>tulindaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> <tr>go caroling</tr> during the Christmas season to the house of s.o. who made preparations to treat the carolers. <i>Manulindaw (mutulindaw) ta sa íla kay nagbingka sila,</i> Let&apos;s go <tr>carol</tr> at their house because they made rice cakes.

<p id=19609><form>tulíngan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>mackerel</tr>: <bio>Rastrelliger kanagurta</bio>, <bio>Katsuwonus pelamis</bio>, and others.

<p id=19610><form>tulíngì, tulíngig</form> (from <ix>língì</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> turn the head sharply to one side, as when slapped. <i>Natulíngì (mitulíngì) siya dihang gitamparus,</i> She snapped her head to one side from the force of the slap she received. <form>{(&rarr;)|tulingì}</form> <pos>a</pos> for the neck or s.t. similar to be twisted to one side. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; c6]</itype> become <tr>twisted</tr> to one side. <i>Nagtulingì ang gunitánan sa gunting,</i> The handle of the scissors is twisted.

<p id=19611><form>tulipsay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b8]</itype> for s.t. thrown or that flies away to swerve off its path. <i>Ang batung lapad mutulipsay ug ibunù,</i> If s.o. <pb n=1051>throws a flat stone it will go in a curve. <i>Hitulipsayan siya sa káhuy nga ákung gibughà,</i> A piece of the wood that I split flew off and swerved onto him.

<p id=19612><form>tulipsay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> Asian moon <tr>scallop</tr>, a smooth-surfaced, golden scallop, white on the inside.

<p id=19613><form>túlis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>rob</tr>, steal with force and intimidation. <i>May yáwi giyud ang nagtúlis sa tindáhan,</i> The one who robbed the store must have had a key. <i>Tulísun ku nang dátung Insik,</i> I&apos;ll rob that rich Chinaman. <pos>n</pos> <tr>robbery</tr>. <i>Wà pa masulbad ang túlis,</i> The robbery has not been solved yet. <form>{pa&N;-|panúlis}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>robbery</tr> in general. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|tulisan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>robber</tr>, <tr>bandit</tr>. <form>{-anis|tulisanis}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>robbers</tr>, <tr>bandits</tr>.

<p id=19614><form>tulísuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> scold, reproach by pointing a finger. <i>Yawyaw lang. Ayaw kug tulisúka,</i> Just keep scolding, but don&apos;t shake your finger at me. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>reproach</tr> severely. <i>Gitulísuk sa kaugalíngung tanlag,</i> Reproached by his own conscience. <form>{ma-un|matulisukun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>reproachful</tr>, usually accompanied with blame.

<p id=19615><form>tulitul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>hemorrhoid</tr>. <number>2</number> an infected puncture in the cheek. <form>{(&larr;)|tulítul}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b5]</itype> become, get a <ix>tulitul</ix>.

<p id=19616><form>tulíyuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB46; aP]</itype> <tr>spin</tr>, <tr>whirl</tr>. <i>Akuy nagtulíyuk (nagpatulíyuk) sa sabad,</i> I made the propeller spin. <i>Ingun sa mutulíyuk ang kalibútan,</i> It was as if the world was spinning about. <pos>n</pos> <tr>spinning</tr>, <tr>whirling</tr>.

<p id=19617><form>tulmà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC3; a]</itype> let s.t. touch on s.t. <i>Itulmà ang ímung tudlù sa ínit sa plansa,</i> <tr>Touch</tr> your finger to the hot iron. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make an <tr>imprint</tr> or <tr>impression</tr> on. <i>Gitulmáan níyag &lsquo;risib&rsquo; ang sulat,</i> He <tr>stamped</tr> the word &lsquo;received&rsquo; on the letter. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>imprint</tr>, <tr>mark</tr>, <tr>impression</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>horizon</tr>, place where the land or sea and the sky seem to meet. <number>3</number> <tr>boundary</tr>.

<p id=19618><form>tulpuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>prick</tr> or <tr>poke</tr> at with s.t. pointed. <i>Dágum nga mitulpuk sa ákung buktun,</i> A needle that pricked my arm. <i>Tulpúka ang timbri,</i> <tr>Push</tr> the doorbell button. <number>2</number> make, put a dot on s.t. <i>Tulpúkan nátug itum ári pára mata,</i> We&apos;ll put dots here for the eyes. <number>3</number> press the keys of a piano, typewriter, and the like. <pos>n</pos> <tr>pricking</tr>, <tr>poking</tr>, <tr>injection</tr> with a hypodermic needle. <i>Dús ang ipabáyad sa dukt&ucaron;r káda tulpuk,</i> The doctor charges two pesos for each <tr>shot</tr>. <form>tulpuktulpuk</form> <pos>n</pos> dots in cloth design. <i>Bistídung may tulpuktulpuk nga pula,</i> Dress with red dots.

<p id=19619><form>tultug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)7]</itype> knock off the ashes or embers. <i>Nakatultug siyag bága sa agipu didtu sa mga papil,</i> He accidentally knocked an ember off from the firebrand onto the pieces of paper.

<p id=19620><form>tultul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>tell</tr>, <tr>lead the way</tr> s.w. <i>Kinsay gatultul nímu sa ámung hayd-áwut?</i> Who <tr>led</tr> you to our hideout? <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> find one&apos;s way s.w. <i>Pangutána lang kun dì ka makatultul sa íla,</i> Just inquire if you can&apos;t <tr>locate</tr> their place. <form>{hi&N;-|hinultul}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1236]</itype> manage to do s.t. in the way that is normal, started. <i>Nalintar siya ug dì na makahinultul ug unsay buhatun,</i> She panicked and couldn&apos;t do what had to be done. <i>Kinsay mahinultul sa búhat kun magpúnay kag sámuk?</i> Who can do his work right if you keep making a nuisance of yourself?

<p id=19621><form>tulu</form> <ix>numeral</ix> <tr>three</tr>. <i>Pirmi giyung magkúyug ang tulu,</i> The three always go together. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B256; a12]</itype> be in or about three in number. <i>Mutulu ka búlan na siyang gasabak,</i> She is about three months pregnant. <i>Natulu ang ákung panan-aw pagkahubug nákù,</i> I had triple vision when I got drunk. <i>Tulua pagrisirba kay ang tsapirun diay,</i> Make three reservations, an extra one for the chaperon. <form>{r-|tutulu}</form> <tr>three</tr>. <form>{ika-|ikatulu}</form> <tr>third</tr>. <form>{ka-|katulu}, {maka-|makatulu}</form> three times. <form>{-in-|tinulu}</form> into three, in three&apos;s. <form>katluan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>thirty</tr>. <form>tinulutulu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>rope</tr> of three strands, <form>{tag-(&larr;)|tagtúlu}, {tag-|tagtulu}, tagutlu</form> three each. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do s.t. by three&apos;s.

<p id=19622><form>túlù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>drop</tr>. <i>Bisan usa ka túlù nga lúhà,</i> Even one single teardrop. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S]</itype> leak so as to cause dripping. <i>Sungkípi ang atup kay nagtulù,</i> Fix the roof because it is leaking. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A2S; b28]</itype> <tr>drip</tr>, leak through. <i>Ug dúnay malígù sa táas, ang túbig mutúlù námù diri,</i> If s.o. takes a bath upstairs, water drips down on us. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b6]</itype> for drops to fall. <i>Hápit makatúlù ákung lúhà sa kahiubus,</i> I almost shed tears in humiliation. <form>{(&rarr;)|tulù}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>leaky</tr>. <i>Tulù ang atup kay gibagyu,</i> The roof is leaky because it was hit by a storm. <form>{pa-|patúlù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> let drip. <i>Nagpatúlù siya sa íyang lúhà,</i> She shed tears. <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;|patúlù} sa singut</formx> <tr>labor</tr> hard. <i>Nagpatúlù sa singut ang ímung amahan arun ka makatunghà,</i> Your father is <tr>working hard</tr> just so you can study. <form>{-in-|tinúlù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> drip plentifully. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>drops</tr>. <i>Tinúlù sa ulan,</i> Raindrops. <number>2</number> shedding of tears, blood, or anything in drops. <number>3</number> noise of dripping. <i>Makadisturbu ang tinúlù sa ulan,</i> The noise of the dripping of the rain is disturbing.

<p id=19623><form>tulud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>push</tr>. <i>Itulud ang kutsi kay dì muand&acaron;r,</i> Push the car because it won&apos;t start. <number>2</number> <tr>goad</tr>, <tr>incite</tr>. <i>Daw sa may mutulud nákù sa pagpaúlì,</i> As if s.t. were <tr>urging</tr> me to come home. <form>tuludtúlud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> pass work, blame onto one another. <i>Nagtuludtúlud lang sila dihang gipangutána kinsay nakasalà,</i> They just kept passing the blame onto each other when I asked them who the culprit was. <i>Ayawg ituludtúlud ang trabáhu,</i> <pb n=1052>Don&apos;t keep trying to pawn off the work on each other. <form>{&mdash;|tulud} bátang</form> <pos>n</pos> the period from August to October when the wind direction is not fixed (the time when a log [<ix>bátang</ix>] is pushed in one direction and then another).

<p id=19624><form>túlug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B123S6; a2]</itype> go, put to <tr>sleep</tr>. <i>Ang yáya mauy pirming magtúlug sa bátà,</i> The baby&apos;s nurse usually puts him to sleep. <i>Natúlug na ba siya?</i> Is he <tr>asleep</tr> yet? <i>Dì ku makatulug ug dì ku kainum,</i> I can&apos;t sleep without drinking s.t. first. <i>Tulga ang bátà,</i> Put the baby to sleep. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> for lard and oil to <tr>congeal</tr>. <i>Natúlug ang mantíkà sa katugnaw,</i> The lard congealed due to the cold. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> for tops to spin steadily without a wobble. <i>Mu rag walà maglihuk ang kasing kay natúlug,</i> The top seems not to move because it is spinning steadily. <pos>n</pos> <tr>sleep</tr>. <i>Wà kuy túlug gabíi,</i> I had had no sleep last night. <form>{(&rarr;)|tulug}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sound asleep</tr>. <i>Tulug na kaáyu ang bátà,</i> The child is sound asleep. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> be <tr>sleepy</tr>. <i>Makapatulug ning tambála,</i> This medicine can make one sleepy. <i>Gitulug aku pag-áyu sa ímung diskursu,</i> Your speech made me very sleepy. <form>{ka-|katúlug}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>sleep</tr>. <i>Mikatúlug (natúlug) siya,</i> He went to sleep. <i>Dì ku makakatúlug,</i> I can&apos;t sleep. <i>Sawug lay katulgi,</i> Just sleep on the floor. <form>{paka-|pakatúlug}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> induce, put to sleep. <i>Makapakatúlug ang ímung mga isturya,</i> Your stories make me fall asleep. <pos>n</pos> s.t. that induces sleep. <i>Tablítas nga pakatúlug,</i> Sleeping pills. <form>{hika-|hikatulug}/{haka-(&rarr;)|hakatulug}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b8]</itype> <tr>fall asleep</tr>. <i>Nahikatulug na ang ákung pinalanggà,</i> My darling has finally fallen asleep. <i>Hikatulgan ku siyang nag-isturya,</i> I fell asleep on him as he was talking to me. <form>{pakuluka-|pakulukatulug}, patulugtúlug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> pretend to sleep. <i>Didtu siya sa káma magpakukat&umacracu;g (magpatugt&umacracu;g), piru wà diay,</i> He was lying on the couch pretending to be asleep, but he really wasn&apos;t. <form>túgan, hinúgan</form> <pos>a</pos> top that spins smoothly and rapidly without a wobble. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> become <tr>smooth-spinning</tr>. <form>{ka-un|katulúgun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sleep</tr>. <i>Wà ku duáwa sa katulúgun,</i> Sleep did not come to me. <form>{kina-|kinatulug}, kinatulgan</form> <pos>n</pos> sleep slept. <i>Maáyu ákung kinatúlug (kinatulgan) kagabíi,</i> I had a good sleep last night. <form>katulganan</form> <pos>n</pos> place one sleeps. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> sleep habitually s.w. <i>Anáa ku magkatulganan sukad sa ákung pag-anhi,</i> I have been sleeping there since my arrival. <form>{ka-un(&rarr;)|katulugun}, katulgun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sleepy</tr>. <i>Katúgun (katulgun) kaáyu ku,</i> I&apos;m very sleepy. <form>{hinga-un(&rarr;)|hingatulugun}, hingatulgun, {ma-(&rarr;)|matulug}, {ma-un|matulúgun}</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of sleeping, always sleeping. <i>Ang táwung matulúgun way kaugmáun,</i> A person who is always sleeping has no future.

<p id=19625><form>tulugtulug</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. bush bearing clusters of reddish fruit: <bio>Breynia rhamnoides</bio>.

<p id=19626><form>tuluk</form> <xr>= <sc>turuk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19627><form>tulun</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>swallow</tr>. <i>Mitulun siyag dakù únà musulti,</i> He swallowed hard before speaking. <i>Tunla ang tablítas,</i> Swallow the pill. <number>2</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> <tr>endure</tr> s.o.&apos;s temperament, hurting words, etc. <i>Dì matulun ang íyang taras,</i> I can&apos;t take her ways. <form>{&mdash;|tulun} lamuy</form> <pos>a</pos> eating s.t. without bothering to chew. <i>Hingtuk-an kay tulun lamuy mag mukáun,</i> He choked because he eats without chewing. <form>tunlan, tutunlan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>throat</tr>.

<p id=19628><form>túlung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>skewer</tr>. <i>Tabángi kug túlung sa aslúnun,</i> Help me skewer the pig we are roasting. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|tulungan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>skewer</tr>.

<p id=19629><form>tulunggun</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tunug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19630><form>túlus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <ix>semen</ix> (not coarse, but avoided). <form>{pa-(&rarr;)|patulus}</form> <pos>n</pos> enhancing sperm production. <i>Patulus nang mga pagkaúna kay daghan ug sustansiya,</i> Those foods will give you lots of sperm because they have nutritive value. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> enhance semen production.

<p id=19631><form>túlus<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> get into the habit of doing s.t. the whole year through by doing it on a special holiday or on a day it should not be done (whether intentionally done or not). <i>Makat&umacracu;s (makapat&umacracu;s) sa pagkahingatúgun ang pagdúgayg mata sa bag-ung túig,</i> It will make you get up late the whole year through if you get up late on New Year&apos;s Day.

<p id=19632><form>túlut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b6P]</itype> pay out rope or string. <i>Dílì ku mutúlut (mupatúlut) sa pasul kay musángit unyà sa ilálum,</i> I will not pay out the fishline because it might snag at the bottom. <pos>n</pos> length of line paid out. <form>{pa-|patulut}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>túlut</sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> sail smoothly, swiftly with the wind. <i>Mupatúlut ang sakayan basta pabur sa hángin,</i> A boat sails smoothly and swiftly if it goes with the wind.

<p id=19633><form>túluy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> be caught in a net. <i>Ug mutúluy ang isdà dì na kabuhì,</i> If the fish snarls in the mesh it can&apos;t get away. <i>Nit&umacracu;y ang bábuy ih&amacracu;s sa batung,</i> The wild pig was caught in the net. <form>{(&rarr;)|tuluy}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. caught in a net.

<p id=19634><form>túluy<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <ix>tamban</ix> <measure reg="10&ndash;13 cm">4&ndash;5&Prime;</measure> long, with a greenish back and white belly.

<p id=19635><form>túma</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>body louse</tr>, similar to the head louse (<ix>kútu</ix>) in appearance and habits, but found in clothing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infested with body lice. <form>{hi&N;-|hinúma}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> remove body lice. <form>tumahun</form> <pos>a</pos> infested with body lice.

<p id=19636><form>túmà</form> <pos>n</pos> drinking of alcohol (slang). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; a2]</itype> drink alcohol. <i>Hubug man, nakatúmà sigúru,</i> You&apos;re drunk. You must have come <pb n=1053>from a drinking spree.

<p id=19637><form>túman<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>obey</tr>. <i>Matag lungsuránun kinahanglang mutúman sa baláud,</i> Each citizen must obey the law. <number>2</number> <tr>fulfill</tr>, <tr>realize</tr>. <i>Natúman ra ang íyang tingúhang maabugádu,</i> His ambition to become a lawyer has finally been realized. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> stubbornly have one&apos;s own way. <i>Náa ra nímu ug magtúman ka,</i> It&apos;s up to you if you insist on your own way. <number>4</number> <itype>[b(1)P]</itype> <tr>indulge</tr>, or permit s.o. his way. <i>Tumáni (patumáni) lang ang bátà arun way gubut,</i> Just indulge the child so there won&apos;t be any trouble. <form>tulumanun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>obligation</tr> to be carried out. <number>2</number> <tr>program</tr>. <i>Tulumanun sa administrasiyun,</i> The program of the administration. <i>Tulumanun sa radiyu,</i> Radio program. <form>{ma-in-un|matinumanun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>obedient</tr>. <form>{ma-in-un|matinumanun} sa gustu</form> stubbornly wanting one&apos;s own way. <form>{ka-an|katumánan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>realization</tr>, <tr>fulfillment</tr>. <i>Ang katumánan sa damgu,</i> The realization of a dream. <form>{ka-un(&rarr;)|katumanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fulfillment</tr> reached. <i>Walay katumanun sa ímung tingúhà,</i> There is no hope of fulfilling your dreams. <form>{pina-an|pinatumánan}</form> <pos>n</pos> one who is granted his way. <i>Bátang pinatumánan,</i> A <tr>spoiled</tr> child.

<p id=19638><form>túman<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> the <tr>utmost</tr> of, <tr>extreme</tr>. <i>Túmang kalípay,</i> Extreme happiness. <i>Túmang kamíngaw,</i> <tr>Utter</tr> loneliness. <i>Túmang kahílum,</i> <tr>Absolute</tr> silence.

<p id=19639><form>tuma pusisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>inauguration</tr>. <i>Ugmà ang tuma pusisiyun sa prisidinti,</i> The president&apos;s inauguration is tomorrow. <number>2</number> taking over of ownership. <i>Ang tuma pusisiyun sa balay,</i> Taking over possession of the house. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <number>1</number> carry out inauguration ceremonies. <i>May tuma pusisiyun sa irpurt ugmà,</i> They will <tr>inaugurate</tr> the airport tomorrow. <number>2</number> take over ownership.

<p id=19640><form>tumar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> take <tr>medicine</tr>. <i>Tumaha (tumara) nang tablítas,</i> Take those pills. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>afford</tr>, have the means for. <i>Ang sapían ra giyuy mutumar (makatumar) niánang ímung prisyu,</i> Only a millionaire could afford the price you are setting. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|tumar} ug aksiyun</formx> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>take action</tr> on s.t. <i>Ang kíha wà katumahig aksiyun,</i> They didn&apos;t <tr>act on</tr> his complaint. <form>{&mdash;|tumar} ug nutisya, libak, et al.</form> <number>4</number> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> <tr>pick up gossip</tr>, rumors. <i>Ang mga radiyu balágun adtu matumar sa tubáan,</i> You can pick up rumors at the toddy stand.

<p id=19641><form>tumatub</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bag of waters</tr>.

<p id=19642><form>tumaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B23(1)6]</itype> <tr>pop up</tr>, <tr>come out</tr>, <tr>surface</tr>, esp. s.t. unexpected, secret, or little known. <i>Mutumaw giyud ang matúud,</i> The truth always comes out. <i>Ug dì ka makatumaw sa inyung kásu, prisúhun ka giyud,</i> If you do not <tr>appear</tr> in court, you will surely be imprisoned. <i>Kanang ímung pagrilaks mau nay makatumaw (makapatumaw) sa sulbad sa prublíma,</i> Relaxation can make the solution to your problem pop up. <pos>n</pos> <tr>mutant</tr>. <i>Tumaw nang batáa kay nigru man untà ang mga ginikánan ug ngánung putì man nà siya,</i> That child is a mutant, because the parents are black, but he is white.

<p id=19643><form>tumba<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB12; a]</itype> for s.t. upright to <tr>fall over</tr>, cause it to do so. <i>Kinsay nagtumba sa bisiklíta?</i> Who made the bicycle fall over? <i>Natumba ang bátà,</i> The child fell. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> slaughter an animal for an occasion. <i>Magtumba tag báka sa ímung kasal,</i> We will slaughter a cow on your wedding. <number>2a</number> <i>&mdash; ug kandílà</i> <itype>[A; b]</itype> light a candle as an offering. <i>Nakatumba na siyag kandílà pára sa kalag sa mga minatay,</i> He has already lighted a candle for the departed souls. <number>2b</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> consume a liquor container full of drink. <i>Kanang grupúha mutumba ug usa ka tárung tubà,</i> That group will consume one kerosene can of palm toddy. <form>{&mdash;|tumba} lúbu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>unbalanced</tr>: <number>1</number> for a vehicle to have its load unevenly distributed. <number>2</number> for a building or ship to have a top floor that is too high in proportion to its bottom floor. <i>Kusug kaáyung mukíling ang barku nga tumba lúbu,</i> A ship which has an unproportionately large upper deck easily lists. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> develop a lack of balance. <form>tumbatumba</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> offer various reasons for doing or not doing s.t., keep changing one&apos;s mind. <i>Nagtumbatumba ka ánang pangatarúngan nímu. Ug buhátun nímu, buhata na,</i> You keep changing your reasons. If you want to do it, do it already. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> play ball with the politicians, not stick to one or the other but going along with whoever is in power. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for capital in a business to be so small that it is entirely invested in merchandise and new goods are bought with proceeds. <i>Dì paútang ang tindáhan ug magtumbatumba ang puhúnan,</i> A store that has all its capital invested in goods cannot afford to give credit. <pos>a</pos> having flexible politics. <i>Kinahanglan tumbatumba ang nigusiyanti,</i> A businessman has to be flexible when it comes to politics. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>liyalíya</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19644><form>tumba<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> an empty coffin laid on a platform with lighted candles, placed in the center front of the church where a requiem mass is being celebrated. <number>2</number> <tr>tomb</tr>.

<p id=19645><form>tumbága</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>copper</tr> or a <tr>copper alloy</tr> that is still copper-colored. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>amurádu</sc>.</xr> <form>{-in-|tinumbága}</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>amurádu</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;|tinumbága} nga kampána</formx> <pos>n</pos> bell made of bronze.

<p id=19646><form>tumbálay</form> <xr>= <sc>tungbálay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19647><form>tumbalik</form> <xr>= <sc>sumbalik</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=1054>

<p id=19648><form>tumbáling</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> <tr>pay attention</tr>. <i>Tumbalínga ang ákung tambag,</i> <tr>Heed</tr> my advice. <i>Ngánung tumbalíngun ka nákù? Si kinsa man ka?</i> Why should I <tr>obey</tr> you. Who are you anyway? <i>Ayaw tumbalínga ang íyang mga sugsúg,</i> Don&apos;t pay attention to his teasing. <form>{pa&N;-|panumbáling}, {pa&N;-(&rarr;)|panumbaling}</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>tumbáling</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> <tr>notice</tr>, be <tr>aware</tr>. <i>Wà ku makapanumbáling ug dinhà bay niági,</i> I did not notice if anyone passed by.

<p id=19649><form>tumbas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; b6]</itype> <tr>equal</tr> in comparison. <i>Way makatumbas sa íyang kaanyag,</i> Nothing can equal her beauty. <i>Magtumbas giyud ang inyung pagkadawù,</i> You both are <tr>equally</tr> greedy. <i>Ang íyang kamaksut gitumbásan sa íyang kadautan,</i> He is as ugly as he is mean. <pos>a</pos> <tr>equivalent</tr>, <tr>worth</tr>. <i>Tumbas sa napúlù ka bútus ang maung balúta,</i> The ballot is worth ten votes. <form>{ka-|katumbas}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>equivalent</tr> to. <i>Mau ni ang katumbas sa ganti nga Uskar sa Amirika,</i> This is the equivalent of the Oscar in America.

<p id=19650><form>tumbayà</form> (from <ix>bayà</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AP; cP]</itype> leave s.t. to the care of s.o. <i>Ayaw itumbayà sa sulugúun ang mga bátà,</i> Don&apos;t leave the children to the care of the maids. <number>2</number> <itype>[AP; b(1)P]</itype> fail to care for. <i>Kanang inahána nagpatumbayà lang sa íyang mga anak,</i> That mother is <tr>neglecting</tr> her children. <i>Nagkagubà ang karáang balay nga gipatumbayáan (gitumbayáan) lang,</i> The old <tr>neglected</tr> house is getting dilapidated.

<p id=19651><form>tumbuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> poke a finger or s.t. pointed at s.t. <i>Mitumbuk siya sa makinilya arun pagtisting niíni,</i> She poked a finger at the typewriter keys to try them out. <i>Aku na say tumbuk sa bilyar,</i> It is my turn to strike the billiard ball. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>point out</tr>, <tr>pinpoint</tr>. <i>Dì ku katumbuk sa iksaktung hinungdan,</i> I cannot <tr>point to</tr> the exact reason. <i>Tumbúka ang utlánan sa mápa,</i> Point out the boundaries on the map. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put a dot s.w.

<p id=19652><form>tumbuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> container, usually a tin can, <measure reg="5.1 cm">2&Prime;</measure> by <measure reg="5.1 cm">2&Prime;</measure>, with a handle used for measuring out kerosene for retail sales.

<p id=19653><form>tumbuy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a1]</itype> reproach s.o. while mentioning the benefits given him. <i>Ayawg tumbúya nang nangípun ninyu, bisag tapulan,</i> Don&apos;t tell the people who are living with you that they are ingrates, though they are lazy.

<p id=19654><form>tumbuy<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>female homosexual</tr>, active <tr><corr sic=Lesbian>lesbian</corr></tr>; woman who acts like a man. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become a lesbian or tomboyish. <pos>a</pos> having the characteristics of a lesbian, <tr>tomboyish</tr>.

<p id=19655><form>tumindug</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>tindug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19656><form>tumitusus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tomato sauce</tr>.

<p id=19657><form>tumpag</form> <xr>= <sc>lumpag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19658><form>tumpang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC12; b]</itype> <tr>answer back</tr>, even up the score in a quarrel or argument. <i>Ug ang táwung idukádu magtumpang ug lális ug bastus, labaw siyang bastus,</i> If an educated man stoops to quarrel with a low person, he just degrades himself. <i>Mu ra mug búang tan-áwun ug tumpángan ninyu nang giyawyaw sa hubug,</i> You&apos;ll look like fools if you try to answer that drunk&apos;s ranting.

<p id=19659><form>tumpáwak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <tr>fall</tr> from a higher elevation. <i>Ang labandíra natumpáwak sa atábay,</i> The washer woman fell into the well. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> fall, be drawn into s.t. undesirable. <i>Natumpáwak siya sa bisyu sa upyu,</i> He fell into opium addiction.

<p id=19660><form>tumpì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB156; c1]</itype> <tr>pile</tr> s.t., usually neatly, on top of s.t. else. <i>Akuy mutumpì sa mga hugasan,</i> I&apos;ll pile the dishes up. <i>Nagtumpì ang daghang inutaw,</i> The huge number of ironed clothes are piled up. <pos>n</pos> a neat pile of things one on top of the other. <i>Usa ka tumpì nga kwarta,</i> A <tr>stack</tr> of bills.

<p id=19661><form>tumpil</form> <xr>= <sc>tumpì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19662><form>túmu</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>volume</tr> of a set of books.

<p id=19663><form>túmud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> transport goods from the place of production to market, <tr>export</tr>. <i>Nakatúmud na tag bugas sa láing násud,</i> We have exported rice to other countries. <i>Itúmud ning isdà sa tabuan,</i> Deliver these fish to the market to sell them. <pos>n</pos> transporting of goods from place of production for sale; <tr>export</tr>. <form>tumuran</form> <pos>n</pos> vehicle or boat used to transport or deliver goods.

<p id=19664><form>túmug, túmuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> be <tr>soaked</tr> with. <i>Lúhà nga mitúmug sa mga mata,</i> Tears that filled the eyes. <i>Natúmug ang bindáhi sa dugù,</i> The bandage is soaked with blood.

<p id=19665><form>tumung, túmung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>aim</tr> s.t. at s.t. <i>Ayawg itumung nákù nang pistúla,</i> Don&apos;t <tr>point</tr> that gun at me. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; acP]</itype> go to the direction of s.t. straight. <i>Tumúnga nang baláya,</i> Go in the direction of that house. <i>Itumung (ipatumung) ang dáru ánang káhuy arun tul-id ímung ági,</i> Aim your furrow at that tree, so it will be straight. <number>3</number> <itype>[a1]</itype> direct a statement, joke, etc. <i>Aku bay gitumung sa ímung insultu?</i> Was your insult directed at me? <i>Wà nákù itumung ang insultu nímu,</i> I didn&apos;t aim the insult at you. <number>4</number> <itype>[A12; a2]</itype> get s.t. (good or bad) as one&apos;s lot. <i>Nakatumung siyag asáwang bagìbian,</i> He ended up with a nagging wife. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>direction</tr>. <i>Way tumung sa átung lákaw run,</i> We are not going any particular place. <number>2</number> <tr>purpose</tr> for which s.t. is done. <i>Unsa may tumung sa íyang pagsukitsukit?</i> What was the purpose of his asking around? <number>3</number> <tr>straight toward</tr>. <i>Miatubang <pb n=1055>siya tumung sa bandíra,</i> He faced <tr>toward</tr> the flag.

<p id=19666><form>tumur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tumor</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b4]</itype> become, have a tumor. <i>Pusibling matumur ang bun-ug,</i> A bruise may turn into a tumor. <i>Gitumuran ang íyang tútuy,</i> She got a tumor on her breast.

<!-- Check entry for pos at near katumsun -->

<p id=19667><form>tumus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> second growth of the edible roots of a sweet potato. <i>Gagmay ning amutíha kay tumus ni,</i> These sweet potatoes are small because they are second-growth roots. <number>2</number> a coconut with a leaf sprout. <form>{pa&N;-|panumus}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> gather second-growth sweet potatoes. <i>Manumus ka pára lung-águn pára pamáhaw,</i> I will gather second-growth sweet potatoes to cook for breakfast. <form>patumsan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>coconut seedling</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> grow coconut seedlings. <i>Mupatumsan mi ánang klásiha sa lubi,</i> We will grow that k.o. coconut for seedlings. <pos>n</pos> <form>katumsan, pinatumsan</form> <xr>= <sc>patumsan</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=19668><form>túmus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> draw in the juice of s.t. placed in the mouth. <i>Ang mga bátà mitúmus (nagtúmus) sa santul,</i> The children were <tr>sucking</tr> on a santol seed.

<p id=19669><form>tumutub</form> <xr>= <sc>tumatub</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19670><form>tumùtúmù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>fabricate</tr>, <tr>make up</tr> a story. <i>Gitumùtumúan si Risal ug pasángil sa mga Katsílà,</i> The Spaniards fabricated charges against Rizal. <pos>n</pos> <tr>fabricated tale</tr>, report, etc. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|tumùtumúan}</form> <pos>a</pos> given to fabricating stories. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become given to fabricating stories.

<p id=19671><form>tumuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tip</tr>, <tr>end</tr>, <tr>top</tr>. <i>Tumuy sa búkid,</i> Top of the mountain. <i>Tumuy sa sundang,</i> Tip of the knife. <i>Tumuy sa karsáda,</i> End of the road. <number>2</number> glans penis (euphemism). <form>bug-at ang {&mdash;|tumuy}</form> not having indulged in sexual acts for quite a long time (humorous euphemism). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; a1c3]</itype> do s.t. at the end, tip of s.t. <i>Nag-áway sila maung nagtúmuy paglingkud sa bangkù,</i> They had a quarrel; that is why they are sitting on opposite ends of the bench. <i>Tumuya paggúnit ang pulbult,</i> Hold the pole vault at the end.&dagger;

<p id=19672><form>tuna<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stammerer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be a stammerer. <i>Ang kahadluk níya sa íyang amahan mauy nakatuna (nakapatuna) níya,</i> His being scared of his father made him a stammerer.

<p id=19673><form>tuna<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> small, glossy-black, worm-like <tr>snake</tr>, deadly poisonous, found in moist places in grasses and weeds.

<p id=19674><form>túnà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>wallow</tr>. <i>Mitúnà ang kábaw sa tunaan,</i> The water buffalo wallows in the puddle. <form>{pa-|patúnà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> put a water buffalo in a puddle to have him wallow in. <i>Magpatúnà úsà ku únà magsúgud pagdáru,</i> I will let the carabao wallow a while before starting to plow. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|tunaan}</form> <pos>n</pos> puddle for water buffalos to wallow in.

<p id=19675><form>túnà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; c6]</itype> <number>1</number> use a <tr>thumbmark</tr> for signature. <i>Itúnà ang kumagkù sa mga táwung dì makamaung mupirma,</i> People who don&apos;t know how to write use a thumbmark for their signatures. <number>2</number> have <tr>coitus</tr> (humorous euphemism). <pos>a</pos> <tr>illiterate</tr>. <i>Ispúting kaáyu apan túnà diay,</i> He is well-dressed but he&apos;s illiterate (he uses thumbmark for his signature).

<p id=19676><form>tunáda</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tune</tr> of a musical piece. <number>2</number> <tr>tone</tr>, <tr>tenor</tr> of voice or statement. <i>Nagdalag kasukù ang tunáda sa íyang tíngug,</i> The tone of his voice is tinged with anger. <i>Kláru ang íyang túyù sa tunáda lang sa suwat,</i> Her object is obvious just by the tenor of the letter.

<p id=19677><form>tun-as</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB12]</itype> decompose entirely, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Way báhù ang patayng láwas nga matun-as,</i> A dead body that is totally decomposed is odorless. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> fall into complete ruin. <i>Natun-as na ang karáang báy nga wà puy-i,</i> The old, uninhabited house has fallen into ruin. <number>3</number> destroy dreams, hopes, etc. <i>Nagkatun-as na ang ákung mga damgu,</i> My dreams are gradually crumbling down. <pos>a</pos> totally decomposed.

<p id=19678><form>túnaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB123(1); a2]</itype> <tr>melt</tr>, <tr>dissolve</tr>. <i>Nagtúnaw kug kandílà pára sa sawug,</i> I melted some candles for the floor. <i>Kutáwa ang kapi arun matúnaw ang kámay,</i> Stir the coffee so the sugar will dissolve. <number>2</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> be <tr>mortified</tr>, melt with shame (literary). <i>Natúnaw siya sa hilabihang kaúlaw sa dihang gibinábuy siyag kasábà sa kadaghánan,</i> He was <corr sic=moritifed>mortified</corr> with shame when he was given a dressing down in public. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|túnaw} ug gátas</formx> <itype>[A; b]</itype> mix a baby&apos;s formula. <i>Kinahanglan maampíngun ang mutúnaw ug gátas sa bátà,</i> One who mixes a baby&apos;s formula must be careful. <pos>a</pos> <tr>melted</tr>. <form>{(&rarr;)|tunaw}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>half-melted</tr>. <i>Ayawg palit ug ayis drap nga tunaw,</i> Don&apos;t buy a half-melted popsicle. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|tunawan}</form> <pos>n</pos> vessel for melting s.t. by heating. <form>{pang-|pangtúnaw}</form> <pos>n</pos> instrumental in melting s.t. <i>Sambúgan sa hustung timpla nga pangtúnaw niíni,</i> Dilute it with the right mixture which will let it dissolve.

<p id=19679><form>túnay</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>real</tr>, <tr>genuine</tr> (slang). <i>Dì ni imitisyun uy. Túnay ni,</i> This is not imitation. This is genuine. <i>Maáyu siyang mudá mu rag túnay giyud,</i> He acts well, as though it were actually real. <number>2</number> <tr>true</tr>; <tr>faithful</tr> to one&apos;s sweetheart (slang). <i>Ayaw siyag binuángi kay túnay nà siya nímu,</i> Don&apos;t deceive her because she is true to you.

<p id=19680><form>tunáyit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> hold a dance until late hours. <i>Magtunayit sarà ang bayli basta dì muuwan,</i> We&apos;ll continue the dance till late <pb n=1056>if it doesn&apos;t rain.

<p id=19681><form>tundaan</form> <pos>n</pos> small boat usually towed behind the stern of a larger boat, used for putting into shore where the larger boat can&apos;t put in.

<p id=19682><form>tundag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> <tr>sink</tr>, be on the way to the bottom; cause s.t. to be so. <i>Mitundag na ang nasúnug nga bapur,</i> The boat that burnt has begun to sink.

<p id=19683><form>tundan</form> <xr>= <sc>alitundan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19684><form>tundù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> engage in s.t. <tr>conscientiously</tr>. <i>Primyúhan tikawg magtundù kag tuun,</i> I&apos;ll give you a reward if you study conscientiously. <i>Tundua nang ímung pagpangimplíyu,</i> Be conscientious in your job. <form>{-in-|tinundù}</form> <xr>= <sc>tundù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19685><form>tunduk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>poke</tr>, hit or strike s.t. with the end or tip of s.t. <i>Ang hálas nga nakatunduk níya,</i> The snake that struck him. <i>Gitunduk níya sa lamísa ang ayis pik,</i> He stuck the icepick in the table. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> thrust with the end of s.t. <i>Ang hínay nga tunduk sa bára,</i> The gentle thrust of an iron bar. <number>2</number> a spot on an animal&apos;s body or head. <i>May tunduk nga itum ang awman,</i> The spotted snapper has a black spot. <form>{-an(&larr;)|tundúkan}</form> <pos>n</pos> animal having a spot.

<p id=19686><form>túng</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> rake-off given by gamblers to the owner of the gambling paraphernalia used. <number>2</number> bribe given to a policeman to avoid arrest. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> pay the <ix>tung</ix>. <i>Ngánung dì ka man mutúng nga ikaw may nakadaug?</i> Why <corr sic="don&apos;t">didn&apos;t</corr> you pay the rake-off when you won the game? <i>Ug túngan nímu ang pulis, papamaligyáun ka nas asíras,</i> If you pay the cops off, you&apos;ll be allowed to hawk on the sidewalk. <form>{-ir|túngir}</form> <pos>n</pos> the one who collects the rake-off in a gambling den.

<p id=19687><form>tunga</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> come out from under water. <i>Layù siyag gitungahan gíkan sa íyang gisawman,</i> The place he came up was far from where he dived. <number>1a</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> pause to breathe while drinking a whole container of spirits. <i>Dílì nákù itunga ang usa ka búl nga tubà,</i> I&apos;ll drink a jar of coconut palm toddy without pausing to breathe. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> show up or see s.o. as per appointment or agreement. <i>Wà na mutunga ang nakautang nákù,</i> The person who owed me money didn&apos;t show up.

<p id=19688><form>tungà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>half</tr>. <i>Tungà sa taknà,</i> Half an hour. <number>2</number> <tr>middle</tr>, <tr>center</tr>. <i>Tungà sa karsáda,</i> Middle of the road. <number>3</number> <tr>vagina</tr> (euphemism). <number>4</number> <tr>stomach</tr> (coarse). <i>Bísag napunù na ang tungà, gabagulbul nga walay lamì ang pagkáun,</i> He filled his <tr>gullet</tr>, but he grumbles that the food was no good. <form><r>[<ix>so-and-so</ix>]</r> sa ímung (íyang) {&mdash;|tungà}</form> [so-and-so] is not true (said in denying s.t. vigorously and with resentment). <i>Dátù sa íyang tungà. Wà man gánì kuy ikapalit ug bugas,</i> Rich my foot! Here I don&apos;t even have money for food! <form>tungang gabíi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>midnight</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B256; c16]</itype> be at about half of s.t. <i>Mutungà sa kilumitru ang ákung gibaktas,</i> I walked for about half a kilometer. <number>2</number> <itype>[c16]</itype> hit at the middle or center. <i>Itungà (tung-a) giyud pag-igù arun buls-ay,</i> Hit the center to get a bull&apos;s-eye. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> consume, reduce to half. <i>Tung-un ku nang usa ka galun nga tubà,</i> I&apos;ll consume half of that gallon of palm toddy. <number>4</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> place between two or more others. <i>Gitung-an siyag higdà sa íyang Nánay ug Tátay,</i> She was laid between her mother and father. <number>5</number> <itype>[AC; abc3]</itype> divide, share into halves. <i>Akuy mutungà arun way áway,</i> I&apos;ll divide it so there will be no quarrel. <i>Magtúngà ta sa ganansiya,</i> We will split the profit equally. <i>Tungáa (tung-a) nà ninyung duha,</i> Divide it equally between the two of you. <form>tungàtúngà</form> <pos>n</pos> the halfway or mid-point. <i>Tungàtúngà sa átung lákaw,</i> Mid-point of our trip. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> divide equally among. <i>Tungàtungáa ninyu nang usa ka buuk kík,</i> Divide that one cake equally among yourselves. <form>hinungàtungà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1356]</itype> be about halfway through. <i>Nahinungàtúngà (nanungàtungà) na ang mísa pag-abut námù,</i> The mass was about halfway through when we arrived. <form>panungàtúngà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <xr>= <sc>hinungàtúngà</sc>.</xr> <form>{hi&N;-|hinungà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be halfway done. <i>Walà pa gánì mahinungà ang kan-un niíni, mitindug na kini,</i> She got up before the rice was even halfway consumed. <form>{-in-|tinungà}</form> <pos>a</pos> by half. <i>Tinungà ka manghangyù,</i> You bargain things down to half-price. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> do by halves or two to one. <i>Way musúkul nímu bísag itinungà ang pusta,</i> No one will challenge you even if the bet is two to one. <form>kinatung-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>centermost</tr>, <tr>middlemost</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|kinatung-an} silangan</form> <tr>Middle East</tr>. <form>{ka-|katungà}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>one-half</tr> of s.t. <i>Ibangku ang katungà sa ímung swildu,</i> Deposit half of your salary in the bank. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B236]</itype> be at about halfway. <i>Nakatungà na ku sa libru,</i> I&apos;m halfway through the book. <i>Wà pa ku makakatungà sa tísis,</i> I have not reached the halfway point in my thesis. <form>tulung-an</form> <pos>n</pos> palm toddy measure, a bamboo tube container which holds one-half a <ix>típu<sub>1</sub></ix>, <ix>1</ix>. <form>tulung-un</form> the Wednesday of the Holy Week where work is done half day.

<p id=19689><form>túngab</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S; c]</itype> put the mouth to the edge of a vessel, as in drinking. <i>Mitúngab siya sa pawpaw arun pag-inum,</i> He brought the half coconut shell to his mouth to drink. <number>2</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> put the mouth near s.t. as in drinking. <i>Ayawg itúngab ímung bàbà sa ákung <pb n=1057>dunggan ug musulti ka,</i> Don&apos;t put your mouth right on top of my ear when you talk.

<p id=19690><form>túngan</form> <xr>= <sc>tulungan</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>túlung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19691><form>túngas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> go up a mountain, <tr>uphill</tr>. <i>Mutúngas ta ánang bakilid,</i> We are going up that slope. <i>Tungásun ku ang kabukíran pagpangítà nímu,</i> I will <tr>climb mountains</tr> to look for you. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|tungasun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>uphill</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>uphill fight</tr>. <i>Tungasun ang íyang kahimtang sa iliksiyun,</i> He has an uphill fight in the election. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125]</itype> be <tr>uphill</tr> or <tr>steep</tr>. <i>Pahináyi ang awtu kay nagkatungasun ang karsáda,</i> Slow the car down because the road is becoming steep.

<p id=19692><form>tungaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. very minute, red <tr>mite</tr> that abounds in bushes, producing an itchy bite and hiding in skin pores. <i>Madakup pay tungaw nga dílì gayud kini musayup paghapit kanámù,</i> It&apos;s more likely that you could catch a mite (i.e. highly unlikely) than that he would fail to stop in our place. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> be infested with such fleas.

<p id=19693><form>tungay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> hang down on a weak or loose attachment. <i>Nagtungay ang sanga sa káhuy nga wà malahus ug kaputul,</i> The branch of the tree is hanging because it was not completely cut through.

<p id=19694><form>*tungbálay</form> (from <ix>datung balay</ix>) <form>{pa&N;-|panungbálay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <number>1</number> go to s.o.&apos;s house. <i>Manumbálay ta sa átung bag-ung silíngan,</i> Let&apos;s <tr>visit</tr> our new neighbor&apos;s house. <number>2</number> haunt one&apos;s mind. <i>Nanumbálay sa ákung hunàhúnà ang átung kagahápun,</i> Our past haunts my mind. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> go to farmhouses to barter commodities. <i>Manumbalay mi sa búkid káda tingsanggì,</i> We go bartering to the farmhouses during harvest season. <form>{ma&N;-|manungbálay}</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. fine-grained white <tr>rice</tr> with a savory, permeating smell.

<p id=19695><form>tungdan</form> <xr>= <sc>alitundan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19696><form>tunggà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c]</itype> have a <tr>drinking spree</tr> (slang). <i>Makigtunggà sila nákù karung ákung adlaw,</i> They want to have a drinking spree with me on my birthday.

<p id=19697><form>tunggal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> prod s.t. with a stick to drive or push it out of a small place. <i>Gitunggal níya ang sagbut sa túbu,</i> He pushed the dirt out of the pipe with a stick. <i>Tunggála ang ilagà sa kisami,</i> Poke at the mice in the ceiling to drive them out.

<p id=19698><form>tunggul</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>stupid</tr>, having no common sense. <i>Tunggul kaáyu nímu uy nga dì ka man makasabut ug sugúun,</i> How stupid you are! You don&apos;t understand when you are told to do s.t.!

<p id=19699><form>tungguy</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> any growth that protrudes from the body. <number>2</number> a swelling or <corr sic=protruberance>protuberance</corr> on a tree. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> <tr>protrude</tr>. <i>Mutungguy ang sábà úsà mugulà,</i> The sucker protrudes first before coming out. <form>tungguytungguy</form> <pos>n</pos> a knoblike <tr>protrusion</tr>, e.g. a <tr>pommel</tr>. <i>Isab-it lang ang rinda sa tungguytungguy ánang muntúra,</i> Just loop the reins around the pommel of the saddle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a2]</itype> make, attach a knoblike protrusion.

<p id=19700><form>tunghà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>appear</tr>. <i>May kumíta nga mitunghà sa lángit,</i> A comet appeared in the sky. <i>Gitungháan siyag ingkantu,</i> A supernatural being appeared to him. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> show up for a date. <i>Nagsábut mi nga magkítà sa alas dus apan wà ku níya tungháa,</i> We agreed to meet at two o&apos;clock but he didn&apos;t appear. <number>1b</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> <tr>come upon</tr> s.t. <i>Sa pagtúngas námù sa búkid ámung hingtunghaan ang usa ka talagsáung talan-áwun,</i> When we climbed up the mountain we came upon a spectacular view. <number>2</number> <tr>report to work</tr>. <i>Mutunghà kug sayu,</i> I&apos;ll <tr>go to work</tr> early. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>attend school</tr>, classes. <i>Nagtunghà siya sa kulihiyu,</i> She is attending college. <number>4</number> <itype>[A23; b1]</itype> for s.t. to occur periodically. <i>Sakitan giyud siya sa tiyan basta mutunghà na kaníya ang íyang sakit,</i> She gets a stomachache when she has her period. <form>{&mdash;|tunghà} ang bisíta</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b5]</itype> <tr>menstruate</tr> (euphemism). <form>{pa-|patunghà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> send to school. <i>Magwurking gud ku ug dì mu makapatunghà nákù,</i> I will work my way through if you can&apos;t support my studies. <form>{-l-an(&rarr;)|tulunghaan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>school</tr>.

<p id=19701><form>tunghak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; c6]</itype> stop drinking to catch one&apos;s breath. <form>tunghaktunghak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> stop every now and then while drinking to catch one&apos;s breath. <i>Ísug kaáyung ilimnúna. Magtunghaktunghak kang muinum,</i> The drink is too strong. You have to stop every now and then to catch a breath when you drink it.

<p id=19702><form>tungína<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> misfortune or suffering inflicted on s.o. by a supernatural being in retribution for some infraction or at the behest of a sorcerer. <i>Kini ang tungína sa ákung pagkamakasasálà,</i> This is my retribution for being a sinner. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> send <ix>tungína</ix> to s.o. <i>Tungináhan ka,</i> I&apos;ll send divine punishment on you. <form>tunginahan</form> <pos>n</pos> sorcerer who can have divine retribution sent.

<p id=19703><form>tungína<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> needlessly deprive s.o. of s.t. <i>Dì mutungína ang inahan sa kinahanglanun sa anak,</i> A mother does not deprive a child of its needs. <i>Ang kagawásan nga itungína nátù sa Kumunismu,</i> The liberty that Communism will deprive us of.

<p id=19704><form>tungkà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2C3; c1]</itype> <tr>meet</tr>, <tr>join</tr>, <tr>come together</tr>. <i>Kining karsadáha mutungkà adtung karsadáha,</i> This road will meet that road. <i>Nagtungkà ang duha ka tumuy sa alambri,</i> <pb n=1058>The two ends of the wire meet. <i>Tungkáa (itungkà) ang duha ka pidásung panaptun,</i> Join the two pieces of cloth. <i>Dúgay nang wà mi magkatungkà,</i> We haven&apos;t <tr>gotten together</tr> for a long time. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC; a2]</itype> hold a drinking spree, <tr>drink</tr> alcoholic beverages. <pos>n</pos> <tr>drinking spree</tr> (slang). <form>{-an|tungkaan}</form> <pos>n</pos> place for drinking alcoholic beverages. <form>{-in-an|tinungkaan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>joint</tr>, <tr>connection</tr>, <tr>seam</tr>.

<p id=19705><form>tungkáhal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46N; c]</itype> for projections to <tr>stick</tr> out. <i>Mitungkáhal (nanungkáhal) ang mga sílik sa isdà,</i> The fins of fish are sticking out. <i>Gitungkahálan sa mga lansang ang salug,</i> Nails are sticking out from the floor.

<p id=19706><form>tungkalù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c6]</itype> sit down idly. <i>Makatungkalù ka uruy dihà nga náay daghang buluhatun sa ímung atubángan,</i> nu? How can you just <tr>sit around</tr> idly when there&apos;s so much work to be done?

<p id=19707><form>tungkì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dustpan</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> do s.t. with a dustpan. <i>Tungkía nang sinilhig ug ilábay sa basúra,</i> Sweep the waste into the dustpan. Then throw it to the garbage can.

<p id=19708><form>tungkù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> step, set on top of s.t. <i>Tungkúa ang binítay arun ka kaabut,</i> <tr>Step on</tr> s.t. to reach the thing we had hung up. <i>Itungkù ang básu sa láin,</i> Put the glass on top of another.

<p id=19709><form>*tungkù<sub>2</sub></form> <form>tabla ug {&mdash;|tungkù}</form> appear like a <tr>fool</tr> (euphemism for <ix>tabla ug tuntu</ix>). <i>Tabla lang tag tungkù íni. Naghuwat ta dinhi, naghuwat pud diay siya didtu,</i> We&apos;re just like a bunch of fools. We wait here, and all the time he was waiting there.

<p id=19710><form>tungkù<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tuk-ung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19711><form>tungkud</form> <xr>= <sc>sungkud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19712><form>tunglu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>curse</tr> bringing evil effect. <i>Ang Ginuu nagtunglu nga magkamang ang hálas,</i> The Lord condemned the serpent to crawl on the ground. <i>Ayawg tunglúha siya kay matinúud unyà,</i> Don&apos;t curse him, for it might come true. <pos>n</pos> <tr>curse</tr> that brings evil effect. <i>&lsquo;Malatà pa untà ímung tinái!&rsquo; tunglu níya,</i> &lsquo;May your intestines rot!&rsquo; he cursed. <form>{pa&N;-|panunglu}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> utter curses. <i>Daw makítà ku siya nga nagpanunglù kanátù,</i> It was as if I could see her cursing us. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> do s.t. not serious which will bring a curse on one. <i>Ngánung nanilhig kag gabíi? Nanunglu ka?</i> Why are you sweeping after dark? You want to bring a curse on yourself? <form>matunglúhun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>cursing</tr>.

<p id=19713><form>tungtung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> step, put on top. <i>Mitungtung siya sa tabládu arun pagdiskursu,</i> He stepped on the stage to speak. <i>Itungtung ang silya sa lamísa,</i> Put the chair on top of the table. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> reach an age, grade in school. <i>Karun hinúun nga mitungtung na aku ning ákung panuígun,</i> Now that I have reached this age. <i>Primarya ra ang íyang hitungtungan,</i> He didn&apos;t get any further than the primary grades. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put interest on a loan. <i>Grábi sad kang makatungtung ug túbù,</i> You sure charge a high interest. <pos>n</pos> <tr>interest</tr> on a loan.

<p id=19714><form>túngu</form> <xr>= <sc>tunglu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19715><form>tungud</form> <number>1</number> <tr>because</tr>, <tr>due to</tr>. <i>Napúkan si Samsun tungud ni Dilayla,</i> Samson fell because of Delilah. <i>Tungud kay nalísang ku,</i> Because I was afraid. <number>1a</number> <ix>in set usage in prayers:</ix> &lsquo;in the name of&rsquo;. <i>Tungud sa timáan sa Santa Krus, sa ámung mga áway bawíun mu kami, Ginúung Diyus námù...<corr>,</corr></i> By the sign of the Holy Cross deliver us from our enemies, our Lord God ... <number>2</number> <tr>by</tr>, <tr>at</tr> a place. <i>Ihúnung ang dyíp tungud ánang balay,</i> Stop the jeep by that house. <number>3</number> <tr>directly beneath</tr>. <i>Dúnay subwi tungud ning átung gitindúgan,</i> There is a subway directly beneath where we are standing. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AP; cP]</itype> put directly beneath. <i>Kinsay nagtungud (nagpatungud) ánà sa bintánà? Hilud-an hinúun,</i> Who put that beneath the window? S.o. spat on it. <i>Itungud (ipatungud) ang baldi sa grípu,</i> Put the pail directly under the faucet. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> go under the house to peep. <i>Kinsa guy gustung mutungud ug tigúlang,</i> Who likes to peep at an old woman? <number>3</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be at, near, or directly beneath s.t. <i>Sirbátu kun matungud na ta sa taw-ang dákit,</i> Blow your horn when we get near the enchanted banyan tree. <number>4</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> be <tr>concerned</tr>, <tr>referred to</tr>. <i>Álang niadtung hitungdan,</i> To whom it may <tr>concern</tr>. <i>Kadtung hitungdan sa ákung sulti,</i> Those referred to by my words. <number>4a</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> <tr>aim at</tr> s.t. or s.o. <i>Ngánung mau man puy inyung tungdun ug insultu ang hilumun?</i> Why do you <tr>aim</tr> your insults to one who does not even talk? <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the place directly below, directly across. <number>2</number> <formx>niadtung tungúra</formx> at that particular juncture, moment. <i>Niadtung tungúra pagkadisgrasya níya gipangulbaan ku,</i> That instant when he met his accident I was terrified. <form>{(&larr;)|túngud}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; ac3]</itype> put, arrange one exactly beneath or opposite the other. <i>Akuy mutúngud sa naghiwì nga dubul dik,</i> I will put the double-deck beds exactly beneath each other. <i>Wà magtúngud ang butúnis ug uhális,</i> The buttons and the buttonholes are not exactly opposite each other. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> look down searchingly into the sea for fish. <i>Nagtúngud ang mananagat ug maáyung panaun,</i> The fisherman is looking into the sea for a good fish to spear. <form>tungudtúngud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b6P]</itype> <tr>make a pass</tr> at a girl or boy. <i>Dúsi pa siya piru daghan nang nagtungudtúngud <pb n=1059>(nagpatungudtúngud) níya,</i> She is only twelve but lots of boys are making passes at her. <form>{pa-|patungud}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> go beneath, near. <i>Mipatungud siya sa ákung lawak,</i> He went directly under my room. <form>{pahi&N;-|pahinungud}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> give s.o. s.t. by way of thanks. <i>Kay mitábang man ka mupahinungud ku nímu ug diyis písus,</i> Because you helped I will give you ten pesos as thanks. <number>2</number> dedicate, do s.t. in honor of s.o. <i>Nagpahinungud ang lungsud ug mísa álang sa minatay,</i> The town offered a mass in honor of the dead. <i>Kining kantáha ákung ipahinungud nímu,</i> This song I dedicate to you. <pos>n</pos> s.t. offered as thanks or as a dedication. <form>{ka-|katungud}, {ka-(&larr;)|katúngud}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>right</tr>, <tr>privilege</tr>. <i>May katungud (katúngud) kang mahibalu kúmu asáwa,</i> You have the right to know, being the wife. <form>katungdánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>duty</tr>. <i>Katungdánan sa anak ang pagsirbi sa ginikánan,</i> It is a child&apos;s duty to serve his parents. <number>2</number> <tr>office</tr>, <tr>position</tr>. <i>Taas siyag katungdánan sa gubirnu,</i> He holds a high office in the government. <form>pangatungdánan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>hold a position</tr>. <form>{tag-|tagtungud}, {tag-(&larr;)|tagtúngud}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.o. who owns, has responsibility over s.t. <i>Gustung ipalubung dáyun sa tagtungud (tagtúngud) ang minatay,</i> The family (lit. concerned party) wants to have the body buried at once. <form>hinungdan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cause</tr> of, <tr>reason for</tr>. <i>Unsay hinungdan nga miundang ka?</i> What is the <tr>reason</tr> you quit? <form>way {&mdash;|hinungdan}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>good-for-nothing</tr>, <tr>useless</tr>. <i>Way hinungdan tawhána gipabantay, nat&umacracu;g na hinúun,</i> He is useless! He is supposed to stand guard but he is sleeping. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12P]</itype> <tr>cause</tr>. <i>Ang mga pabrika mauy nakapahinungdan sa pag-uswag sa dápit,</i> The factories <tr>brought about</tr> progress in the place. <form>pakahinungdan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> consider s.t. important. <i>Dì nátù pakahinungdánun ang milabay na,</i> Let&apos;s not give importance to what has already passed. <form>hinungdánun, mahinungdánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>important</tr>. <i>Hinungdánun nga túyù,</i> Important business. <form>{mahi-|mahitungud}/{maha-|mahatungud}</form> <tr>about</tr>. <i>Magsulti ta mahitungud sa Biyitnam,</i> Let us talk about Vietnam. <form>{nahi&N;-|nahinunghud}</form> <pos>n</pos> thing pertaining to. <i>Mau ray ílang gihisgutan ang nahinungud sa nigusyu,</i> All they talked about was matters of business. <form>tungdunun</form> <pos>n</pos> stars, constellations, or landmarks used by fishermen, navigators, as a guide.

<p id=19716><form>tungug</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. <tr>mangrove</tr>, the bark of which is used for dyeing and as an ingredient of coconut palm toddy. <number>2</number> bark of this mangrove. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> apply <ix>tungug</ix>. <form>tulunggan, tungganan</form> <pos>n</pos> container made of a bamboo node to hold powdered material from this plant. <form>katunggan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mangrove swamp</tr>.

<p id=19717><form>tunguk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B456]</itype> stay <tr>immobile</tr>, staring blankly. <i>Nagtunguk siya. Nagdamgu sigúru,</i> He is <tr>staring blankly</tr>. He&apos;s probably daydreaming. <i>Natunguk siya pagkadungug sa dautang balità,</i> He sat <tr>motionless</tr> after he heard the bad news.

<p id=19718><form>túngul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>stomach</tr> of animals. <number>2</number> human stomach (humorous). [so-and-so] <form>sa ímung (íyang) {&mdash;|túngul}</form> [so-and-so] is not true. <i>Magminyù sa íyang túngul. Náa pa gániy gátas sa bàbà!</i> He is going to get married? The hell he is. He isn&apos;t even weaned yet!

<p id=19719><form>tungup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; a1]</itype> be <tr>exactly</tr> a certain quantity, time. <i>Mutungup giyud sa úras ning ákung rilu,</i> My watch gives the exact time. <i>Tungpa lag lung-ag bálig lima ka táwu,</i> Cook exactly enough rice for five people. <form>tunguptúngup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> calculate the time or measurements. <i>Nagtunguptúngup lang ku sa úras kay wà man kuy rilu,</i> I&apos;m just estimating the time because I don&apos;t have a watch.

<p id=19720><form>tung-uy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> set cooking utensils over the fire. <i>Nagtung-uy kug lung-agan,</i> I&apos;m putting the rice on the fire now.

<p id=19721><form>tunhay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> <tr>prosper</tr>, be successful. <i>Mutunhay ang nigusyu kun kuntintu ang mga trabahanti,</i> The business will prosper if the employees are contented. <i>Way kapulisan nga makatunhay (makapatunhay) sa kalínaw inig-iliksiyun,</i> No police force can guarantee peace and order during elections. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23; a2P]</itype> <tr>endure</tr>, <tr>last</tr>. <i>Mutunhay ning sapatúsa kay lig-un,</i> This pair of shoes will last because they are sturdy. <i>Dílì ka tunháyan ug butang ánang ímung ginamitan,</i> The way you are using your things, nothing is going to last. <form>{pa-|patunhay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> promote the success or endurance of s.t. <i>Salapì nga mupatunhay sa kinabúhing hamugáway,</i> Money that will allow one to have a life of leisure. <form>{ka-an|katunháyan}, {ka-un(&rarr;)|katunhayan}</form> <pos>n</pos> success achieved. <form>{mag-r-|magtutunhay} sa kalínaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sergeant-at-arms</tr>. <form>{ma-un|matunháyun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lasting</tr>, <tr>enduring</tr> for a long time (literary). <i>Matunháyung kalípay,</i> <tr>Everlasting</tr> happiness.

<p id=19722><form>tunhay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for the weather to be clear and bright. <form>{&mdash;|tunhay} ang ugat</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>straight-grained</tr> wood. <i>Ang káhuy nga tunhay ug ugat sayun limpiyúhan,</i> Straight-grained wood is easy to plane. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B25; b6]</itype> be, become fine weather. <i>Ug matunhay (mutunhay) ang panahun, mularga ta,</i> If the weather is good, we can leave.

<p id=19723><form>túnik</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. perfumed <tr>lotion</tr> (from the brand name, <ix>Tonix</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> apply this lotion. <i>Tuníki siya arun mahumut,</i> Put perfume on her so she will smell good. <form>{pa&N;-|panúnik}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> apply this lotion to oneself.

<p id=19724><form>*tuniku</form> <form>bínu {&mdash;|tuniku} istumakal</form> <pos>n</pos> an old medicinal liquor.

<pb n=1060>

<p id=19725><form>tunil<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> bamboo palm toddy container of two nodes.

<p id=19726><form>tunil<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tuniláda</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19727><form>tunil<sub>3</sub>, túnil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tunnel</tr>.

<p id=19728><form>tuniláda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ton</tr>. <i>Mutimbang ug usa ka tuniláda,</i> It weighs one ton.

<p id=19729><form>tunlù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> dip part of s.t. in a liquid or solid. <i>Gitunluan námù ang sikwátig pán,</i> We dipped the bread in the hot chocolate. <form>{-an|tunluan}, {-anan|tunluanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. where one dips s.t.

<p id=19730><form>tunlub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> stick, <tr>dunk</tr> s.t. completely or partially into a liquid or solid. <i>Nagtunlub siyag mga saput sa amirul,</i> She is <tr>dipping</tr> clothes into the starch. <i>Itunlub ang plúma sa tintíru,</i> <tr>Dip</tr> the pen into the inkpot.

<p id=19731><form>tunlud</form> (from <ix>lúnud</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>submerge</tr> in a liquid.

<p id=19732><form>tunsil</form> <xr>= <sc>tansil</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19733><form>tuntu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>stupid</tr>, <tr>silly</tr>. <i>Tuntu! Ngánung kining klasíha ímung gipalit,</i> Stupid! Why did you buy this kind? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become stupid, silly, consider s.o. as such. <i>Sa nagkadugay ka ning trabahúa nagkatuntu ka sab,</i> The longer you are on this job, the dumber you get. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> <tr>deceive</tr>, make a fool of. <i>Way kalúuy ang laláking nagtuntu nímu,</i> The man who deceived you was heartless. <i>Manuntu ka man nákung mas wayis man ku nímu,</i> Don&apos;t try to make a fool of me. I&apos;m a bit smarter than you are. <i>Gituntu ka lang ánang mananag-an,</i> That fortuneteller just <tr>hoaxed</tr> you. <form>{-in-|tinuntu}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>abuse</tr>, do s.t. mean or bad to s.t. <i>Ug dúnay mutinuntu nímung buguy, tawga lang ku,</i> If some ruffian is mean to you, just call me. <i>Kinsay nagtinuntu ring ákung tigib nga nagíbang man,</i> Who abused my chisel? Somebody nicked it. <number>1a</number> <tr>abuse sexually</tr>. <i>Ayaw siyag tinuntuhi samtang dì pa mu minyù,</i> Don&apos;t abuse her so long as you are not married. <number>2</number> do s.t. in a careless way, somewhat playfully. <i>Ayawg tinantug dúwà kay mapildi ta,</i> Don&apos;t <tr>fool around</tr> in this game. We might lose. <i>Gitinuntuhan níyag drúwing ang ákung tsárt,</i> He was just fooling around with the chart that I had him draw. <number>3</number> fool around with women. <i>Nagtinuntu ang íyang bána,</i> Her husband is fooling around. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fooling, <tr>horsing around</tr>. <number>2</number> bad, <tr>illicit practices</tr>. <i>Daghan kaáyung tinuntu sa gubirnu,</i> There is a great deal of <tr>corruption</tr> in the government.

<p id=19734><form>tuntun</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>lower</tr> s.t. <i>Mitábang kug tuntun sa lungun sa buhù,</i> I helped lower the coffin into the hole. <i>Ituntun ang baldi sa atábay,</i> Lower the pail <corr sic=to>into</corr> the well. <number>1a</number> <itype>[B6]</itype> <tr>sag</tr> loosely. <i>Mituntun íyang súsu nga wà bráhi,</i> Her breasts sagged without a bra. <i>Nagtuntun ang luag níyang karsúnis,</i> His pants are sagging because they are loose. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> pay out a fishline. <i>Tuntúni ug mga lima ka dupa ang pasul,</i> Pay out five fathoms of line. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB2; b6(1)]</itype> for s.t. weighted down to sink; cause it to do so. <i>Magtuntun siya sa iring nga ilábu sa dágat,</i> He&apos;ll weight the cat down to throw it into the sea. <i>Mutuntun (matuntun) ug dalì ang pasul ug lagdúngan,</i> The fishing line will sink easily if you attach a sinker. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> use a <tr>plumb</tr> to test whether things are vertical. <i>Magtuntun kus halígi arun dílì maghirig,</i> I am using the plumb line on this post so it won&apos;t lean. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> string or rope used to lower s.t. <number>2</number> heavy object attached to s.t. to make it sink. <number>3</number> <tr>plumb line</tr>. <form>{pa&N;-|panuntun}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> fish in deep waters with a hook, line, and sinker. <pos>n</pos> fishing with a hook, line, and sinker in deep waters.

<p id=19735><form>túnu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tune</tr> of music pieces. <i>Tudlúi ku sa túnu ánang kantáha,</i> Teach me the tune of that song. <number>2</number> <tr>intonation</tr>, <tr>tone</tr>. <i>Nindut ug túnu ang sinultihang Ilunggu,</i> The Ilongo language has a pleasant intonation. <i>Malumu ang túnu sa párì nga nagsirmun,</i> The priest preached with a tender tone. <form>{&mdash;|túnu} ug pasiyun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC3; a2]</itype> sing the passions of Jesus Christ during Lent. <i>Súgud sa Martis Santu magtúnu nag pasiyun sa ámù,</i> Starting with Holy Tuesday they sing the Passion of Jesus Christ at our place. <form>{pa&N;-|panúnu}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tone</tr>, <tr>manner of speaking</tr>. <i>Sa íyang panúnu sukù kaáyu tu siya,</i> By the tone of his voice he was very angry.

<p id=19736><form>túnu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; a12]</itype> for an undertaking to <tr>come out well</tr> or all right. <i>Wà mutúnu ang ákung bibingka kay kúlang ang lubi,</i> My rice cakes did not <tr>come out good</tr> because they lacked coconut. <i>Tunúha ang ímung pagtuun arun ka mulampus,</i> Study consistently and carefully so you will <tr>succeed</tr>.

<p id=19737><form>tunù, túnù</form> <pos>n</pos> juice extracted by squeezing coconut meat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> extract juice from coconut. <form>{(&rarr;)|tunù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> prepare food with coconut extract. <i>Tunui ang útan nga kalbásà,</i> Stew the squash with coconut juice. <form>{-in-an(&rarr;)|tinunuan}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. cooked with coconut extract. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|tunuun}</form> <pos>a</pos> coconut meat having plenty of juice.

<p id=19738><form>tunub</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>step on</tr>. <i>Nagtunub ka sa ákung prupyidad,</i> You are stepping on my property. <i>Ayawg tumbi ang sáwug kay basà pa,</i> Don&apos;t step on the floor. It&apos;s still wet. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b2]</itype> <tr>set foot on</tr>, in. <i>Dì na ku mutunub ning inyung báy,</i> I will never <tr>set foot in</tr> your house again. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> have attended some school. <i>Amin na lang kay nakatunub nà siyag unibirsidad,</i> Just give in. He has gone to college, you know. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>dishonor</tr>, <pb n=1061><tr>desecrate</tr> s.o.&apos;s name or honor. <i>Ayawg tumbi ang dungug sa átung pamilya,</i> Don&apos;t dishonor our family&apos;s name. <form>{(&larr;)|túnub}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>footprint</tr>. <number>1a</number> the k.o. life one led. <i>Sunda ang túnub sa ímung amahan,</i> Follow in your father&apos;s footsteps. <number>2</number> <tr>footfalls</tr>. <i>Kinsa nang dagkug túnub sa táas,</i> Who made that loud noise upstairs? <form>{&mdash;|túnub} ug kasíkas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sound effects</tr> in a radio play (lit. footfalls and noise). <i>Ang mga túnub ug kasíkas kinahanglang itayming giyud sa lakaw sa dúlà,</i> The sound effects should be coordinated with the progress of the play. <form>tumbanan</form> <pos>n</pos> place one puts the feet when sitting.

<p id=19739><form>túnud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> convey below the surface of the water or into a pit. <i>Nagtúnud kug patayng irù sa lawud,</i> I threw the dead dog into the deep part of the ocean. <i>Itúnud na ang lungun sa lungag,</i> Lower the casket into the hole now. <number>2</number> <itype>[B245; b6]</itype> for the sun to set. <i>Nagkatúnud (nagkatunud) na ang adlaw sa kasadpan,</i> The sun is sinking in the west.

<p id=19740><form>tunug</form> <pos>n</pos> sound of a musical instrument. <i>Manánuy ang tunug sa mga tulunggun,</i> The musical instruments make a sweet sound. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>resonant</tr>, producing a distantly loud sound. <i>Tunug ning sistáha dà, dì bungul,</i> This guitar is sure resonant. It is not dull. <i>Tunug kaáyu dinhi ang sinultihánay sa píkas kwartu,</i> You can clearly hear the conversation in the next room. <number>2</number> <tr>widely known</tr>. <i>Tunug na nga mupaúlì ka,</i> Everybody knows that you&apos;re going home. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> become resonant, consider s.t. so. <i>Sa magkadaan ang byulin, magkatunug sab,</i> The older a violin gets, the more resonant it becomes. <number>2</number> be distinctly <tr>audible</tr>. <i>Mutunug ímung tíngug kun pabur mi sa hángin,</i> Your voice is very audible if the wind comes towards us. <number>3</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> be widely known. <i>Natunug na sa lungsud ang inyung kasal,</i> Everybody knows that you&apos;re getting married. <form>tulunggun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>musical instrument</tr>.

<p id=19741><form>tun-ug</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>cold air</tr>, atmosphere. <i>Panira arun dì musulud ang tun-ug,</i> Close the windows so the <tr>cold</tr> won&apos;t get in. <number>2</number> <tr>dew</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> be exposed to cold drafts. <i>Giubu siya kay natun-ugan,</i> He has a cough because he got exposed to the cold. <form>{pa-|patun-ug}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> expose s.t. or oneself to the cold. <i>Ayawg patun-ugi ang kutsi kay dúgayng muandar,</i> Don&apos;t expose the car to the cold because it will be hard to start. <form>{pa&N;-|panun-ug}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for the odor of s.t. to spread all over. <i>Dílì makapanun-ug ang búwak ug dì pa mamuklad,</i> Flowers don&apos;t give off fragrance before the blossoms open.

<p id=19742><form>tunuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>thorn</tr>. <i>Tunuk sa rúsas,</i> Rose thorns. <form>{&mdash;|tunuk} sa isdà</form> sharp spines on a fish. <number>2</number> a <tr>sliver</tr> or <tr>thorn</tr> which has pricked the foot and gotten lodged. <i>Tudlísa ang tunuk,</i> Get the <tr>splinter</tr> out with a needle. <number>3</number> <tr>prick</tr> <i>Tambáli ang tunuk,</i> Put medicine on the prick. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> get a sliver or nail into one&apos;s foot. <i>Natunuk siyag lansang maung gititanus,</i> He got tetanus because he stepped on a nail. <i>Makatunuk nang tuyum,</i> Sea urchins can prick you. <form>{hi&N;-|hinunuk}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b4(1)]</itype> cut the spines from fish. <i>Piligru ang ítu ug dì hinungkan (hinunukan) kay l&amacracu;,</i> It is dangerous if you don&apos;t cut off the spines from the catfish because they are poisonous. <form>{-un|tunukun}, tungkun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>thorny</tr>. <form>alambri nga {-un|tunukun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>barbed wire</tr>.

<p id=19743><form>túnul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> convey s.t. to s.o. by hand. <i>Mitúnul siya sa kamut arun pagpahalípay nákù,</i> He offered his hand to congratulate me. <i>Itúnul ra nákù nang libru,</i> Would you hand me that book?

<p id=19744><form>tunung</form> directly at a point. <i>Naigù ang langgam tunung giyud sa kasingkásing,</i> He hit the bird <tr>right</tr> in the heart. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC3; ac6]</itype> <tr>zero in</tr> on a mark, go directly to s.t. <i>Dihà mutunung sa íyang úlu ang napúwak nga lubi,</i> The coconut fell right on his head. <i>Dì kung katunung sa buhù sa dágum kay kurug ku,</i> I cannot get the thread into the eye of the needle because I&apos;m shaking. <i>Wà magtúnung ang mga batúnis ug uhális,</i> The buttons and buttonholes don&apos;t exactly align. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256; c16]</itype> happen at a particular time, <tr>coincide</tr> with a certain other event. <i>Natunung nga bakasiyun ang pagkasakit nákù,</i> I got sick just when it was vacation time. <i>Itunung (tungna) sa Anyu Nuybu ang inugurasiyun,</i> The inauguration is set for New Year&apos;s day. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12; a2]</itype> get s.t. (good or bad) as one&apos;s lot. <i>Nakatunung kug silyang tughuun sa sinihan,</i> Of all the seats in the theater I had to pick one that was infested with bugs. <i>Tungna nang asáwang paraygun,</i> Pick a wife that asks for affection. <number>4</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> have the presence of mind to do s.t. <i>Hastang kulbáa nákù. Wà ku katunung ug dágan,</i> How shaken I was! I didn&apos;t have the presence of mind to run. <pos>n</pos> s.t. aimed at. <i>Milakaw siyang way tunung,</i> He walked out without going anywhere in particular. <i>Láin siyag tunung,</i> He has an evil purpose.

<p id=19745><form>túnuy</form> <pos>a</pos> fully <tr>ripe</tr>, <tr>well-ripened</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB3(1); c1]</itype> be, become <tr>fully ripe</tr>, make s.t. ripe. <i>Karbúru mauy mutúnuy (mupatúnuy) sa ságing,</i> Calcium carbide will make the fruit fully ripe. <i>Matunuy na ning mga prútas inigabut nátù sa Manílà,</i> These fruits will be fully ripe when we arrive in Manila.

<p id=19746><form>tunyu nu</form> (from <ix>tuntu nu</ix>) would I be foolish enough to do that? <i>Nagdúngan mig swildu <pb n=1062>apan akuy íyang pabayrun sa sini. Tunyu nu?</i> We were both paid at the same time, but he wants me to pay his way to the show. He must think I&apos;m stupid or s.t.

<p id=19747><form>tupà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; b8]</itype> alight, settle down or land without effective control. <i>Ang ayruplánu mitupà sa humayan,</i> The airplane <tr>crash-landed</tr> in the rice field. <i>Ang balay nga natupaan sa kwítis nasúnug,</i> The house on which the rocket fell caught fire.

<p id=19748><form>tupad</form> <xr>= <sc>tapad</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19749><form>túpas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>topaz</tr>.

<p id=19750><form>tupay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> become unconscious with the pupils of the eyes moving upward and with twitching of the fingers. <i>Idalì ang bátà sa huspital sa dílì pa tupayun,</i> Bring the child at once to the hospital before it becomes unconscious. <pos>n</pos> state of being unconscious.

<p id=19751><form>tupi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> give <tr>haircut</tr>. <i>Kinsang barbirúha nagtupi nímu,</i> Which barber gave you a haircut? <pos>n</pos> <tr>haircut</tr>. <form>{pa-|patupi}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> get a haircut.

<p id=19752><form>túpi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26C3; c]</itype> be <tr>flush</tr> with. <i>Sipilyáhi ang bagà nga tabla hangtud magtúpi ang duha,</i> Plane down the thick board until the two boards are exactly <tr>even</tr>. <i>Abunúhi ang karsáda hangtud matúpi sa daplin,</i> Put fill in the road until it is flush with the edge. <i>Pun-a ang tangki hangtud ang túbig matúpi sa ngábil,</i> Fill up the tank until the water is flush with the rim.

<p id=19753><form>tupiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>topic</tr>. <i>Pirmi lang pulitiku ang tupiku nga ílang hisgútan,</i> Politics is always the topic of their conversation.

<p id=19754><form>tupit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c16]</itype> speak with mispronunciations from speech defects, similar to lisping in English, but with a substitution of /s/ for /t/. (The tongue is said to stick to the roof of the mouth.) <i>Nagtupit ang dílà sa nagdiskursu tungud sa nirbiyus,</i> The man who was giving a speech was so nervous he started to lisp.

<p id=19755><form>tuplak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <number>1</number> push s.o. or s.t. away. <i>Gituplak sa bátà ang básu sa bintánà,</i> The child pushed the glass out of the window. <number>2</number> push a cock toward another to induce the second cock to fight. <i>Ituplak ning sunúya sa usa arun masakmalan tung usa inig-áway níla,</i> Shove this cock toward the other one so that I can grab it when they fight.

<p id=19756><form>tuplas</form> <xr>= <sc>pantuplas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19757><form>tupluk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>mischievous</tr>, full of pranks. <i>Gibutangag íhì sa tupluk dakù ang pláwir bís ni Mám,</i> The prankster put urine in the teacher&apos;s vase. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become mischievous.

<p id=19758><form>tupluk<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tulpuk</sc> (but not doubled).</xr>

<p id=19759><form>tuptup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>cut</tr> s.t. from its base or stem. <i>Tuptúpa ang pakù kay dì nà iapil paglútù,</i> Cut the wings off. Don&apos;t include them with what you are cooking. <number>1a</number> cut s.t. with long strokes at the base. <number>2</number> cut s.t. straight across, not tapering. <i>Kinsay nagtuptup ug tupi nímu?</i> Who cut your hair evenly all around your head? <pos>a</pos> being cut straight across, not tapering. <form>{pina-|pinatuptup}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make s.t. cut straight across.

<p id=19760><form>túpù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac6]</itype> pair a boy and a girl off half jokingly. <i>Kusug siyang mutúpù piru nagpabíling dága,</i> She loves to match others off, but she herself stays single. <i>Tupúa sila labun parisun,</i> Match them up. They make such a good pair. <form>tupùtúpù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>matching couples</tr>.

<p id=19761><form>túpuk</form> <xr>= <sc>tulpuk</sc>.</xr> <form>{(&rarr;)|tupuk}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> hole in the ear for earrings. <number>2</number> holes in an animal&apos;s ears through which a rope is passed.

<p id=19762><form>túpung</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> of the same height, <tr>even</tr> along the top or bottom. <i>Túpung ang íyang mga ngípun,</i> Her teeth are all of the same height. <number>2</number> reaching an equally high state of excellence. <i>Si Magsaysay walay túpung,</i> No one is as great as Magsaysay. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23S; a2b2]</itype> <tr>reach</tr> to a certain height or level. <i>Ang ákung kalágut mitúpung na sa lángit,</i> My anger reaches the heavens. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make things even. <i>Tupúnga ang tiil sa silya arun dì magkindangkindang,</i> <tr>Even up</tr> the chair legs so it won&apos;t wobble back and forth. <i>Dílì na siya hitupngan sa pagkapalikíru,</i> No one is as great a philanderer as he is. <number>3</number> <itype>[C; a]</itype> be of the same height. <i>Nagtúpung sila,</i> They are of the same height. <i>Tupúngun nátù ang mga tanum,</i> Let&apos;s cut the plants even along the top. <form>{&mdash;|túpung} ang tiil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C3]</itype> be <tr>dead</tr> (humorous). <number>4</number> <itype>[C; c]</itype> compare height, ability. <i>Dílì ikatúpung ang íyang abilidad,</i> There is nothing that can compare to his ability. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>alinupung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19763><form>tupus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>suck</tr> on s.t. in the mouth to eat it or get the juice out. <i>Nagtupus kug biksdrap kay árat ákung tunlan,</i> I am sucking on a cough drop because I have a sore throat. <number>2</number> toy or play with s.t. with the mouth. <i>Madaníhung ngábil nga íyang gitupsan sa pagháluk níla,</i> The attractive lips he played with as they kissed. <form>tinupsan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pulp</tr> or juiceless flesh after eating. <i>Silhíga ang mga tinupsan human mug pangus ug tubu,</i> Sweep away the pulp after you&apos;re through eating your sugar cane. <form>talinupsan</form> <pos>a</pos> for clothes to <corr>be </corr>moist, almost dry after having been wet. <i>Mabulkas na ang hinalay kay talinupsan na,</i> You can take in the clothes now because they are <tr>almost dry</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125]</itype> be, become almost dry.

<p id=19764><form>tupus<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>take over</tr> the task of s.o. incapable or unavailable. <i>Kinsa may mutupus <pb n=1063>sa ímung trabáhu ug mulakaw ka,</i> Who takes over your chores when you go out? <i>Tupsa ring ákung buhatun kay kahilanatun ku,</i> Take over my work because I feel feverish. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> make up for the time lost or missed. <i>Buhían mu run kun tupsan ninyu ang klási sa Sabadu,</i> I will dismiss you now if you make the class up on Saturday. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>make up for</tr> s.t. lacking by s.t. very good. <i>Púlus sila burung piru gitupus sa ílang anak nga utukan,</i> They are mostly imbeciles, but their one brainy child made up for it. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> time used for make-up. <i>Ang trabáhu run tupus sa pista upisiyal gahápun,</i> Today&apos;s work is to make up for yesterday&apos;s holiday. <number>2</number> s.t. just as much so in exactly the opposite way. <i>Dátù mi niadtu, tupus pud run nga kakha tukà,</i> We used to be just as rich as we are poor now. <i>Pagkagarbúsang bayhána, tupus sa íyang bánang labihan kamapaubsánun,</i> She is just as stuck up as her husband is modest.

<p id=19765><form>tupwak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> push s.t. into a place below in one motion. <i>Wà pa hibaw-i kung kinsay mitupwak sa Dun didtu sa pangpang,</i> The person who pushed the Don over the cliff has not been identified yet.

<p id=19766><form>*turágas</form> <form>{pa-|paturágas}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do s.t. indiscriminately without any aim or connection and in unrestrained amounts. <i>May katarúngan nà siyang mupaturágas ug gastu kay kwartáhan man sab,</i> He has a reason to spend his money <tr>carelessly</tr>. He has plenty anyway. <i>Pangutan-a nang piríku dì ba mupaturágas nà rug tubag,</i> Address the parrot and it will answer you with a stream of <tr>random</tr> talk. <i>Nagpaturágas lag pamusil sa kabalayan ang mga bandídu,</i> The bandits sprayed the houses with bullets <tr>indiscriminately</tr>. <form>{pina-|pinaturágas}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. done carelessly and without restraint. <number>2</number> <tr>extemporaneous dialogue</tr>. <i>Nalingaw kaming namínaw sa mga pinaturágas ni Karpu ug ni Bituy sa radiyu,</i> We had great fun listening to the extemporaneous dialogue of Karpo and Bitoy over the radio.

<p id=19767><form>tural</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>natural</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19768><form>turátuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[P; b4]</itype> go directly s.w. without paying attention to the surroundings because of anger, embarrassment or some other emotion. <i>Mipaturátuy (miturátuy) siyag lakaw bísag ámung gitawag,</i> She walked straight ahead even though we called her.

<p id=19769><form>túray</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>scold</tr> s.o. heavily. <i>Mutúray nà siyag kasábà ug dì nímu tumánun ang íyang súgù,</i> She really scolds you if you don&apos;t do what she says.

<p id=19770><form>turban</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>turban</tr> or similar headdress. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear a turban.

<p id=19771><form>turdbis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>third base</tr> in a ball game. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B36]</itype> be on third. <i>Wà giyuy nakaturdbis námù,</i> Not one of us got to third base.

<p id=19772><form>túri</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tower</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>rook</tr> in chess. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> confine in a tower. <i>Gitúri sa hárì ang bigáun níyang anak,</i> The king shut his promiscuous daughter up in a tower. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> stay high above from a vantage position overlooking the view below. <i>Nagtúri ka man giyud dihà. Maáyu kaáyu ang ímung paglantaw sa byú, nu?</i> You are up high over there. You sure get a good view, don&apos;t you?

<p id=19773><form>túrik</form> <xr>= <sc>kuslad</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19774><form>turíkì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; b5]</itype> have intercourse with (humorous). <i>À, muturíkì ka níya bísag gadaut siya,</i> My! You&apos;d have intercourse with her even if she is menstruating?

<p id=19775><form>turil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>corral</tr> for a herd. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a1]</itype> enclose herd in a corral. <i>Kinahanglang turilun ang mga báka arun way makabuhì,</i> The cows must be fenced in so that none can escape.

<p id=19776><form>túrins</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Torrens Title</tr>, a document attesting full legal ownership of a piece of land. <form>titulu {&mdash;|túrins}</form> <xr>= <sc>túrins</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19777><form>turíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jeans</tr>, women&apos;s tight-fitting <tr>trousers</tr> that look like matadors&apos; trousers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make jeans.

<p id=19778><form>turista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tourist</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> be, become a tourist.

<p id=19779><form>turíti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>male calf</tr> of a cow or carabao.

<p id=19780><form>turiyal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>disturb</tr>, <tr>bother</tr> s.o. <i>Way muturiyal nímu ug wà kay útang,</i> Nobody disturbs you if you don&apos;t owe anybody anything. <i>Way makaturiyal nákù ug akuy matúlug,</i> Nobody dares disturb me when I&apos;m asleep.

<p id=19781><form>turíyu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> adolescent or young bull or male water buffalo. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> for a male calf to get to be full grown. <i>Ikadáru na nang nati ug maturíyu,</i> You can use the calf for plowing when it gets to be nearly full-grown.

<p id=19782><form>turíyu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bullfight</tr>.

<p id=19783><form>turka</form> <xr>= <sc>turku</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=19784><form>turku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Indian</tr> or <tr>Pakistani</tr>.

<p id=19785><form>turnilyu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bolt</tr>, <tr>screw</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> use a screw or bolt on s.t. <i>Turnilyúhi na lang nang kaptanan arun malig-un,</i> Just use a screw on that handle so it is strong. <form>lísù sa {&mdash;|turnilyu}</form> <xr>= <sc>lísù sa buut</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>lísù</sc>.</xr> <form>turnilyadur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>screw driver</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a]</itype> use a screw driver on s.t.

<p id=19786><form>turnilyu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>finger wrestling</tr> where the players join their middle fingers with their arms resting on a table and the one who succeeds in turning the other&apos;s hand over wins. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> have finger wrestling.

<p id=19787><form>turníru</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>turnu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19788><form>turniyu, turníyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tournament</tr>. <number>2</number> sports tournament. <i>Turníyu sa baskitbul,</i> Basketball tournament. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>turnilyu<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; ab3c]</itype> <pb n=1064>have a tournament. <i>Turniyúhun (turniyúhan) nátù ang kamut sa prinsísa,</i> We will have a tournament for the princess&apos; hand. <i>Ug iturníyu ang kamut sa prinsísa, sigurádung ikay únang mapárut,</i> If the princess&apos; hand is offered in a tournament you would surely be the first to get beaten. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> have a sports tourney. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>turnilyu<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=19789><form>turnu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> turn or cut s.t. in a lathe. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> thread screws or bolts. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lathe</tr> or machine for threading screws and bolts. <number>2</number> thread on a screw or bolt. <form>turnuhan</form> <xr>= <sc>turnu</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr> <form>turníru</form> <pos>n</pos> lathe operator.

<p id=19790><form>turnu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>turn</tr> to do s.t. <i>Ímu nang turnu paglútù karun,</i> It&apos;s your turn to cook now. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> assign turns to do s.t. <i>Kinsay gaturnu nímu paggwardiya sa Duminggu?</i> Who assigned you to stand guard on Sunday? <form>turnuturnu, turnuhay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rotation system</tr> or by turn. <i>Turnuturnu ang paglimpyu sa simbahan ug átù karun,</i> Cleaning the church is done by turns, and it&apos;s our turn today. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> do by turns. <i>Magturnuturnu (magturnuhay) tag báyad sa sugà,</i> Let&apos;s take turns paying the light bill.

<p id=19791><form>turnus</form> <xr>= <sc>tugnus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19792><form>turpáda</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; b5]</itype> <tr>attack</tr>, encounter in a fight. <i>Kausa ra nang kasúha ug abugádung dikampanilya ang muturpáda ánà,</i> You&apos;ll have no trouble getting your case dismissed if you have a good lawyer fighting it for you. <i>Ang mga girilyang nagturpáda sa garisun sa Hapun,</i> The guerrilla who attacked the Japanese garrison. <i>Ug mga bátà ang makaturpáda íning makaúna, mangurímaw ni dáyun,</i> If the children attack this food, nothing will be left of it. <i>Ug makigturpáda kag bastus, mabastus kag apil,</i> If you fight with low people, you bring yourself down to their level.

<p id=19793><form>turpi</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>acting stupid</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> <tr>become stupid</tr>. <i>Nagkadugay ka ning trabahúa nagkaturpi sab ka,</i> The longer you are on the job the dumber you act. <form>{&mdash;|turpi} ang dílà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> for the tongue to be twisted, as after a heart attack, or when a person is in the throes of death.

<p id=19794><form>turpídu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>torpedo</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> torpedo. <i>Giturpídu ang bapur ug natundag,</i> The ship was torpedoed and sank.

<p id=19795><form>tursi</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>twist</tr> a limb, <tr>wring</tr> a neck. <i>Buhíi nang kurta arun dì ku tursíhun nang ímung buktun,</i> Drop that knife or I&apos;ll twist your arm. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>turn</tr>, <tr>rotate</tr> s.t. <i>Tursihag hínay ang manabíla,</i> Turn the steering wheel slowly.

<p id=19796><form>turta</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. thick, heavy <tr>cake</tr> made from flour and eggs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make, have <ix>turta</ix>.

<p id=19797><form>turtilya, turtilyas</form> <pos>n</pos> egg <tr>omelette</tr>, s.t. cut up fine and fried with a beaten egg. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> have, make an omelette.

<p id=19798><form>turtur</form> <xr>= <sc>tuktur</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19799><form>túru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> male <tr>carabao</tr> or <tr>bull</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|túru} nga báka</form> <tr>bull</tr>. <number>2</number> male in a paid sex show. <number>2a</number> <xr>= <sc>pa-</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become a bull. <i>Kusgan kaáyu ning turiyúha ug matúru na,</i> This young bull will be very strong when it gets to be a full-grown bull. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>pa-</sc>, <i>v1a.</i></xr> <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> make s.o. work like a horse. <i>Kusug nang agalúnang mutúru ug súgù, apan dílì maáyung manwildu,</i> That employer makes his employees work like a horse but he doesn&apos;t pay them well. <form>{pa-|patúru}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bullfight</tr>. <number>2</number> sexual intercourse displayed for a fee. <number>3</number> fraudulent coin-tossing game where the coins have two heads. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> hold a bullfight. <number>1a</number> have a sex exhibition. <number>1b</number> cheat with fraudulent coins. <number>2</number> have <tr>sexual intercourse</tr> (humorous). <form>turutúru</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>pa-</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>pa-</sc>, <i>v1a.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> work hard like a horse. <i>Giturutúru nákù ang trabáhu apan wà ku swildúhi,</i> I worked like a horse, but I wasn&apos;t paid. <form>paturutúru</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> pretend to be brave like a bull.

<p id=19800><form>turuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B23(1)46; b(1)]</itype> <tr>sprout</tr>, grow from the surface. <i>Wà makaturuk ang similya tungud sa húlaw,</i> The seeds did not sprout because of the drought. <i>Uy gitugkan ug buhuk si Upaw,</i> My, old Baldy has grown hair. <number>2</number> <itype>[B246; b(1)]</itype> for a feeling to develop. <i>Makapaturuk (makaturuk) sa katáhap ang íyang linihukan,</i> His behavior arouses suspicion. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sprout</tr>. <i>Pandúngi ang mga bag-ung turuk arun dì maláyà,</i> Cover the new sprouts so they don&apos;t wither. <number>2</number> sprout on coconut fruit. <i>Tul-id giyud ang turuk sa binhiun nga lubi,</i> The sprouts of the coconuts for planting are really straight. <number>3</number> <tr>penis</tr> (humorous euphemism). <form>{&mdash;|turuk} banwa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. growing without being planted and taking space, like a weed. <number>2</number> a person who is useless and occupies space. <i>Turuk banwa nà siya sa pamilya; dílì mutábang sa buluhatun,</i> That person just occupies space in the house. He does not help with the chores. <form>tugkan</form> <pos>n</pos> coconut having a sprout. <form>turukturuk</form> <pos>n</pos> tiny <tr>growths</tr> which emerge. <i>Unsa nang mga turukturuk sa ímung náwung, bugas?</i> What are those growths on your face, pimples?

<p id=19801><form>turun</form> <pos>n</pos> confection made with chopped nuts mixed in honey or sugar paste. <form>{&mdash;|turun} diman</form> peanut nougat. <form>{&mdash;|turun} dipíli</form> pili nut nougat. <form>banána {&mdash;|turun}</form> sweet made of bananas wrapped in <corr sic=hin>thin</corr> <corr sic=pastery>pastry</corr> and fried. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6c1]</itype> make a nut nougat. <form>{-is(&larr;)|turúnis}</form> <xr>= <sc>turun</sc> (plural).</xr>

<p id=19802><form>turung</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. worn as a <tr>head covering</tr>. <i>Pagdalag <pb n=1065>turung kay tingálig muulan,</i> Bring s.t. to cover your head with. It might rain. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> protect the head, wear a head covering. <i>Nagturung siyag dáhun sa ságing arun dì mahumud sa ulan,</i> He protected his head with a banana leaf to avoid getting wet in the rain.

<p id=19803><form>turungturung</form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>top shells</tr> reaching <measure reg="2.6 cm">1&Prime;</measure>.

<p id=19804><form>turúrut</form> <xr>= <sc>tarúrut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19805><form>turus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> squash s.t. between the two thumbnails. <i>Turusa (tudsa) dáyun ang kútu arun dílì mawálà,</i> Squash the louse immediately with your thumbnails before it disappears. <number>2</number> defeat or crush helpless opposition in a fight. <i>Ipakítà ku kaninyu unsáun pagturus nang ámung mga kaáway,</i> I&apos;ll show you how we will crush our enemy.

<p id=19806><form>turut</form> <pos>a</pos> exhibiting a lack of judgment or propriety in doing s.t. or speaking; <tr>silly</tr>. <i>Manginhas magpáyung mu rag si turut,</i> You are a <tr>dodo</tr>! You want to take an umbrella to go shellfishing! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be, become silly.

<p id=19807><form>turútut</form> <xr>= <sc>tarúrut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19808><form>turútuy</form> <pos>a</pos> a person much shorter than normal. <i>Taastaas sad ang turútuy kay sa inánu,</i> A very short person is taller than a dwarf. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become a very short person.

<p id=19809><form>tús<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> set up a volleyball. <form>{-ir|túsir}</form> <pos>n</pos> one whose job is to set up the ball for the spiker. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; c1]</itype> be the one who sets the ball up for the spiker.

<p id=19810><form>tús<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>túlus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19811><form>tusak</form> <xr>= <sc>tuslak</sc>.</xr> <form>{(&larr;)|túsak}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B13; a12]</itype> pierce s.t. with several holes. <i>Kinsay nagtúsak áring tilun?</i> Who put a lot of holes in the screen? <i>Tusákun kag dunggab ug hisakpan ka sa tulisan,</i> The bandits will stab you all over if they catch you. <form>tusaktusak</form> <xr>= <sc>tusak</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19812><form>tus-ap<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> put up a candidate. <i>Musugut kag tus-ápun (itus-ap) kang kandidátu?</i> Are you amenable if they put you up as a candidate?

<p id=19813><form>tus-ap<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tús<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=19814><form>tusdik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> prick a pustule. <i>Ayaw ug líhuk samtang nagtusdik ku sa ímung talubig,</i> Don&apos;t move while I prick your pustule.

<p id=19815><form>túsik<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>drinking party</tr> (slang). <i>Ági unyà sa ámù karung gabíi kay may túsik didtu,</i> Come by the house tonight because we&apos;re holding a drinking party. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> have a drinking party or <tr>drink</tr> alcoholic beverage (slang).

<p id=19816><form>túsik<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>peck at</tr>. <i>Nabúta siya kay gitúsik íyang mata sa langgam,</i> He became blind because a bird pecked at his eyes. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC; a12]</itype> start a cockfight by letting the cocks peck each other once. <i>Kinahanglang tusíkun ang mga manuk arun maglábuk dàyun,</i> The cocks must be set to pecking at each other so that they will fight at once. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pecking</tr>. <number>2</number> setting of cocks to peck at each other.

<p id=19817><form>tuskig</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>stiff</tr>, <tr>crisp</tr>. <i>Tuskig nga papil dibangku,</i> Crisp banknotes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> <tr>stiffen</tr>. <i>Ang nagtuskig níyang karsúnis,</i> His well-<tr>starched</tr> trousers. <i>Nagkatuskig na ang minatay,</i> The body is getting stiff. <form>{&mdash;|tuskig} ug líug</form> be <tr>haughty</tr>. <form>{pa-|patuskig}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> act <tr>haughty</tr>. <i>Nagpatuskig lang siya sa líug dihang gipangayúag hinábang,</i> She acted haughty when I asked her for a contribution.

<p id=19818><form>tuslak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> drive s.t. into s.t. so as to pierce it. <i>Kinsay nagtuslak sa prútas ug kutsilyu?</i> Who stuck a knife into the fruit? <i>Gituslak níla ang mata sa higanti,</i> They pierced out the giant&apos;s eyes.

<p id=19819><form>tuslù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>dip</tr> part of s.t. into s.t. for a short period of time. <i>Ígù ra kung mituslù sa túbig. Walà ku magdúgay kay tugnaw,</i> I just dipped into the water for a minute. I didn&apos;t stay long because it was cold. <i>Nagtuslù ug asin nga nagkaug mangga,</i> He is eating mangoes dipping them in salt.

<p id=19820><form>tuslub</form> <xr>= <sc>tunlub</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19821><form>tuslud</form> (from <ix>sulud</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>dunk</tr> s.t. in a liquid or solid, partially or completely. <i>Maputì ang karning ituslud sa inínit túbig,</i> Meat gets pale if it is dunked into hot water. <i>Ituslud ang mangga sa asin,</i> Stick the mango in the salt.

<p id=19822><form>tusluk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>prick</tr> or <tr>poke</tr> s.t. by driving s.t. pointed into it. <i>Kinsay nagtusluk íring kík nga nabúhù man?</i> Who poked a finger in the cake? It has a hole in it. <i>Tuslúka ang mata sa kuntra,</i> Poke your finger into your opponent&apos;s eyes. <number>1a</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> be had for sexual purposes. <i>Hituslukan na nang bayhána sa íyang uyab,</i> The girl has had relations with her boy friend. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> plug into a socket. <i>Itusluk únà ang kurd únà mamalantsa,</i> Plug the cord in before you iron. <pos>n</pos> <tr>electric plug</tr>. <form>{-anan|tuslikanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>electric outlet</tr>, <tr>socket</tr> for plugging s.t. into.

<p id=19823><form>tusmaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> get into a pool of liquid, completely or partly. <i>Natusmaw ku sa lápuk,</i> I fell into a muddy pool. <i>Ang mga nagámit nga kubyirtus mauy itusmaw sa túbig ínit,</i> The silver they used should be immersed into the boiling water.

<p id=19824><form>tusmud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> push s.o. forward. <i>Natumba ang bátà nga íyang gitusmud,</i> The child that he pushed fell down. <number>2</number> <tr>dip</tr>, <tr>immerse</tr> s.t. big in water. <i>Siyay nagtusmud sa katring dughuun didtu sa dágat,</i> He immersed the <pb n=1066>bed that was full of bugs into the sea. <i>Natusmud siya sa kanal,</i> He fell into the ditch. <number>3</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>wade</tr>, immerse oneself in the water.

<p id=19825><form>tusnub</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>dip</tr>, <tr>dunk</tr> or <tr>sop</tr> in liquid, esp. s.t. which absorbs and becomes soft. <i>Alkuhul nga gitusnúban sa gápas,</i> Alcohol the doctor dipped the cotton in. <i>Itusnub ang dúnat sa kapi,</i> Dunk the doughnut in the coffee. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>wade</tr>, <tr>swim</tr> in water.

<p id=19826><form>tusnud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>dip</tr>, <tr>immerse</tr> a part of s.t. or s.t. held. <i>Kinsa tung nagtusnud sa ákung &umacracu; sa túbig?</i> Who held my head under the water? <i>Natusnud sa lápuk ang íyang sapátus,</i> He stepped into the mud puddle with his shoes.

<p id=19827><form>tust&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>toast</tr> bread or noodles. <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>toasted</tr>. <form>tustádu</form> <pos>n</pos> toasted bread or noodles. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> toast bread or noodles.

<p id=19828><form>tustus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> roll up a tobacco leaf. <i>Tustúsa dáan nang tabákù arun dì ka na magtustus pa sa uma,</i> Roll the tobacco beforehand so you won&apos;t have to roll any in the field. <pos>n</pos> rolled tobacco leaf, <form>{-in-|tinustus}</form> <pos>n</pos> rolled up tobacco leaf. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> smoke rolled tobacco. <i>Magtinustus gihápun siya bisag makapalit nag abánu,</i> He insists on smoking rolled tobacco even though he can afford cigars now.

<p id=19829><form>túsu</form> <pos>a</pos> clever in deceiving others. <i>Túsu kaáyu si Baúhay maung nakalingkawas siya gíkang Amúay,</i> Mr. Turtle was very clever so he managed to escape from Mr. Monkey. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become clever in deceiving. <form>patusutúsu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>pretend</tr>. <i>Nagpatusutúsu kung hubug arun agákun ku níya,</i> I <tr>acted</tr> drunk so she would help me walk.

<p id=19830><form>tusud</form> <xr>= <sc>turus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19831><form>túsug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a4]</itype> for s.t. sharp to pierce and get stuck into s.t. <i>Bildu mauy nakatúsug sa ligid,</i> A glass splinter got stuck into the tire. <i>Natúsug ang íyang kamut sa dágum,</i> He pricked his hand with a needle. <form>{(&rarr;)|tusug}</form> <pos>n</pos> a sliver stuck into s.t.

<p id=19832><form>túsuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> pierce s.t. through s.t. else, <tr>skewer</tr>. <i>Tusúka ang isdang tap-anan,</i> Skewer the fish you are going to broil. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> make a hole in the earlobe. <form>{(&rarr;)|tusuk}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>skewer</tr>. <number>2</number> a hole in the ear for earrings or in animals for the tether rope.

<p id=19833><form>túsup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> suck the juice out of s.t. <i>Tusúpi ang lísu únà iluwà,</i> Suck the juice out of the seed before you spit it out.

<p id=19834><form>tusuy</form> <xr>= <sc>sutuy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19835><form>tutal</form> it does not matter, in any event [so-and-so] is the case. <i>Pahagka ku bi. Tutal, kaslúnun na man ta,</i> Let me kiss you. <tr>Anyway</tr>, we are going to get married. <i>Ákù lang gibilin. Tutal, mubalik pa man ku,</i> I just left it. Anyway, I was going to come back for it. <i>Ngánu bag mag-úlan? Tutal, díay ákung páyung,</i> What if it rains? Anyway, I have my umbrella.

<p id=19836><form>tútal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>add up</tr>. <i>Búgù giyug aritmitik ang nagtútal íni,</i> The one who added this up must be slow in arithmetic. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> <tr>sum up</tr> advantages and disadvantages, pro&apos;s and con&apos;s, etc. <i>Ug tutálun nátù, ikaw ang alkansi sila ang nak aganansiya,</i> If we <tr>analyze</tr> it, you are on the losing end and they gain.

<p id=19837><form>tutbras</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>toothbrush</tr>. <number>2</number> action of brushing the teeth. <i>Ngípun nga walay tutbras,</i> Teeth which haven&apos;t been brushed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> brush s.o.&apos;s teeth for him or false teeth. <i>Tutbrási nang ímung marpil uy,</i> Brush your false teeth! <form>{pa&N;-|panutbras}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> brush one&apos;s teeth. <i>Ayawg panutbras kay anúgun ang kìkì,</i> Don&apos;t brush your teeth because it&apos;s a waste of food particles.

<p id=19838><form>tuthu</form> <xr>= <sc>taluthu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19839><form>tutpik</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>toothpick</tr>. <i>Mu ra ka mag tutpik kaniwánga,</i> You are as thin as a toothpick. <number>2</number> variety of <tr>croton</tr> (<ix>kalípay, 2</ix>) with very slender leaves. <form>{pa&N;-|panutpik}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> pick one&apos;s teeth.

<p id=19840><form>tútù</form> title for a male a little older than the speaker, used also as a nickname.

<p id=19841><form>tùtù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> crush, pound s.t. until it is soft or tender but without breaking it into pieces. <i>Magtùtù kug anghilika itampuy sa nagsakit kung ngípun,</i> I&apos;ll crush bryophyllum leaves to use as a compress for my teeth. <i>Ákung tùtúun ang karning bipstikun,</i> I&apos;ll pound the meat for beefsteak. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> bruise a part of the body, the lips, with a violent impact.

<p id=19842><form>tùtù<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>talùtù<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=19843><form>tutub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> cover the mouth of a container securely by laying s.t. over it and tying it. <i>Ákung tutubun (tutbun, tutuban, tutban) ang ginamus,</i> I&apos;ll cover the salted fish securely. <pos>n</pos> cover tied around the mouth of a container. <form>{-in-|tinutub}</form> <pos>n</pos> vessel or container which is covered securely.

<p id=19844><form>tutug</form> <xr>= <sc>tultug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19845><form>tútuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> stand upright unaided or on one&apos;s own. <i>Dì pa mutútuk ning batáa,</i> This child can&apos;t <tr>stand unsupported</tr> yet. <i>Dì pa ku makatútuk kaáyu kay lúya pa ang ákung láwas,</i> I can&apos;t <tr>stand alone</tr> very well yet because I&apos;m weak. <form>udtung {&mdash;|tútuk}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>high noon</tr>.

<p id=19846><form>tútuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>stare</tr>. <i>Nagsiga íyang mata nga mitútuk nákù,</i> He stared at me with his eyes blazing. <i>Itútuk ímung mga mata sa kahitas-an,</i> Fix your eyes to the heavens. <form>{-in-ay|tinutukay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c3]</itype> stare at each other.

<pb n=1067>

<p id=19847><form>tutul, tútul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>object</tr>. <i>Ug way mututul, aprubádu na ang musiyun,</i> If no one objects, the motion is approved. <i>Unsang partíha sa risulusiyun ang ímung gitutúlan?</i> What part of the resolution are you objecting to? <form>{ma-un|matutulun}</form> <pos>a</pos> characterized with <tr>reluctance</tr> or <tr>disobedience</tr>.

<p id=19848><form>tutunlan</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>túlun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19849><form>tútut</form> <xr>= <sc>títit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19850><form>tútuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S; b]</itype> suck the breast. <i>Nagtutuy pa siya pagkamatay sa íyang inahan,</i> He was still sucking his mother&apos;s breast when she died. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> be at the sucking stage. <i>Dì pa mabulag ang ituy sa inahan kay nagtutuy pa,</i> You can&apos;t take the puppy away from its mother because it is still suckling. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> lick s.o.&apos;s boots. <i>Kusug kaáyu ang íyang pag-usbaw sa katungdánan kay maáyu mang mutútuy,</i> He easily got to the top because he never hesitates to lick his superiors&apos; boots. <pos>n</pos> <tr>breast</tr>. <form>tutyan, tutyanan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>feeding bottle</tr>.

<p id=19851><form>tuu, túu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>right hand</tr>, right side of a pair. <i>Kusgan ang tuu (túu) nákung kamut kay sa wala,</i> My right hand is stronger than my left. <form>{&mdash;|túu} nga kamut</form> <number>a</number> <tr>right hand</tr>. <number>b</number> <tr>right-hand man</tr>. <i>Siya ang túung kamut sa dátù,</i> He is the right-hand man of the Datu. <number>2</number> <tr>right side</tr>. <i>Likù sa tuu,</i> Turn to the <tr>right</tr>. <form>wala ug {&mdash;|túu}</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>wala</sc>.</xr> <form>{pa-(&rarr;)|patuu}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> go to keep to the right side. <i>Ipatuu ang kutsi labinag likuun,</i> Keep to the right, esp. on the curves. <form>tuuhun, tuhuun, tùhun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>right-handed</tr>. <number>2</number> implement made to be used by a right-handed person. <i>Ayawg gámit sa tuuhun nga sundang ug walhun ka,</i> Don&apos;t use a right-handed bolo if you are left-handed.

<p id=19852><form>túu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>believe</tr>. <i>Mutúu ka bag anting-anting?</i> Do you believe in amulets? <i>Tuhúan (tuúhan) ba gud nang pulitiku?</i> Should you believe that politician? <number>2</number> <itype>[AP; b(1)]</itype> <tr>heed</tr>. <i>Dì ka man gud mupatúu (mutúu) ug tambágan,</i> It&apos;s because you don&apos;t <tr>listen</tr> when you&apos;re given advice. <i>Sultíhi siya kay ikaw ray íyang tuhúan,</i> Tell him because you&apos;re the only one he listens to. <form>Mitúu Aku</form> <pos>n</pos> The <tr>Apostles Creed</tr>. <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>mituáku</bx>. <i>Mangadyì kitag Mitúu Aku,</i> Let us pray the Apostles&apos; Creed. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> return, come back to a place after having supposedly left it for good (from the portion of the Apostles&apos; Creed that reads, &lsquo;And He will come back ...&rsquo;). <i>Anía mibálik na sab ku mu ra ug nagmitúu aku,</i> Here I am back again, like it said in the Apostles&apos; Creed. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13P]</itype> keep going back and forth. <i>Magmituáku ang kalag pagtúman sa pinitinsiya,</i> A soul keeps coming back on earth to do penance. <i>Ang pagkalimtánun mauy makamituáku (makapamituáku) nákù sa balay,</i> I&apos;m so forgetful I keep going back and forth to the house. <form>tuutúu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>superstitious belief</tr>. <i>Tuutúu lang nga taw-an nang dakíta,</i> It&apos;s nothing more than <tr>superstition</tr> that that banyan is inhabited by spirits. <form>patuutúu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> deceive by pretending to be s.o. or teaching s.t. false. <i>Nagpatuutúu siyang asindíru apan diay musimus nga dakù,</i> He pretends to be a big landowner when he&apos;s nothing more than a beggar. <i>Unsa na say íyang gipatuutúu?</i> What k.o. foolishness is he trying to make you believe now? <pos>n</pos> false ideas which s.o. is disseminating. <i>Patuutúu lang nà sa mga panatiku,</i> That&apos;s nothing but <tr>baloney</tr> that the fanatics try to make you believe. <form>matuutuuhun, matuhùtuhuun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>superstitious</tr>, given to false beliefs. <form>tinuhúan, tinuúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>beliefs</tr>, religious or otherwise. <form>tuluhúan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>article of belief</tr>. <form>{pag-|pagtúu}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>belief</tr>, feeling of certainty that s.t. is a certain way. <form>matuúhun</form> <tr>a</tr> having faith.

<p id=19853><form>tuub, túub<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. treatment by steam whereby the patient is set before a pot of boiling water with herbs or a representative of whatever caused his illness, and a blanket is put over him so that he can breathe in the steam; or if it is just a part of his body that is ailing, the ailing part is exposed to the steam. <number>1a</number> a similar treatment with tobacco smoke instead of steam for stomach ailments. <number>2</number> the material which is thought to have caused the illness, used in the <ix>tuub</ix> treatment. <form>{(&larr;)|túub}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> treat with <ix>tuub</ix>. <i>Gitúub (gituúban) ku ang katul sa ákung tiil,</i> I treated the rash on my foot with steam.

<p id=19854><form>túub<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> unopened palm fronds, esp. coconut. <i>Nagkúhà siyag túub pára sa bindíta sa lukay,</i> He gathered some unopened coconut fronds for Palm Sunday.

<p id=19855><form>tuud</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>stump</tr> of tree or post. <i>2</i> unextracted stump of a tooth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> get worn down to stumps.

<p id=19856><form>túud<sub>1</sub></form> <number>1</number> particle indicating agreement with an explanation or after being reminded. <i>Túud nu, pídi man diay run,</i> That&apos;s right, isn&apos;t it? It is payday today, isn&apos;t it? <number>2</number> particle indicating that s.t. is in accordance with what happened before. <i>Túud man, ílang gilúkat ang ságing,</i> And <tr>so</tr>, they uprooted the banana plant (after having discussed doing so). <number>3</number> particle used to disprove s.t. that was negated: <tr>actually</tr>, <tr>in reality</tr>. <i>Wà kunu siyay áluy, dúna túud,</i> He said he does not have a penny, but actually he does. <number>4</number> is it true that? <i>Muanhi túud ang mayur ugmà,</i> Is the mayor <tr>really</tr> coming tomorrow? <number>5</number> to be <pb n=1068>sure [so-and-so] is the case, but ... <i>Barut túud ni apan barátu man sab,</i> This may be a poor kind but it is cheap anyway. <form>{(&rarr;)|tuud}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23C23; a12]</itype> get to be <tr>serious</tr> about a game or joke, make s.t. serious. <i>Ayaw palábig kundat níya kay mutuud nà siya,</i> Don&apos;t fool around too much with him because he will take it <tr>seriously</tr>. <i>Ang ílang háluk sa maung isína nagtúud kay giganáhan na sila,</i> Their kiss in that scene became real when they both got stimulated. <i>Muundang nà siya nímug sugsúg ug ímung tud-un,</i> He will stop teasing you if you treat him seriously. <form>{pa&N;-(&rarr;)|panuud}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>{-in-(&rarr;)|tinuud}</sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> get emotionally <tr>agitated</tr> in a game or argument. <i>Manuud siyag ikalális,</i> He gets agitated if you argue with him. <form>{-in-|tinuud}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>true</tr>, <tr>correct</tr>, <tr>genuine</tr>. <i>Tinúud nga kaági,</i> True-life story. <i>Tinúud nga diyamanti,</i> Genuine diamond. <number>2</number> do well. <i>Háwid ug tinúud arun dì ka mahúlug,</i> Hold on tight so you don&apos;t fall. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become true, correct, genuine. <i>Pastilag matinúud tung ákung damgu!</i> My! What if that dream of mine were to come true! <form>{(&rarr;)|tuud}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> <tr>make true</tr> a statement, threat. <i>Pastilan ug tinud-un níya tung íyang hulga!</i> My! What if he makes his threat come true! <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> do s.t. in a true or serious way, not jokingly or half-heartedly. <i>Wà muy dag-anan ug mutinuud (maninuud) na kug dúwà,</i> You haven&apos;t a hope if I play <tr>seriously</tr>. <form>{-inin-(&rarr;)|tininuud}</form> <pos>a</pos> in a <tr>genuine</tr>, <tr>serious</tr> way. <i>Tininuud tung íyang paningkámut,</i> It was an <tr>honest-to-goodness</tr> effort of his. <form>tinud-anay, tinud-ay, tinuuray</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sincere</tr>. <i>Tinud-anay (tinuuray) nga pagbásul,</i> Sincere regret. <number>2</number> serious, not playfully. <i>Tinud-anay tung ílang áway dì dráma,</i> Their fight was <tr>real</tr>, not just a put-on. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> get to be serious from mere joke or play. <form>kamatuúran</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>truth</tr>. <i>Dúnay kamatuúran ang íyang gisulti,</i> There is some truth in what he said. <number>2</number> <tr>proof</tr>. <i>Ayawg kíha ug wà kay kamatuúran,</i> Don&apos;t sue if you have no proof. <form>{ma-|matúud}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>true</tr>. <i>Mau kini ang matúud nga hinungdan,</i> This is the true reason. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc1]</itype> <tr>prove</tr>. <i>Kini ang mumatúud sa ímung salà,</i> This will prove your guilt. <i>Namatud-an siyang sad-an,</i> He was proven guilty. <i>Imatúud (matuúra) kanà sa hukmánan,</i> Prove that in court. <form>{pakama-|pakamatúud}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> consider s.t. true. <form>matinud-ánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sincere</tr>, <tr>true</tr>. <i>Matinud-ánun siya sa íyang sáad,</i> He is true to his promises. <form>{pagka-in-|pagkatinúud}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>truth</tr>, <tr>reality</tr>. <i>Sa pagkatinúud wà kuy pagsálig nímu,</i> In reality I don&apos;t trust you. &dagger;

<p id=19857><form>túud<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3S; a1b]</itype> know how, show s.o. how to get to a place. <i>Nakatuud ku sa ílang hayid-áwut,</i> I know where their hide-out is. <i>Tuúra ang gitagúan nákung kúkis,</i> Locate the place I hid the cookies at. <i>Tuúri kug háin ang sikrítung agiánan,</i> Lead me to the secret passage. <form>{pa-|patúud}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>show</tr> s.t.; show off s.t. <i>Mipatúud ang bátà sa íyang samad sa íyang inahan,</i> The child showed his mother his wound. <i>Nagpatúud ang hambugíru sa íyang bag-ung kutsi,</i> The braggart is showing off his new car.

<p id=19858><form>túug</form> <pos>n</pos> the young unopened leaf of a buri palm, esp. processed into strips to be used in weaving mats and bags.

<p id=19859><form>tuuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>choke</tr>. <i>Kusgánung kamut ang mituuk níya,</i> Strong hands choked her. <i>Natuuk ang manuk sa kaugalíngung hukut,</i> The chicken choked on the string that tied it.

<p id=19860><form>tuun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>teach</tr>. <i>Si Mánuy nagtuun nákug bisiklíta,</i> My brother taught me how to ride a bicycle. <i>Tun-i siyag languy,</i> Teach her how to swim. <number>2</number> <tr>study</tr>. <i>Dì na nà tun-an kay sayun da,</i> You don&apos;t have to study that because it&apos;s easy. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>study</tr>, put s.t. under consideration. <i>Tun-an pa nákù tung ímung tanyag,</i> I will still put your offer under consideration. <number>3</number> <tr>attend school</tr>. <i>Ayawg intra sa ínum kay nagtuun ka pa,</i> Don&apos;t take up drinking because you are still studying. <number>4</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> <tr>learn from</tr>. <i>Didtu siya makatuun ug panúlis sa munti,</i> He learned about robbery in prison. <form>{-anan|tuunanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. to be studied. <form>{hi&N;-(&larr;)|hinúun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>studious</tr>. <i>Hinúun siya, buguk lang,</i> He studies hard, only he is stupid. <form>matulun-ánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>educational</tr>, giving lessons. <i>Matulun-ánun nga lílas,</i> An <tr>instructive</tr> movie. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146]</itype> be instructive, educational. <form>{pag-|pagtuun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>studies</tr>, <tr>schooling</tr>. <i>Nahúnung ang íyang pagtuun paggíra,</i> His studies were interrupted by the war. <number>2</number> action of putting s.t. under analytic consideration or advisement. <form>pagtulun-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>teachings</tr>, <tr>moral lesson</tr>. <i>Pagtulun-an sa sugilánun,</i> The moral lesson of the story. <number>2</number> <tr>lesson</tr> in school. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>kat-un</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19861><form>túun</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B3]</itype> be directed towards a <tr>focus</tr>. <i>Wà ku makakità nímu kay didtu magtúun ang ákung mata sa ladlad,</i> I didn&apos;t see you because my eyes were <tr>focused</tr> on the wares that were on display. <i>Dì matúun ang gás sa bàbà sa butilya ug way imbúdu,</i> Kerosene will not get directly into the mouth of the bottle if there is no funnel. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put a child on the patty. <form>{(&rarr;)|tuun}<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> happen <tr>coincidentally</tr> with s.t. else. <i>Wà mi magsábut kay natuun lang sa pag-abut,</i> We had no agreement. We just arrived at the same time by coincidence. <i>Ituun ug Duminggu ang kasal,</i> <pb n=1069>Have the wedding on a Sunday.

<p id=19862><form>tuung</form> <pos>n</pos> a raised frame of wood or iron placed around an opening to prevent foreign materials from getting in. <i>Butangi ug tuung ang bàbà sa atábay arun dílì mubálik ug sulud ang túbig,</i> Put a <tr>coaming</tr> around the mouth of the well so that water will not get back in. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> construct a coaming around s.t. <i>2</i> <form>{&mdash;|tuung} ang tutunlan</form> <itype>[B46]</itype> get a <tr>lump in the throat</tr> from emotion. <i>Mutuung ang ákung tutunlan nga magtan-aw sa mga bátang manligdas lang sa asíras magabíi,</i> I get a lump in my throat when I see children sleeping on the sidewalks at night.

<p id=19863><form>túuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6(1)]</itype> press a hot object over s.t. <i>Nasúnug ang panaptun nga íyang gituúyan sa ínit kaáyung plantsa,</i> The cloth got burnt when she pressed it with a hot <tr>iron</tr>.

<p id=19864><form>tuwa</form> <xr>= <sc>tula</sc>.</xr> <form>tuwatúwa, tinuwatuwa</form> <xr>= <sc>lunaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19865><form>tuwad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> be in position with the rump stuck out and the body downward. <i>Ilúhi nang bátà kay nagtuwad na,</i> Wipe the child now that he is thrusting out his rump. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A3P]</itype> for s.t. horizontal to be lower at the tail end. <i>Nagtuwad ang sakayan kay bug-at sa prúwa,</i> The boat is low at the bow because too much weight was put in front. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>overturn</tr> s.t. bottoms up. <i>Tuwara (ituwad) ang bisiklíta kay átung ilísag ligid,</i> Turn the bicycle <tr>upside down</tr> because I will change the tire. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> scrutinize s.t. carefully to find a mistake or falsity. <i>Bísan pag tuwarun ninyu siya, mudukut giyud siya sa íyang diklarasiyun,</i> No matter how well you cross-examine him he will stick to his declaration. <form>{(&larr;)|túwad}</form> <pos>n</pos> (colloquial&mdash;somewhat coarse) <number>1</number> fruit or product of one&apos;s effort or endeavor. <i>Nabúhì siya sa dílì íyang túwad,</i> He lives on the fruit of others&apos; efforts. <number>2</number> <tr>children</tr>. <i>Akuy musúgù sa ákung mga anak kay ákung túwad,</i> I&apos;ll tell my children what to do because they are my own. <number>3</number> <tr>work</tr>. <i>Ákù ang tanang túwad sa balay,</i> I do all the work in the house. <form>{(&larr;)|túwad} tuáli</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> be in complete <tr>disorder</tr>, <tr>disrupted</tr>. <i>Usba nang trabahúa kay nagtúwad tuáli,</i> Redo that work because it&apos;s all a <tr>mess</tr>. <i>Dì ku mangilábut ninyu bísag túwad tualíhun ninyu ang inyung kinabúhì,</i> I won&apos;t interfere. You may make a mess of your life if you like. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>tuwad</sc>, <i>v3.</i></xr> <form>{ka-(&larr;)|katúwad} tuáli</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be in complete disorder. <form>tuwadtúwad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>tuwad</sc>, <i>v3.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> expend a great deal of effort in s.t. <i>Nagtuwadtúwad ug hílak,</i> Crying for all he was worth.

<p id=19866><form>túwag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> be <tr>disarranged</tr>, in <tr>disarray</tr>. <i>Matúwag (magtúwag) ang mga butang sa báy ug náay mga bátà,</i> The things in the house will be in disarray when there are children around. <pos>a</pos> <tr>in disarray</tr>.

<p id=19867><form>tuwak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> cross over the summit of a hill and come down on the other side. <i>Mutuwak kag pitu ka bungtud úsà ka muabut sa gilagíngan,</i> You have to cross over seven hills before you reach the logging area. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> for rain to stop. <i>Manlákaw ta kun mutuwak na ang ulan,</i> We will go if the rain stops.

<p id=19868><form>tuwang<sub>1</sub>, túwang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> <tr>tilt</tr> s.t. over on its side, for s.t. to tilt. <i>Hináyag tuwang ang táru ug maghuwad kag túbig,</i> Tilt the can slowly when you pour water out. <i>Twangun (ituwang) ku ning lamísa kun manihúun nímug baráha,</i> I&apos;ll turn the table over if you manipulate the cards. <pos>a</pos> <tr>tilted</tr>. <i>Tuwang kaáyu ang tartanilyang gisakyag tambuk,</i> The cart was tilted very much to one side when a fat man got on it. <form>tuwangtúwang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB1456; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>rock</tr>, make s.t. rock from side to side. <i>Nagtuwangtúwang ang barku sa kadagkù sa balud,</i> The boat was rocking from side to side in the big waves. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> carry water using the <ix>tuwangtúwang</ix>. <pos>n</pos> strong strip of bamboo for carrying cans of water which are suspended from it. <form>{&mdash;|tuwangtúwang} nga silya</form> <pos>n</pos> rocking or <tr>swivel chair</tr>. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|tuwangan}</form> <xr>= <sc>tuwangtúwang</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=19869><form>tuwang<sub>2</sub>, túwang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B234]</itype> for rain or a storm to stop. <i>Nagkatuwang na ning bagyúha kay mihínay na ang hángin,</i> This storm is abating now as the wind has subsided.

<p id=19870><form>túwang<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>help</tr> s.o. work. <i>Tulu kaming mitúwang kaníya ug dáru,</i> Three of us helped him plow. <i>Dì siya makatúwang nímu pag-alsa sa kaban,</i> He cannot help you lift the trunk. <form>{ka-|katúwang}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>helper</tr>.

<p id=19871><form>túwang<sub>4</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> having a big gap in age or financial state. <i>Adunáhan siya ug kabus ku. Túwang kaáyu ang ámung kahimtang,</i> She&apos;s wealthy and I&apos;m poor. We come from very different social positions.

<p id=19872><form>tuwas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B6; b6]</itype> be <tr>dislocated</tr>, <tr>displaced</tr>. <i>Mituwas (natuwas) ang íyang síku sa pagkahúlug níya,</i> His elbow was dislocated when he fell down. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>unlodge</tr>, <tr>unwedge</tr> s.t. lodged in a place. <i>Ikaw bay nagtuwas sa ali sa agiánan?</i> Did you remove the bar that blocked the passageway? <i>Átung twasun (ituwas) nang punúan sa lubi nga nasángit sa káhuy,</i> We&apos;ll remove the coconut trunk that is wedged in the branches of the tree.

<p id=19873><form>tuwatúwa</form> <xr>= <sc>lunaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19874><form>tuwaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>tuaw</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> <tr>weep</tr>, <tr>cry</tr>. <i>Unsay gituwawan nímu, ang sintimintal nga <pb n=1070>salída?</i> What are you crying about? The sentimental movie?

<p id=19875><form>tuway<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> vaginal secretion having an extremely foul odor. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> have such secretions. <i>Gituway sigúru siya kay bakag kaáyug ági,</i> She must have a vaginal disorder because she leaves behind a very foul odor. <form>{-un(&larr;)|tuwáyun}</form> <pos>a</pos> having a very odourous vaginal secretion.

<p id=19876><form>tuway<sub>2</sub>, túway</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible <tr>clam</tr> about <measure reg="7.7 cm">3&Prime;</measure> in width. <form>{pa&N;-|panuway}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> go <tr>clamming</tr>. <i>Nanúway mi sa katunggan,</i> We <tr>gathered clams</tr> in the mangrove swamps. <form>tuwaytuway<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>clam</tr>.

<p id=19877><form>tuwaytuway<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4]</itype> for s.t. to be almost cut off and dangle loosely. <i>Nagtuwaytuway ang íyang tudlù nga hápit na maputul,</i> The part of his finger that is almost cut off is dangling loosely. <i>Ang pagkadugmuk sa íyang bitíis mauy nakatuwaytuway (nakapatuwaytuway) niíni,</i> His leg is now dangling loosely because it was crushed.

<p id=19878><form>tuwaytúway<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>kneecap</tr>. The kneecap of a dead person is believed to give a person special powers, e.g. invisibility.

<p id=19879><form>tuwaytúway<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. annual, erect and branched <tr>herb</tr> of open waste spaces: <bio>Bidens cynapiifolia</bio>.

<p id=19880><form>tuwittuwit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chirp</tr> of birds. <i>Makalingaw pamináwun ang mga tuwittuwit sa mga langgam,</i> It&apos;s amusing to listen to the birds chirp. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for birds to chirp.

<p id=19881><form>túy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> simplified version of <ix>takyan</ix> where the players pass the <ix>takyan</ix> around in a circle and whoever misses gets punished by having to serve all the players in turn. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> play <i>túy.</i>

<p id=19882><form>túy<sub>2, 3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>túluy<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=19883><form>túya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>freak</tr>. <i>Túya nà siya kay dakù kaáyug úlu,</i> He is a freak because he has a very large head.

<p id=19884><form>túyà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB234; c16]</itype> <tr>sway</tr>, move in a rocking-like motion. <i>Mga balud nga mutúyà sa sakayan,</i> Waves that <tr>rock</tr> the boat. <i>Kusug mutúyà ang sakayan ug way karga,</i> An empty boat rocks a lot. <pos>n</pos> <tr>swaying</tr>. <form>tuyàtúyà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB46; c1]</itype> <tr>rock</tr>, <tr>sway</tr>. <i>Nagtuyàtúyà ang dáhun nga natágak,</i> The leaves are <tr>waving</tr> back and forth as they fall.

<p id=19885><form>*túyang</form> <form>{pa-|patúyang}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> keep on doing s.t. on a lavish scale. <i>Kun magpatúyang kag ínum, lagmit ulsirun ka,</i> If you don&apos;t curb your drinking, you will surely get an ulcer. <i>Gipatuyángan siya sa gustu,</i> She was allowed to do what she wanted to do without restraint. <form>{pina-an|pinatuyangan}</form> <pos>n</pos> one who is allowed to have his way. <form>{mapa-un|mapatuyangun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>immoderate</tr>, <tr>lavish</tr> in quantity.

<p id=19886><form>tuyarug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> stand erect, motionless, and speechless. <i>Sa ákung kalísang mituyarug na lang ku sa daplin nga hálus muginháwa,</i> Due to my fright I stood motionless in the corner, hardly daring to breathe.

<p id=19887><form>tuyátuy</form> <xr>= <sc>turátuy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19888><form>tuybù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b6]</itype> <tr>project</tr> from the surface, <tr>stick up</tr> into the air. <i>Mituybù lang ang isla nga bag-ung nahimugsù,</i> The newly-born island just <tr>sprang up</tr>. <i>Súngay nang nagtuybù sa ímung úlu?</i> Is that a horn <tr>protruding</tr> from your head? <pos>n</pos> <tr>projection</tr>, <tr>mound</tr>, or the like.

<p id=19889><form>tuyhad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> straighten up the body, stay erect. <i>Tuyhad ug panagsa kun maglingkud kag dúgay,</i> Stretch out once in a while when you sit for some time. <i>Ituyhad (tuyhára) ímung láwas kanang mu rag kadíti,</i> Carry your body straight like a cadet. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> arrive from s.w. empty-handed (lit. not bent under a load). <i>Miabut gíkan sa byáhi walà giyuy dala. Nagtuyhad lang,</i> He arrived from his trip empty-handed. <pos>a</pos> straight, erect of the body.

<p id=19890><form>tuyhákaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> crane one&apos;s neck, pull oneself up tall. <i>Mituyhákaw ang tanang líug paglabay sa artista,</i> They all craned their necks when the actress passed by. <i>Nagtuyhákaw ang kubra nga pumapaak,</i> The cobra pulled itself up when it was preparing to strike.

<p id=19891><form>tuyhud</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>straight</tr>, not bent or crooked. <i>Tuyhud kaáyu ning kahúya,</i> This piece of wood is very straight. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB3; c1]</itype> stretch out straight. <i>Nagkatuyhud na ang ákung buktun nga napíang,</i> I can gradually begin to <tr>straighten out</tr> the arm I had sprained. <i>Nagtuyhud lang nang tawhánang nagbayli,</i> That man is dancing straight and stiff.

<p id=19892><form>tuytuy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> fruit bud, small immature fruits. <form>{pa&N;-|panuytuy}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> grow small fruits. <i>Ang bungáhuy makapanuytuy ug dalì ug daúban,</i> A fruit tree will develop fruit buds if you expose it to smoke.

<p id=19893><form>tuytuy<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make a sound to call chickens. <i>Ánad kaáyung manúka kay mudúul dáyug tuytúyun,</i> What a tame chicken! As soon as you go &lsquo;toytoy&rsquo; to it, it comes. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>túkuy</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sound for calling chickens. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>túkuy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19894><form>tuytuy<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> any small <tr>clay jar</tr>. <number>2</number> one-node bamboo tube container for water or palm toddy. <number>3</number> small-mouthed, thick, dark-green glass <tr>jug</tr> holding about <measure reg="23 liters">six gallons</measure>, used for storing coconut palm toddy. A network of rattan with a handle on both sides is fitted around the body. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|tuytuyan}</form> <xr>= <sc>tuytuy<sub>3</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=19895><form>túyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>soy sauce</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b]</itype> put soy sauce in s.t.

<p id=19896><form>tuyù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wound</tr> esp. one which is inflicted in <pb n=1071>a contest. <i>Ang sunuy nakadaug sa tárì nga walay tuyù,</i> The rooster won in the cockfight without a wound. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> inflict a <tr>wound</tr>. <i>Padag-un ku ang ímung manuk ug makatuyù sa ákù,</i> I will let your cock win if it can inflict a wound on mine.

<p id=19897><form>túyù<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>túyu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19898><form>túyù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>purpose</tr>, <tr>intention</tr>. <i>Unsay ímung túyù dinhi,</i> What is your purpose in being here? <form>{&mdash;|túyù} kay</form> [so-and-so] happened because s.t. else was or was not done. <i>Gihilantan ka túyù kay nagpasinguwan,</i> You got a fever because you went and played in the rain. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; a2b]</itype> do s.t. <tr>on purpose</tr>. <i>Pasaylúa ku kay wà nákù tuyúa,</i> I&apos;m sorry. I didn&apos;t do it <tr>intentionally</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> do s.t. for a specific purpose. <i>Nagtúyù mig bingka pára sa ímung pag-abut,</i> We made rice cakes esp. for your arrival. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> with full awareness of what one is doing. <i>Agwanta ka kay gituyúan nímu ang pagpangasáwa níya,</i> You have to put up with it because you married her on purpose. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> do s.t. to provoke trouble for oneself, <tr>ask for it</tr>. <i>Ngánung dì ka man mutúug sugúun? Magtúyù ka lang giyud,</i> Why do you not do as you&apos;re told? You are <tr>asking for it</tr>. <i>Ngánung misaka ka dihà? Nagtúyù kag mahúlug?</i> Why are you climbing up there? You want to fall or s.t.? <form>{pa&N;-|panúyù}</form> <xr>= <sc>pamaláyi</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>bayi</sc>.</xr> <form>{pa&N;-(&rarr;)|panuyù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> get <tr>angry</tr>. <i>Nanuyù si Pápa kay dúgay kang naulì,</i> Daddy is angry because you went home late. <form>{-in-|tinúyù}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>intentional</tr>. <i>Dì tu aksidinti. Tinúyù tu,</i> It was no accident, it was intentional. <number>2</number> esp. done. <i>Tinúyù nga gulà sa pasku,</i> <tr>Special</tr> Christmas issue. <number>3</number> <tr>arranged marriage</tr>. <i>Ang kaminyúung tinuyù lagmit dílì mutunhay,</i> Arranged marriages rarely last. <form>{-in-an|tinuyúan}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. done <tr>intentionally</tr>. <i>Wà ku magbásul kay tinuyúan man tu nákù,</i> I don&apos;t regret it because I did it on purpose. <form>{ka-an|katuyúan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>aims</tr>, <tr>purpose</tr>. <i>Gibatbat ang katuyúan sa kumpirinsiya,</i> They explained the aims of the conference. <form>{pina-|pinatúyù}</form> <pos>n</pos> specifically made or designed. <i>Pinatúyù nga lingkuránan sa bátà,</i> Chair esp. designed for children. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|tuyuun}</form> <pos>a</pos> place not conveniently accessible. <i>Tuyuun ílang balay kay náa sa intiriyur,</i> Their house is not convenient to get to because it is far from the road.

<p id=19899><form>túyub</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. itchy and painful fistula growing under the skin in the rectum, penetrating deeply, eventually reaching the intestines. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> get <i>túyub.</i>

<p id=19900><form>tuy-ud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB3; c16P]</itype> <tr>straighten</tr> s.t. out, be <tr>straight</tr>. <i>Sayun dang pagtuy-ud (pagpatuy-ud) sa kulut nga buhuk,</i> It&apos;s easy to <tr>straighten</tr> out curly hair. <i>Dì kung katuy-ud sa mubung katri,</i> I can&apos;t lie with my legs straight on a short bed.

<p id=19901><form>túyuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB2S3; aPc]</itype> <tr>spin</tr>, <tr>turn around</tr>, <tr>go around</tr> s.t.; make s.t. spin or go around. <i>Pagnga ang púnu kay nagtuyuk pag turntíbul,</i> Turn the victrola off because the turntable is still turning. <i>Isakay siya sa bisiklíta ug itúyuk sa plása,</i> Put him on your bicycle and take him around the plaza. <form>{nag-(&rarr;)|nagtuyuk} pa ang búla</form> nobody can be sure (lit. the ball is still <tr>rolling</tr>). <i>Bísag dakù na tag bíyà, ayaw mug kadiskárids kay nagtuyuk pa ang búla,</i> Even if we are way behind, don&apos;t get discouraged because the game isn&apos;t over. <form>{pa-|patúyuk}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> have s.o. turn or spin s.t. around. <i>Ipatúyuk ning istinsil sa tigmimyugrap,</i> Have the mimeographer run this stencil off. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|tuyukan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>axle</tr>. <i>Nabálì ang tuyukan sa garapinyíra,</i> The axle in the ice-cream freezer broke. <form>tuyuktúyuk nga silya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>swivel chair</tr>. <form>tuyuktúyuk ug pangítà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> search here and there. <i>Timan-ig maáyu ása mu nà ibutang arun dì ka magtuyuktúyuk (matuyuktúyuk) ug pangítà ug kinahanglánun na,</i> Make a note of where you put it so you do not go around everywhere looking for it when you need it. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|tuyukun}</form> <pos>n</pos> general term for cone and olive shells.

<p id=19902><form>twagsik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> for a liquid to fly and scatter. <i>Ngánu bang mutwagsik (manwagsik) man nang íyang láway igsulti níya,</i> Why does his saliva spray out when he talks? <i>Palayù ta kay nagpanwagsik ang túbig gíkan sa panghugasan,</i> Let&apos;s keep out of the way of the water splashing from the drain.

<p id=19903><form>twakdug</form> <pos>n</pos> bamboo <tr>wall stud</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> attach the bamboo studs. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> use s.t. for bamboo wall studs.

<p id=19904><form>twásik</form> <xr>= <sc>tuásik</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19905><form>twilb-uklak</form> <pos>n</pos> twelve o&apos;clock in the sight of a weapon.

<p id=19906><form>twirka</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>screw</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b]</itype> fasten with a <tr>screw</tr>. <form>lisù sa {&mdash;|twirka}</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>lísù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19907><form>twis, twist</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>twist</tr>, name of a dance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> dance the twist.

<p id=19908><form>tyábaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b3]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>cry out</tr> in pain, grief, and the like. <i>Nagtyábaw ang nanganak sa kasakit,</i> The woman delivering is hollering in pain. <i>Unsay ímung gityabáwan? Namatyan kag iring?</i> What are you <tr>hollering</tr> about? A cat of yours that died? <number>2</number> complain for being unable to bear s.t. <i>Mityábaw nang lungsud sa kamahal sa palalítun,</i> The people are beginning to scream at high prices. <number>3</number> for animals to make their normal <pb n=1072>loud noise. <i>Nagtyábaw ang kábaw,</i> The carabao lowed.

<p id=19909><form>tyágù</form> (from <ix>Tyágù</ix>, <ix>short for</ix> <bx>Santiyágu</bx>, a name of a person) <pos>a</pos> <tr>poker-faced</tr> when making jokes. <i>Tyágù kaáyu ning tawhána kay dílì mukatáwa bísag kataw-anan,</i> He really is poker-faced because he makes the funniest jokes without cracking a smile. <form>{&mdash;|tyágù} nu</form> exclamation of discomfiture when one is the butt of a joke or prank. <i>Tyágù nu! Labi nag dílì ikay tumung sa kumidiya!</i> It sure is funny, isn&apos;t it, esp. when the joke is not on you!

<p id=19910><form>tyáli</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>inch</tr>. <i>Walu ka tyáli ang gilapdun sa papil,</i> The paper is eight inches wide.

<p id=19911><form>tyának</form> <xr>= <sc>mantiyának</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19912><form>tyangaw</form> <xr>= <sc>pyangaw.</sc></xr>

<p id=19913><form>tyanggi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>marketplace</tr>. <form>{pa&N;-|panyanggi}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> <tr>go marketing</tr>. <i>Tagái kug kwartang ipanyanggi,</i> Give me some money to go marketing with. <form>tyanggihan</form> <pos>n</pos> marketplace and its vicinity.

<p id=19914><form>tyatru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>theater</tr>.

<p id=19915><form>tyimpu</form> <xr>= <sc>timpu</sc> in all meanings except <i>n6.</i></xr>

<p id=19916><form>tyinda</form> <xr>= <sc>tinda</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19917><form>tyubíbu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>merry-go-round</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> ride, construct a merry-go-round.

<p id=19918><form>tyúning purk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tuning fork</tr>.

<p id=19919><form>tyúpì</form> <xr>= <sc>tayúpì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=19920><form>tyuríya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>theory</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> apply a certain theory, hunch, technique of diagnosis. <i>Átung tyuriyáhun ning makináha, bir ug dì ba muandar,</i> Let&apos;s try my hunch on this machine and see if we can&apos;t get it to start.

<p id=19921><form>tyusupíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>theosophy</tr>.

<p id=19922><form>tyútur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tutor</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB156; b(1)]</itype> <tr>tutor</tr> s.o., be a tutor. <i>Sayun siyang tyutúran kay brayit,</i> It&apos;s easy to tutor him because he is bright.




</text>
</TEI.2>
