<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN" [

<!ENTITY larr       CDATA "&#x2190;"            -- leftwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY rarr       CDATA "&#x2192;"            -- rightwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY glots      CDATA "&#x0294;"            -- glottal stop -->

<!ENTITY amacr      CDATA "&#x0101;"            -- a with macron -->
<!ENTITY imacr      CDATA "&#x012B;"            -- i with macron -->
<!ENTITY umacr      CDATA "&#x016B;"            -- u with macron -->

<!ENTITY amacrgra   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0300;"    -- a with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY imacrgra   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0300;"    -- i with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY umacrgra   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0300;"    -- u with macron and grave -->

<!ENTITY amacracu   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0301;"    -- a with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY imacracu   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0301;"    -- i with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY umacracu   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0301;"    -- u with macron and acute -->

<!ENTITY acaron     CDATA "a&#x030C;"           -- a with caron -->
<!ENTITY ucaron     CDATA "u&#x030C;"           -- u with caron -->
<!ENTITY icaron     CDATA "i&#x030C;"           -- i with caron -->

<!ENTITY schwa      CDATA "&#x0259;"            -- schwa (turned e) -->

]><TEI.2 lang=en>
<teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
        <titleStmt>
            <title>A Dictionary of Cebuano Visayan</title>
            <author>John U. Wolff</author>
        </titleStmt>
    </fileDesc>
    <profileDesc>
        <langUsage>
            <language id=en>English</language>
            <language id=en-US>English (United States)</language>
            <language id=ceb>Cebuano</language>
        </langUsage>
    </profileDesc>
</teiHeader>
<text>
<body>
<pb n=1>
<div1 n=A type=Letter>
<head>A</head>


<p id=2><form>a</form> <pos>n</pos> letter A. <form>walay &mdash;</form> <tr>illiterate</tr>.

<p id=3><form>-a</form> subjunctive direct passive affix. <xr>see <sc>-UN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4><form>-a(&larr;)</form> <number>1</number> affix added to nouns forming words which refer to a specific one of several: <i>Kanang isdáa, dílì kadtu,</i> That fish there, not that one further over. <i>Háing baláya ang íla?</i> Which house is theirs? <number>1a</number> added to possessive pronouns: the particular one that belongs to [so-and-so]. <i>Dakù ang amúang balay, gamay tung iláha,</i> Our house is large, and theirs is small. <number>2</number> affix added to adjectives to form exclamation. <i>Dakúa uy!</i> My! How big it is! <i>Patyun tikaw, irúa ka!</i> I&apos;ll kill you, you dog you! <i>Ngilngígang awtúha à!</i> That&apos;s some car!

<p id=5><form>á</form> particle used as a pause word before starting to speak. <number>1</number> as a filler. <i>Á, muanhi ka ugmà?</i> Um, are you going to come here tomorrow? <number>2</number> deprecating or showing unimportance of what just preceded. <i>Á, paríha ra nákù,</i> Oh, it&apos;s all the same to me. <i>Á, nagkumidiya lang siya,</i> Oh, he&apos;s just joking. <number>3</number> showing mild disapproval. <i>Á, dì nà mahímù,</i> Oh, you can&apos;t do that. <number>4</number> recalling or conceding s.t. <i>Á, duha diay tu,</i> Oh, yes. There were two of them, weren&apos;t there. <number>4a</number> preceding s.t. just found out. <i>Á, Lítu diay ímung ngálan,</i> Oh, so your name is Lito. <i>Á, kanindut,</i> Oh, how nice! <number>5</number> expressing relief. <i>Á, nahuwasan ku,</i> Ah, what a relief!

<p id=6><form>à</form> particle preceding or following a sentence with an adjective predicate. <number>1</number> dismissing s.t. as impractical, too easy, impossible, etc. <i>À, mu ra diay nà? Kasayun à!</i> Oh, is that all there is to it? How easy it is! <i>À, ása man ku mutúu nímu,</i> Hm, you think I could believe you? <number>2</number> showing disapproval. <i>À, hináya nímung mulíhuk,</i> Hm! You sure work slowly! <number>3</number> showing surprise. <i>À, kanindut nímug sinínà,</i> How come you have such a beautiful dress on!

<p id=7><form>&amacrgra;</form> <xr>= <sc>ÁLÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=8><form>aba<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>breast</tr> of fowls.

<p id=9><form>aba<sub>2</sub></form> exclamation of pleasure and surprise. <i>Aba! Nakadaug ku,</i> My! I won!

<p id=10><form>ábà tuy</form> (from <ix>sábà dihà untuy</ix>) <tr>shut up!</tr> <i>Ábà tuy, maáyu ka lang sa tayáda, wà kay tadtad,</i> Shut up! You&apos;re great at talking, but let&apos;s see you do s.t.

<p id=11><form>abaa</form> particle indicating disapproval (literary). <i>Abaa! Mah&umacracu;g ka gánì dihà!</i> Stop that! You might fall!

<p id=12><form>*abab</form> <form>taga-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hillbilly</tr>. <form>pakataga-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> act, treat like, consider a hillbilly. <i>Gipakatagaabab lang ku ninyu. Ihása,</i> You just think I&apos;m a hillbilly. Don&apos;t try to fool me. <form>&mdash; disáya</form> <pos>a</pos> be the boss and not henpecked.

<p id=13><form>ab-ab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>chew</tr> to pieces. <i>Ab-ábun sa irù ang íyang hikut,</i> The dog will chew up his rope. <number>2</number> eat away, erode. <i>Ang pagluib ni Maríya nag-ab-ab sa íyang balatían,</i> Maria&apos;s infidelity ate away at his insides. <i>Giab-ab ang íyang pinútì sa tayà,</i> His sword was eaten away by rust. <number>3</number> fester. <i>Ang nag-ab-ab kung núka,</i> My festering wound.&dagger;

<p id=14><form>abad</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>abbot</tr>.

<p id=15><form>ábag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> give material help, help do work. <i>Kinsa may mag-ábag nímu sa ímung pag-iskuyla?</i> Who will help pay for your schooling? <i>Abági ku áring pagsilhig,</i> Help me sweep. <pos>n</pos> help given. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> helper.

<p id=16><form>abaga</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sweet potatoes</tr> growing from the outer vines and not from the main root.

<p id=17><form>abága</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shoulder</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2SN; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> take financial <tr>responsibility</tr>. <i>Abagáhun (pangabagáhun, pangabagáhan) ni Mánuy níya ang galastúhan sa pag-iskuyla,</i> His brother will shoulder his school expenses. <number>2</number> take responsibility for accomplishing s.t. <i>Kita giyuy muabága (mangabága) áning prugramáha,</i> We must undertake to carry out this program. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>ABÁGA</sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr> <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>right-hand-man</tr>. <form>abagáhun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>broad-shouldered</tr>.

<p id=18><form>*abáhu</form> <form>&mdash; kunsidirasiyun, dispusisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> bound by s.o.&apos;s will. <i>Abáhu (báhu) <corr sic=kunsididirasiyun>kunsidirasiyun</corr> ku sa ákung bána,</i> I am bound by my husband&apos;s decisions.

<p id=19><form>abaka</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>abaca plant</tr>: <bio>Musa textilis</bio>. <number>2</number> <tr>abaca fiber</tr>. <form>abakahan, abakanhan, abakal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>abaca plantation</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> own an abaca plantation.

<p id=20><form>abakáda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>alphabet</tr>.

<p id=21><form>abakal</form> <xr>see <sc>ABAKA</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=2>

<p id=22><form>abal</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>BALBAL</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>ABAT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=23><form>abalu</form> <pos>n</pos> assessed <tr>value</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB56; b5c]</itype> assess, be assessed at. <i>Ug ikaw muabalu sa ákung yútà, ayawg dak-a,</i> If you assess my land, don&apos;t set it too high. <i>Ang yútà miabalu (giabalu, giabaluhan) ug singkwinta mil,</i> The land was assessed at fifty thousand pesos.

<p id=24><form>abalwasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>assessment</tr>. <i>Purus dagkug abalwasiyun ang mga yútà dinhi sa syudad,</i> The lots in the city all have high assessments.

<p id=25><form>abandunar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> <tr>abandon</tr>, <tr>neglect</tr>. <i>Nag-abandunar na lang siya sa íyang kaugalíngun sukad mamatay ang íyang asáwa,</i> He neglected himself entirely after his wife died. <i>Ayaw abandunaha (iabandunar) ang ímung pamilya,</i> Do not abandon your family. <form>abandunádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>abandoned</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>neglectful</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>ABANDUNAR</sc>.</xr>

<p id=26><form>abandúnu</form> <xr>= <sc>ABANDUNAR</sc>.</xr>

<p id=27><form>ábang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S; b]</itype> <tr>rent</tr>. <i>Ang usa ka kwartu giabángan sa tigúlang,</i> The old man rents one of the rooms. <number>2</number> <itype>[b]</itype> hire a prostitute. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> make an offering to a supernatural being for the use of land which is thought to be in his possession. <i>Iábang ni nákung baktína álang sa uma,</i> I will sacrifice this pig as rental for the land. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> rent paid. <i>Pilay ábang nímu sa libru?</i> How much rent did you pay for the book? <number>2</number> money paid a prostitute. <number>3</number> toil taken by supernatural beings. <i>Kadtung nalumus dinhi ábang kunu tu sa ingkantu,</i> The man who drowned here is said to have been the rent collected by the supernatural spirit. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>patronize</tr> a prostitute. <form>-an(&rarr;)<corr><sub>1</sub></corr></form> <number>1, 2, 3</number> <xr>= <sc>ÁBANG</sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr> <number>4</number> <tr>haunted</tr> place, place where departed spirits take a toll or rent. <i>Abangan kunu kanang baláya. Náa giyuy mamatay káda túig,</i> That house is haunted (lit. has a rental on it). Each year s.o. dies there.

<p id=28><form>abangan<corr><sub>2</sub></corr></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>rattan</tr> used as anchor rope for a <ix>búbu</ix> fish trap.

<p id=29><form>abánid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do s.t. step by step, and in sequence. <i>Iabánid (abaníra) kini pagpintal arun dílì magkampat,</i> Paint it one square at a time so it will come out even. <pos>a</pos> done in succession, order. <i>Abánid ang íyang pagsukut sa mga istudyanti,</i> He asked the students one after another in turn.

<p id=30><form>abaníku</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> folding <tr>fan</tr>. <number>1a</number> fan of any sort for fanning oneself. <number>2</number> blackberry lily, k.o. bulbous ornamental: <bio>Balamcanda chinensis</bio>. It is so called because the leaves are arranged like an opened fan. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>BANÍKU</sc>.</xr> <number>4</number> <formx>kurta di-</formx> <xr>see <sc>KURTA<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a fan. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> fan s.o. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> fan oneself. <form>inabaníku</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. made in such a way that it can be folded for storage, e.g., a folding chair, jackknife.

<p id=31><form>abansáda</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>exposed</tr> to the wind. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> for s.t. to be directly open to the wind. <i>Naabansáda sa hángin ang ákung bukubuku, maung gisip-un ku,</i> My back was directly exposed to the wind. That&apos;s why I caught cold. <i>Ayaw abansadáha (iabansáda) sa hángin ang inyung bintánà,</i> Don&apos;t put a window right where it catches the full breeze.

<p id=32><form>*abansi</form> <form>miting di &mdash;</form> grand rally immediately prior to an election.

<p id=33><form>abansin</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>advance</tr>, for a body of people to move forward. <i>Ang mga Hapúnis miabansin sa pátag sa Lusun,</i> The Japanese advanced over the plains of Luzon.

<p id=34><form>abanti</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>forward</tr>, <tr>ahead</tr>. <i>Abanti ka rang milingkud,</i> You took a seat too far to the front. <number>2</number> ahead in score. <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> move forward. <i>Muabanti kag diyútay, matambug ka sa bangag,</i> If you move forward any more, you will fall into the hole. <i>Iabanti nang ímung awtug diyútay,</i> Move your car forward a bit. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> be ahead, have more points in a game. <i>Naabantíhan mu námug diyis puntus,</i> We were ten points ahead of you. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> keep up with s.t. <i>Dì ku makaabanti sa galastúhan sa iskuylahan,</i> I cannot keep up with the school payments. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> endure work. <i>Dì ku makaabanti sa pagdáru kay dautun ku,</i> I can&apos;t keep up with the plowing because I&apos;m sickly. <number>4a</number> <itype>[A]</itype> ask part payment in advance, especially in salary. <number>4b</number> <itype>[c]</itype> give s.o. a cash advance on his salary or other payment. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> front wheel(s). <i>Nahiyus ang abanti sa mutur,</i> The front tire of the motorcycle is flat. <number>2</number> forward gear. <number>3</number> front seat in a car. <form>atras &mdash;</form> <xr>see <sc>ATRAS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=35><form>abánu</form> <pos>n</pos> factory-made <tr>cigar</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make into a cigar. <number>2</number> <itype>[A123S]</itype> have, obtain a cigar. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>smoke</tr> a cigar.

<p id=36><form>abat</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> any <tr>supernatural being</tr> or human with supernatural powers which shows itself in an unexpected and startling way. <number>2</number> one who is &lsquo;it&rsquo; in games. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> head off s.o. <i>Maapsan pa nímu siya ug ímung abatun sa iskína,</i> You can still catch up with him if you head him off at the corner. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> frighten s.o. by appearing suddenly or otherwise startling him. <i>Ig-ági níya, abta siya,</i> When he comes by, give him a scare. <form>alabtan, abtanan</form> <pos>a</pos> haunted, place where things appear suddenly. <form>alabtun</form> s.o. to whom spirits tend to show themselves. <form>abat-ábat</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>game of tag</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <number>1</number> play tag. <number>2</number> try to meet without succeeding. <i>Wà giyud mi magkítà, nag-abat-ábat lang,</i> We just kept missing each other.

<pb n=3>

<p id=37><form>ábat<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> <tr>hold on</tr> to s.t. fixed to support oneself. <i>Ang tigúwang miábat sa pasamánu paingun sa táas,</i> The old man held on to the bannister while going upstairs. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> a railing in shape of a ladder for baby to cling to when he starts to walk.

<p id=38><form>ábat<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>feel</tr> with the hands, esp. to find s.t. out. <i>Nag-ábat siya sa yáwi sa íyang bulsa kung wà ba hibyai,</i> He felt for the key in his pocket to see if he hadn&apos;t left it behind. <i>Abátun ku ang íyang agtang ug hilanatun ba,</i> I&apos;ll touch her forehead to see if she is feverish. <number>2</number> <itype>[A123S; a12b2]</itype> feel s.t. with the sense of touch. <i>Nakaabat ku sa kabugnaw sa sinihan,</i> I felt the coolness of the movie house. <i>Abátun gánì nímu ang kasakit, musamut giyud,</i> If you think about the pain, it will get worse. <number>3</number> <itype>[A123S; b2]</itype> happen to <tr>notice</tr>, <tr>sense</tr> s.t. <i>Nakaabat kung mu rag may misaka sa ámung báy,</i> I sensed that s.o. had entered our house.

<p id=39><form>abay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; b6]</itype> <tr>move along</tr> together with s.t. moving. <i>Lagmit hiligsan ang bátà kay nag-abay sa tartanilya,</i> The child is likely to be run over because he is running alongside of the rig. <i>Silang duha nag-ábay paglanguy,</i> The two swam side by side. <number>1a</number> <formx>&mdash; ug sawa</formx> have a snake born at the same time one is born. The snake is called one&apos;s twin (<ix>kalúha</ix>) and is supposed to bring him and his family luck. <i>Pagkatáwu sa ákung iyaan, giabayan (giabyan) ug sawa. Mau nang nadátù ang íyang inahan,</i> When my aunt was born, a twin snake was born with her, and so her mother became rich. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> go in with s.o. who buys or invests in s.t. <i>Ug mupalit kag usa ka sákung humay muabay kug lima ka gantang,</i> If you buy a sack of rice, I will go in with you for five ganta&apos;s worth. <i>Giabyan níyag singku písus ang ákung pusta,</i> He went in for five pesos on my bet. <number>3</number> <itype>[AN]</itype> go in together in a fishing operation which requires several hands. <number>4</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> attach a gaff in the <ix>abay</ix> way (<xr>see <sc>ABAY</sc>, <ix>n</ix> <bx>4</bx></xr>). <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> money paid as a <tr>share</tr> in a purchase or investment. <i>Ang ákung abay bálig dus písus ra,</i> My share is two pesos&apos; worth. <number>2</number> <tr>bridesmaid</tr> or <tr>best man</tr>. <number>3</number> man&apos;s male <tr>friend</tr>. <number>3a</number> title used by males of the same age to each other. <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>bay</bx>. <i>Ása man ning dyípa, bay?</i> Where is this jeep headed for, driver? <number>4</number> manner of tying a gaff to a cock level with and parallel to the spur to offset any advantage it may have over its opponent. <form>maN-l-(&larr;), maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> persons who go in together in a fishing operation. <form>-an, abyanan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>life saver</tr>. <form>abyan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>friend</tr>, <tr>companion</tr>. <i>Alang kaníya walà siyay láing abyan kun dílì álak,</i> He has no other friend except liquor. <number>2</number> supernatural being that provides a shaman or sorcerer with his power. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C1]</itype> <number>1</number> be friends. <i>Kita lay mag-abyan,</i> Let&apos;s be friends. <number>2</number> indulge in a bad habit. <i>Walà siya makig-abyan sa huguyhúguy,</i> He did not indulge in roaming about.

<p id=40><form>abgaw</form> <xr>= <sc>ADGAW</sc>.</xr> <form>-un</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. snapper with a yellow streak along the body: <bio>Lutianus sp</bio>.

<p id=41><form>abhak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>diminish</tr> s.t. by taking away or destroying part of it. <i>Naabhak (naabhákan) ang íyang abága sa bála,</i> The bullet tore a huge piece out of his shoulder. <pos>n</pos> hole left when s.t. is chopped off, out. <i>Dakù kaáyu ang abhak sa káhuy,</i> There&apos;s a big cut in the tree. <pos>a</pos> done in such a way that s.t. is chopped off. <i>Abhak nga pagkabuldúsir ang inyung nataran,</i> Your yard was bulldozed clean.

<p id=42><form>abhul</form> <xr>= <sc>ABHUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=43><form>abhung</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>musty</tr> and flat in smell: damp clothing, rice, sweet potatoes, salted fish, et al. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become musty. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> of a musty kind.

<p id=44><form>abi</form> <xr>= <sc>ABIR</sc> <bx>1, 2</bx>.</xr>

<!-- Complex entry. OK. -->

<p id=45><form>ábi</form> <number>1</number> <formx>&mdash; <r>[<ix>gen.</ix>]</r></formx> [gen.] <tr>thought</tr>, took for granted. <i>Ábi nákug tinúud,</i> I thought it was true. <formx>&mdash; nímu</formx><corr sic=","></corr> You know what? <i>Ábi nímu? Nakit-an ku siya nga láig kúyug,</i> You know what? I saw him going out with s.o. else. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; kay</formx> just because. <i>Ábi kay nakadaug sa byúti kuntis midakù na ang úlu,</i> Just because she won the beauty contest she thinks she is s.t. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; na lang</formx> s.o. might think that. <i>Súkul. Ábi na lang, daug.</i> Fight back. They might think you give up.

<p id=46><form>abiábi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> show <tr>hospitality</tr> to. <i>Mu giyud ning táwung iládu, abiabíhun giyud sa mga tagilungsud,</i> The townspeople show hospitality to any famous visitor. <form>maabiabíhun, manggiabiabíhun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>hospitable</tr>.

<p id=47><form>abíba, abibar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>cheer</tr> one on, <tr>encourage</tr> to do. <i>Nag-abíba sa mga bátag binúang,</i> Egging the children on in their naughtiness. <pos>n</pos> <tr>encouragement</tr>, egging on. <form>maabibáhun</form> <pos>a</pos> giving encouragement, egging on.

<p id=48><form>abíhid</form> <xr>= <sc>ALABÍHID</sc>.</xr>

<p id=49><form>abilay</form> <xr>= <sc>SAMBILAY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=50><form>abilidad</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ability</tr>, <tr>capacity</tr> or <tr>skill</tr> to accomplish s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain a certain ability. <form>abilidaran</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>skilled</tr>, <tr>able</tr>. <i>Abilidaran nà si Tunyu. Bansayng mutínis,</i> Tony has talent. He plays tennis well.

<p id=51><form>abilyána</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>tan-colored</tr> shoes. <pos>n</pos> tan polish. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> polish shoes with a light tan polish, color them tan. <i>Abilyanáha (abilyanáhi) ning sapátus kung putì,</i> Dye these shoes of mine tan. <i>Wà kuy bitung itum. Abilyanáhi <pb n=4>lang,</i> I don&apos;t have any black polish. Just put tan polish on them.

<p id=52><form>ábin</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; b]</itype> <number>1</number> engage in an enterprise or game together. <i>Mag-ábin ta sa pamaligyag pagkáun,</i> Let&apos;s become partners in selling food. <number>2</number> <tr>ally</tr> on oneself with. <i>Mga hakug sa gahum ang miábin kaníya,</i> People who were greedy for power allied themselves with him. <i>Nakig-ábin aku kaníya sa íyang mga panglantaw sa unáhan,</i> I share his views of the future. <pos>n</pos> partner in business or game. <i>Ug siyay ákung ábin sa bíku kanúnay ming mudaug,</i> When she is my partner in hopscotch, we always win. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>ÁBIN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=53><form>abintúra</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>adventures</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>adventure film</tr>, story. <i>Makítà siya sa mga lílas abintúra,</i> He appears in adventure films. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> try going s.w. for the adventure of it. <i>Nag-abintúra mig katkat sa Manunggal,</i> We went on an expedition to Mt. Manunggal. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>ABINTURAR</sc>.</xr>

<p id=54><form>abinturar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b5]</itype> <tr>try</tr> one&apos;s luck. <i>Miabinturar (nangabinturar) lang siyag aplay básig madáwat,</i> He tried his luck in applying in hopes he might be accepted. <i>Abinturahi (abinturaha) lang si Maríyag hangyù,</i> Try your luck with Maria and ask her. <form>abinturíru, -a</form> <xr>= <sc>ABINTURISTA</sc>.</xr> <form>abinturista</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>adventurous</tr>, tending to try things out without knowing the outcome. <i>Dì ku mugugul ug kwarta niánà kay dì ku abinturista. Básig dì musalir,</i> I won&apos;t invest my money on that because I&apos;m not daring. It might just fail.

<p id=55><form>abir</form> <number>1</number> particle used in calling attention to a point in contention. <i>Ang diyus makagagáhum. Abir, unsáun man nímu pagpangutána diin siya manukad,</i> God is almighty. All right then, how can you ask where He comes from? <number>1a</number> particle used in inciting a person to do s.t. <i>Abir, sulayi ug musalir ba nang paagíha,</i> O.K. Just see if that procedure works out. <i>Abir, sumbága kunu ku kay isumbung tikaw ni Pápa,</i> All right, just try hitting me, and I&apos;ll tell Daddy on you. <number>2</number> pause word expressing hesitation when one doesn&apos;t know how to do s.t. <i>Abir, lisúa nag hínay dúngan sa pagtulbuk ári,</i> Let&apos;s see now, turn that slowly and press this at the same time. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>AMBI</sc>. <bx>4</bx></xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; ac]</itype> try one&apos;s luck, take a stab at. <i>Nangabir (miabir) lang siyag panlútù. Dì hinúun siya kamau,</i> He just took a try at cooking. He doesn&apos;t really know how. <i>Abirun unyà nákug hangyù si Maríya,</i> I&apos;ll just take a stab at asking Maria. <i>Iabir kunu ni sa ahinsiya ug dawátun ba,</i> Try taking this to the pawnshop and see if they will accept it.

<p id=56><form>abirids</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>average</tr>, the usual size or quantity. <number>2</number> <tr>average</tr> rating in school. <i>Pasar ku kay utsinta ákung abirids,</i> I passed because my average was eighty. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1</number> average so and so much. <i>Makaabirids mig lima adlaw-adlaw,</i> We can sell on the average five every day. <number>2</number> have an average grade of.

<p id=57><form>abiríya</form> <pos>a</pos> be <tr>broken</tr>, <tr>inoperative</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> <number>1</number> for an engine to <tr>break down</tr>. <i>Kining trak dílì magámit. Nag-abiríya man,</i> This truck cannot be used. It is broken. <number>2</number> be under the weather. <i>Naabiríya aku kay nagkalíbang aku gahápun,</i> I&apos;m not feeling well because I had diarrhea yesterday.

<p id=58><form>abirtu</form> <xr>= <sc>ABYIRTU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=59><form>abis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab7]</itype> <tr>slice</tr> with a curved blade, <tr>cut</tr> a small or thin part from a bigger piece. <i>Abisig diyútay nà,</i> Slice a piece off of it. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>slice</tr> the terminal portion of a coconut bud to induce sap flow. <i>Kaduha sila mangabis káda adlaw,</i> They make an incision in the bud twice a day.

<p id=60><form>abísu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>announcement</tr> of s.t. to come. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>announce</tr> s.t. to come. <i>Nag-abísu ang radyu nga adúnay bagyung umaábut,</i> The radio announced that there is a typhoon coming. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> receive an announcement. <i>Nakaabísu ming way túbig ugmà,</i> We received the announcement that there would be no water tomorrow.

<p id=61><form>abitsuylas</form> <xr>= <sc>HABITSUYLAS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=62><form>abitu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>habit</tr>, a distinctive apparel worn by devotees, priests, monks, and the like. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> wear a habit.

<p id=63><form>abíyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>food</tr>, <tr>provisions</tr>, <tr>money</tr>, <tr>supplies</tr> for daily consumption. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> provide food, etc. <i>Báhin sa mga kinahanglanun matag adlaw akuy muabíyu,</i> As far as your daily needs go, I will provide. <i>Abyúhan ta lang mug usa ka sákung humay matag búlan,</i> We&apos;ll supply you with one sack of rice a month.

<p id=64><form>abiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>airplane</tr>. <form>ka-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> group of airplanes.

<p id=65><form>abkay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>dig up</tr>, out. <i>Abkáyun ku ang kwarta nga ákung gilubung dinhi,</i> I will dig up the money that I buried here.

<p id=66><form>abla</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>speak</tr> to s.o. with some purpose in mind. <i>Abláhi kunu si Máma, básin pag musugut,</i> Try to talk mother into it. She might let us. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> persuasive talk. <i>Dílì ka sugtun niánang bayhána kun walà kay abla,</i> That woman will not accept you if you don&apos;t sweet-talk her. <number>2</number> <tr>big talk</tr>. <i>Abla lay nagdaghan. Walay líhuk,</i> It was all just big talk. No action. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> art or technique of <tr>expressing</tr> one&apos;s viewpoint. <i>Malampúsun siyang abugádu kay maáyu siya sa pangabla,</i> He is a successful lawyer because he has a <pb n=5>good technique in talking.

<p id=67><form>abládu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> delivered in <tr>spoken</tr> fashion. <i>Ang kúru abládu, dílì kantáhun,</i> The chorus is spoken, not sung. <number>2</number> lines of a play. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>speak</tr> lines.

<p id=68><form>ablása</form> <xr>= <sc>ABRÁSA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=69><form>abli</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>open</tr> s.t., be open. <i>Ikaw bay nag-abli sa pultahan?</i> Were you the one who opened the door? <i>Sulud lang kay nag-abli ang pultahan,</i> Just come right in. The door is open. <number>2</number> <tr>begin</tr>, <tr>start</tr> a class, business, etc. <i>Muabli ang klási sa Hunyu,</i> Classes begin in June. <i>Ablíhag (ablíhug) sayu ang klási sunud túig,</i> Classes will open early next year. <number>3</number> <tr>found</tr>, <tr>establish</tr> an enterprise. <i>Anus-a man ablíhi (ablíha) ang inyung iskuylahan sa panahì?</i> When will you open your sewing school? <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>opening</tr>. <i>Dakug abli nang tarúha,</i> That can has a big opening. <number>2</number> opening of classes. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> open. <i>Abli ang bintánà. Sirhi ra gud,</i> The window is open. Please close it. <number>2</number> be started. <i>Abli na ang tindáhan. Palit ngadtug kapi,</i> The store is open now. Go buy some coffee.

<p id=70><form>Abr.</form> abbreviation for <ix>Abril,</ix> &lsquo;April&rsquo;.

<p id=71><form>abrap</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sudden</tr>. <i>Abrap ra kaáyu nang ímung pag-anhi,</i> Your coming is very sudden. <number>2</number> <tr>brusque</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> be sudden, do s.t. by plunging right into it. <number>2</number> be brusque. <i>Naabrap ra tu nímu pagkatubag,</i> You answered in a brusque way.

<p id=72><form>abrása</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; bc3]</itype> <tr>walk side by side</tr> with. <i>Hulat kay muabrása kug lakaw ninyu,</i> Wait for me. I&apos;m going to walk next to you. <i>Dílì ta mag-abrásag lakaw sa karsádang hagip-ut,</i> We shouldn&apos;t walk side by side on a narrow street.

<p id=73><form>abrasadur</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>TANGDAYAN</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>TANGDAY</sc>, <bx>2</bx>.</xr>

<p id=74><form>abrasíti</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2; c2]</itype> promenade arm in arm or side by side. <i>Nakit-an kung ímung bánang may giabrasíting (giabrasitíhang) babáyi,</i> I saw your husband walking arm in arm with a woman (with a woman holding on to his arms).

<p id=75><form>abrasyíti</form> <xr>= <sc>ABRASÍTI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=76><form>abri<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>ABLI</sc>.</xr> <form>-dur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>opener</tr>.&dagger;

<p id=77><form>abri<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>ABYIRTU<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=78><form>abrigána</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. that stimulates the appetite. <i>Maáyung abrigána ang bír,</i> Beer is good to <tr>stimulate the appetite</tr>.

<p id=79><form>abrigáwu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>apprentice</tr> on a ship. <number>2</number> one who works on a boat for his passage. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> be an apprentice, apprentice s.o. to. <number>2</number> work in lieu of paying passage.

<p id=80><form>abrígu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shawl</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> wear, make, receive a shawl.

<p id=81><form>Abril</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>April</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. in April. <i>Magbakasyun mu sa Hunyu? Ah, Abrila lang,</i> Will you take your vacation in June? Oh, just make it in April. <number>2</number> write down April in a document. <i>Máyu ímung nabutang? Abrila lang hinúun,</i> Did you write May? It should be April.

<p id=82><form>abriláta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>can opener</tr>.

<p id=83><form>absin</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>absent</tr>, fail to attend work or class. <i>Absínig kas-a nang klasíha nímu,</i> Just miss your class this one time. <number>2</number> mark one absent. <i>Absínan tikaw,</i> I&apos;ll mark you absent. <pos>n</pos> <tr>absence</tr>, time away from class. <i>Daghag absin nímu Dyú, lagmit ka mahagbung,</i> How many absences you have, Joe! You&apos;re likely to flunk. <form>hiN-, pala-, absiníru, absinus</form> <pos>a</pos> given to missing classes. <i>Anus-a gud nà siya makapasar nga absinus man nà sa klási,</i> How can he pass if he always misses classes? <form>&mdash; mayindid</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>absent-minded</tr>.

<p id=84><form>absinus</form> <xr>see <sc>ABSIN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=85><form>absulusiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>absolution</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> give absolution. <i>Gilubung siya nga walà gánì kaabsulusyuni,</i> He was buried without having received absolution.

<p id=86><form>absuwiltu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>acquitted</tr> in court. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a12]</itype> <tr>acquit</tr>.

<p id=87><form>abtik</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>nimble</tr>, <tr>quick</tr> in reaction. <i>Ang musáyaw sa tinikling kinahanglang abtik ug tiil,</i> Whoever dances the <ix>tinikling</ix> has to have nimble feet. <number>2</number> <tr>fast</tr>, live in action. <i>Mahuman ni dáyug abtik lang mutrabáhu,</i> It will get done right away if you work rapidly. <number>3</number> <tr>cunning</tr>, <tr>sly</tr>. <i>Abtik giyud siya kay midáwat imbis mubáyad,</i> He sure is sharp. Instead of paying as he should have, he got paid. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> <number>1</number> get to be nimble. <number>2</number> get to be fast in action. <i>Muabtik (maabtik) lagi ang íyang panglíhuk basta pakit-ug sápì,</i> He&apos;ll get moving fast as long as you show him money. <number>3</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be <tr>cunning</tr>, sly. <number>4</number> <itype>[b4(1)]</itype> <tr>outsmart</tr>. <i>Naabtikan sad ku sa bátà,</i> The child put one over on me. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> engage in <tr>chicanery</tr>. <i>Ayaw kug pangabtíki kay suhítu ku,</i> Don&apos;t try to put a fast one over on me, because I know my way around.

<p id=88><form>abtung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rope</tr> used for tying the plow to the crosstree.

<p id=89><form>abu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ashes</tr>. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>ALABÚHAN</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make ashes. <i>Abuha nang mga palwa ug gam-ang sabun,</i> Make the palm stems into ashes to make soap out of. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be <tr>razed</tr> or <tr>burned</tr> to the ground. <i>Pag-abut nákù naabu na ang balay,</i> When I arrived, the house was already burned to the ground. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> get ashes all over one. <i>Nagkaábu ku kay misum-uk ku sa nasunúgan,</i> I got ashes all over me because I went into the burned-out area. <form>alabúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stove</tr> or <pb n=6>any place a fire for cooking is built. <form>abuhun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ash-colored</tr>. <i>Manuk nga abuhun,</i> Gray-colored cock.

<p id=90><form>abuábu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>fish</tr>.

<p id=91><form>*abubhu</form> <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> be <tr>jealous</tr> of a loved one. <pos>n</pos> <tr>jealousy</tr>. <form>abubhuan</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>jealous</tr>. <i>Abubhuang bána,</i> A jealous husband. <form>mapangabubhúun</form> <pos>a</pos> of a jealous type. <i>Mapangabubhúun nga pasiklap,</i> A jealous glance.

<p id=92><form>abud, ábud<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>throw</tr> grains, throw grains to. <i>Ang bukbukung mais mauy iábud sa manuk,</i> Throw the beetle-infested corn to the chickens. <number>2</number> drop grains into a hole in planting. <i>Mag-abud sila sa ílang baul,</i> They will plant their field. <number>3</number> <tr>feed</tr> grain into a mill. <i>Ímu síging abdan (abúran) ang galingan,</i> Keep feeding grains into the mill. <number>4</number> <tr>supply</tr> a factory with raw materials. <i>Kanang kumpaniyáha mauy tig-abud sa mga papil sa imprinta,</i> That company supplies paper to the printing press. <number>5</number> feed news, gossip. Aha! <i>Ikaw diay nag-abud sa mga nutisya,</i> So you were the one who spread the news! <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> feed for fowls. <number>2</number> one&apos;s turn to throw grains. <i>Ákù na rung abud,</i> It&apos;s my turn to feed (the chickens). <form>alabdan</form> <xr>= <sc>ABUD</sc>, <ix>n</ix> 2.</xr>

<p id=93><form>ábud<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> ornamental bulbous <tr>plant</tr>: <bio>Eurycles amboinensis</bio>. The leaves are applied over the bladder to facilitate urination.

<p id=94><form>ábud<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>head louse</tr> lighter in color and with a longer and more slender body than the ordinary head louse (<ix>kútu</ix>).

<p id=95><form>abug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dust</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B46; a4b4(1)]</itype> become <tr>dusty</tr>. <i>Muabug ang karsáda ug dúgayng uwanun,</i> The road gets dusty if the rains come late. <i>Giabug ang ámung balay kay dúgay na nga wà puy-i,</i> Our house became all dusty because it hadn&apos;t been lived in for a long time. <i>Tabúni ang libru arun dílì maabugan,</i> Cover the books so they won&apos;t get dusty. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> turn into dust. <i>Sa kadugáyan kitang tanan maabug,</i> In the end we will all turn to dust. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> get dust all over it. <i>Nagkaábug ang ákung buhuk tungud sa byáhi,</i> My hair is all covered with dust because I&apos;ve just gotten off the bus. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dusty</tr>. <form>-l-an(&larr;)</form> exposed to dust. <i>Kining kwartúha alabúgan. Duul man gud sa karsáda,</i> This room is exposed to dust. It&apos;s close to the street.

<p id=96><form>*abug<sub>2</sub></form> <form>paN-</form> euphemism for <xr><sc>PANGABUGHU</sc>.</xr> <xr>see <sc>ABUBHU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=97><form>ábug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>chase</tr>, <tr>drive</tr>, <tr>drive away</tr>. <i>Abúga ang bábuy ngadtu sa tangkal,</i> Drive the pig into the pen. <i>Abúgi sa lángaw ang lamísa,</i> Drive the flies away from the table. <number>2</number> <tr>drive</tr> s.o. to do s.t. <i>Ang kaúlaw mauy nag-ábug kanákù pagpaháwà sa ámung lungsud,</i> Shame drove me to move out of town. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stick</tr> with strips of paper, plastic, etc., attached on one end, used to chase flies away. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> an enclosure of the fish corral into which the fish are driven before being caught.

<p id=98><form>ábug<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>ABYUG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=99><form>abugáda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>female lawyer</tr>.

<p id=100><form>abugádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lawyer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B16; a2]</itype> be, become a lawyer. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> speak for s.o. <i>Abugadúhan ta lang ka kay wà kay pangabla,</i> I&apos;ll speak for you because you don&apos;t have the knack of saying what you want. <form>abugaduhun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lawyer-like</tr>. <i>Abugaduhung pangatarúngan,</i> Lawyer-like reasoning.

<p id=101><form>abugágu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dumb lawyer</tr> (play on the words <ix>abugádu</ix> &lsquo;lawyer&rsquo; and <ix>gágu</ix> &lsquo;stupid&rsquo;).

<p id=102><form>abugar</form> <xr>= <sc>ABUGÁDU</sc>, <ix>v</ix> <bx>2</bx>.</xr>

<p id=103><form>abugasíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>law course</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>law profession</tr>. <i>Sa abugasíya kinahanglan mamakak ug panalagsa,</i> In the law profession it is necessary to lie once in a while.

<p id=104><form>abughu, abughù</form> <xr>= <sc>*ABUBHU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=105><form>abukádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>avocado</tr> or <tr>alligator pear</tr>: <bio>Persea sp</bio>. It is usually eaten with sugar and milk.

<p id=106><form>abúkay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. white <tr>cockatoo</tr>, often kept as pet: <bio>Cacatua haematuropygia</bio>. <form>(&rarr;), abúkay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for babies to make noises like a cockatoo.

<p id=107><form>abunansiya</form> <xr>= <sc>ABUNDA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=108><form>abunda</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>abundant</tr>. <i>Abunda ang bugas karun,</i> There&apos;s plenty of rice now. <number>2</number> have <tr>plenty</tr>. <i>Ug abunda ka sa sápì, mamalit kag yútà,</i> If you have lots of money, you should buy land. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be, become abundant. <i>Unyà ra ta mamalit ug mangga ug muabunda (maabunda) na,</i> We will buy mangoes later when they become abundant. <pos>n</pos> <tr>abundance</tr>.

<p id=109><form>abundansiya</form> <xr>= <sc>ABUNDA</sc>.</xr>

<!-- TODO: order of sub entries and pos seems to be confused after k.o. fishing -->

<p id=110><form>ábung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>bar</tr>, <tr>block</tr> the way. <i>Abúngan ta ning karsádag dakung batu,</i> Let&apos;s block the road with a big stone. <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>fishing equipment</tr> consisting of dried coconut leaves tied to a raft. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. which blocks the way. <i>Ang káhuy nga abung sa pultahan,</i> The wood that was blocking the door. <pos>a</pos> in the path of the wind, smoke, smells, and the like. <i>Abung sa hángin,</i> Exposed to the wind. <i>Abung ka kaáyu sa íyang dautang tingúhà,</i> You are very much exposed to his evil powers. <form>pa-(&rarr;), pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; ac]</itype> put in an exposed position. <i>Ug magpaabung ka sa sílit sa túbig, mahumud ka,</i> If you put yourself in the path of a jet of water, you&apos;ll get wet. <i>Paabungig asu ang mangga,</i> (Make the fire so that) the mango tree will be in <pb n=7>the path of the smoke. <pos>n</pos> k.o. fishing whereby a net is set across the path of a fish. <number>2</number> <itype>[a]</itype> give allowance in measuring s.t. <i>Paabungan ug diyútay ang sukud ígù pagsipilya,</i> Measure it with a little allowance for planing. <i>Mutíru gánì kag langgam nga naglupad paabungig diyútay,</i> If you shoot at a flying bird, aim a little ahead. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> do s.t. in anticipation of a favor or reward. <i>Buútan nà siya run kay nangábung man nga hitagaan ug diyis,</i> He&apos;s obedient this time because he&apos;s anticipating getting a dime. <pos>n</pos> <tr>preparation</tr> of oil and plants medicinal roots and herbs used as a protection against some evil.&dagger;

<p id=111><form>abungaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tiny, light brown <tr>insect</tr> which swarms over food and the like, similar in appearance to a fly. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infested with <ix>abungaw.</ix>

<p id=112><form>abungaw<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>BUNGAW</sc>.</xr>

<p id=113><form>abúnu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fertilizer</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>transfusion</tr> or <tr>infusion</tr>. <i>Nagkinahanglan siyag abúnu kay gisulgan sa dugù,</i> He needs a transfusion because he lost a lot of blood. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> put fertilizer on. <i>Abunúhi ang rúsas,</i> Put fertilizer on the roses. <number>2</number> give a transfusion or infusion. <number>3</number> supplement, fill in. <i>Ikaw bay mag-abúnu sa kúlang?</i> Will you make up the lack? <i>Ang gísu mauy iabúnu sa batsi,</i> They use limestone to fill the rough spots in the road.

<!-- Query following entry. OK -->

<p id=114><form>aburídu</form> <pos>a</pos> <formx>&mdash; ang úlu, pangísip</formx>, etc. be <tr>upset</tr>, <tr>irritable</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be upset. <i>Kadtung ímung tahù nakaaburídu (nakapaaburídu) sa ákung úlu,</i> Your news got me all upset.

<p id=115><form>abusáda</form> <xr>= <sc>ABUSÁDU</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=116><form>abusádu</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to <tr>take advantage</tr>, <tr>infringe</tr> on rights. <i>Abusádu ang mga kutsíru dinhi. Basta muulan, pabayrun ta nílag dubli,</i> The rig drivers are abusive. If it rains, they double the fare. <i>Nagníwang lang nà siya kay abusádu man gud sa íyang láwas,</i> He is thin because he neglects his body. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become abusive.

<p id=117><form>abusar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; b(1)]</itype> a do s.t. one is not entitled to, take advantage of s.o. by infringing on his rights. <i>Nag-abusar siya paggáwì sa makinilya nga way pananghid,</i> He took the liberty of using the typewriter without permission. <i>Giabusahan sila sa magbabaligyà kay way kumpitinsiya,</i> The storekeeper took advantage of them because there was no competition. <number>b</number> mistreat one&apos;s health. <i>Nag-abusar ka lang sa ímung láwas sa ímung pag-inum,</i> You&apos;re abusing your health with all your drinking. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> do s.t. to a superfluous degree. <i>Wà na nà magkaun; nag-abusar na nà,</i> That is not eating; that is excessive indulgence.

<p id=118><form>abúsu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>taking advantage</tr>, acting beyond one&apos;s rights. <i>Ang pagdáwat sa suburnu usa sa mga abúsu,</i> Taking bribes is one of their abuses. <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>ABUSAR</sc>.</xr>

<p id=119><form>abut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>arrive</tr>, reach a place. <i>Dì pa makaabut (maabut) ang suwat,</i> The letter won&apos;t have arrived yet. <i>Duul ra. Maabut ug lud-an,</i> It&apos;s close by, within spitting distance (can be reached by spitting). <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> lead to and reach a place. <i>Muabut ba ning karsadáha sa subà?</i> Does this road reach the river? <i>Kining lugára dílì abutun sa táub,</i> The tide doesn&apos;t get as far as this place. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> reach s.t. with the arms. <i>Maabut ba nímu ang sanga?</i> Can you reach the branch? <i>Iabut kunu nang ímung kamut sa bungbung,</i> Reach your hands out to the wall. <number>1c</number> <itype>[B; b4]</itype> reach an amount, last a certain length. <i>Ang ákung swildu dílì muabut ug dus mil,</i> My salary doesn&apos;t reach two thousand. <i>Walà abtig duha ka adlaw ang bugas,</i> The rice did not last two days. <number>1d</number> <formx>&mdash; sa hunàhúnà</formx> come to the mind. <number>1e</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> <tr>receive</tr> money. <i>Abtan (abutan) ku tingálig kwarta rung hápun,</i> I&apos;ll probably get my money this afternoon. <number>2</number> <itype>[a4]</itype> have a feeling come over one. <i>Giabut siyag kakulbà,</i> A feeling of terror came over her. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A23; b4]</itype> catch s.o. doing s.t. <i>Si Turyuy nakaabut nílang nagháluk,</i> It was Torio who came upon them kissing. <number>3b</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> be <tr>overtaken</tr>. <i>Abtan kag gabíi sa dálan,</i> You will be overtaken by night on the road. <number>4</number> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> come to an <tr>orgasm</tr>. <i>Dílì giyud muabut ang lamì,</i> She won&apos;t have an orgasm. (The delicious feeling will not arrive.) <i>Abtan ra gihápun síya basta maningkámut ang duruha,</i> She will have an orgasm if both try their best. <number>5</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> for an event or season of the year to come around. <i>Dì na madúgay muabut na ang Pasku,</i> It won&apos;t be long before Christmas comes. <number>6</number> <itype>[A12; b]</itype> be on time for s.t. <i>Nakaabut ka ba sa panahun sa Katsílà?</i> Do you go back as far as the Spanish times? <i>Maabtan pa nímu ang barku,</i> You can still catch the boat. <number>7a</number> <itype>[A12; a1]</itype> afford to pay for s.t. <i>Dì ku makaabut ug palit niánà,</i> I can&apos;t afford to buy that. <i>Wà siyay ikaabut sa báyad,</i> He has no funds to meet the payments with. <number>7b</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> can be done, reached. <i>Tabángan tikaw kútub sa ákung maabut,</i> I&apos;ll help you as much as I can. <number>8</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> stay temporarily some place. <i>Háin man ka mag-abut run?</i> Where are you staying now? <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. or s.o. that has arrived s.w. <i>Dílì ni karáan uy. Bag-u ning abut,</i> This is not old stock. It just arrived. <i>Bag-u kung abut dinhi. Wà pa ku kadumdum,</i> I am a newcomer here. I don&apos;t <pb n=8>know how to get there. <number>2</number> <tr>yield</tr>, <tr>proceeds</tr> from an effort, <tr>income</tr>, <tr>harvest</tr>. <i>Pilay abut sa yútà káda túig?</i> How much does the land yield each year? <i>Gamay rag abut ang munisipyu,</i> The town has a small income. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; ac]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>meet</tr> together. <i>Abútun nákù ang duha ka tumuy,</i> I will make the two ends meet. <i>Mau kadtung lugára ang ámung gikaabútan (gipanag-abútan),</i> That is the place where we met. <number>2</number> <tr>overlap</tr> in time. <i>Nag-ábut na man gánì ang sinanggì karun ug sa miáging túig,</i> This year&apos;s corn crop overlaps with last year&apos;s. (I.e., this year&apos;s crop was harvested before last year&apos;s crop had been used up.) <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> <formx>&mdash; ang ginháwa</formx> be <tr>panting for breath</tr> (gasps of breath overlap). <i>Giúyug siya sa ubu. Nag-ábut ang íyang pagginháwa,</i> He was shaken by his coughing fit. He was panting for breath. <form>pa-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wait in expectation for. <i>Dì na ku mupaábut sa kumbira,</i> I won&apos;t wait for the party. <i>Paabútun tikaw hangtud sa alas kwatru,</i> I&apos;ll wait for you until four o&apos;clock. <form>abut-abut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> arrive in close succession. <i>Nag-abut-abut ang mga bisíta,</i> Visitors came one after another. <form>abut-ábut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> go every now and then. <i>Nag-abut-ábut nà siya sa Hungkung,</i> She goes to Hong Kong often. <form>siN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <number>1</number> for a time, event to <tr>approach</tr>. <i>Nagsingabut ang pista,</i> The fiesta is approaching. <number>1a</number> for one&apos;s time of the month to approach. <i>Nagsingabut na, maung saputun,</i> She&apos;s in a bad mood because her time of the month is approaching. <number>2</number> be in expectations of, look forward to. <i>Nagsingabut ku nga mahuman ang trabáhug sayu,</i> I&apos;m expecting to finish the work early. <form>-l-un(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> subject to periodic attacks of an illness. <number>2</number> s.o. who has the fortune of getting a large yield from an effort. <form>alabtan, abtanan</form> <pos>n</pos> place one usually stays temporarily. <form>-l-an-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>ABTANAN</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> place one meets s.o. else. <form>um-r-(&larr;), um-l-(&larr;), tali-, tali-(&larr;), sali-, sali-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> about to arrive. <i>May umaábut (umalábut, taliabut, taliábut, saliabut, saliábut) nga mga bisíta,</i> There are some visitors about to arrive.&dagger;

<p id=120><form>abwag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; c1]</itype> <tr>break up</tr>, <tr>scatter</tr>. <i>Miabwag ang mitambung sa ráli pag-ulan,</i> The people at the rally scattered when it started to rain. <i>Abwagun (iabwag) nátù ang mga papil,</i> Let us scatter the pieces of paper.

<p id=121><form>abyadur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>aviator</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be, make into an aviator.&dagger;

<p id=122><form>abyan</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ABAY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=123><form>abyasiyun, abyasyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>aviation</tr>.

<p id=124><form>abyirtu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>open</tr>. <i>Abyirtu ang ganghaan,</i> The door is open. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2PB; c1]</itype> open s.t.; be opened.

<p id=125><form>abyirtu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>seventh chord</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> play a seventh chord. <i>Iabyirtu (abyirtúha) ang tapuy ig-abut sa dapit nga muingun &lsquo;Matam-is uyámut&rsquo;,</i> When you get to the part that goes &lsquo;How very sweet ...&rsquo; play a seventh chord.

<p id=126><form>abyug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>rock</tr> s.t. hanging back and forth. <i>Abyúga (iabyug) lang ang bátà sa dúyan kun muhílak na,</i> Just rock the baby in the hammock if he starts to cry. <pos>n</pos> action of rocking s.t.

<p id=127><form>A.D.</form> Anno Domini.

<p id=128><form>ád<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>add</tr> up. <i>Ádun (adun) nátù ni,</i> Let&apos;s add this up. <i>Iád ang kwatru ári,</i> Add the four to this column.

<p id=129><form>ád<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>ÁLAD</sc>.</xr>

<p id=130><form>ada</form> <number>1</number> particle showing that s.t. is not important. <i>Ada, irù ra gud tu. Kahadluk na man nímu!</i> Heck, that was just a dog. What a scaredy cat you are! <number>2</number> particle expressing annoyance. <i>Ada! Sábà na,</i> Oh, be quiet! <form>&mdash; uruy</form> <xr>= <sc>ADA</sc>, <bx>1</bx>.</xr> <form>&mdash; uy</form> particle expressing exasperation at being unable to cope with s.t. (used only by women). <i>Da uy, lisud kaáyu,</i> Oh dear! That is so hard!

<p id=131><form>áda</form> <pos>n</pos> mythological beings represented as beautiful maidens living in forests, streams, etc. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become an <ix>áda.</ix>

<p id=132><form>adá</form> <xr>= <sc>ADA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=133><form>ad-ad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>slice</tr> into thin, but not long pieces. <i>Ang baláni ad-árun únà iláwug sa bábuy,</i> The banana trunk is chopped up finely before it is fed to the pigs. <form>ad-aran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>slicing board</tr>.

<p id=134><form>Adan</form> <ix>name:</ix> Adam.

<p id=135><form>adbans</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>advance</tr> payment on a salary, debt, etc. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AP; cP]</itype> give an advance. <i>Adbansan ka nákug singku,</i> I&apos;ll advance you five pesos. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> ask for an advance. <i>Muadbans akug singku pára sa kumpra,</i> I would like to have five pesos in advance for shopping. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> for soldiers to advance. <i>Miadbans ang mga Hapun,</i> The Japanese advanced. <i>Ílang giadbans ang mga kanyun,</i> They put the artillery on the front line. <form>&mdash; gard</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a contingent sent ahead to the front. <number>2</number> s.t. sent s.w. to prepare the way (humorous metaphor). <i>Nag-una ang mga adbans gard kay silay magpriparar,</i> The advance guard has gone ahead because they will get things ready.

<p id=136><form>adbaysir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>adviser</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> act as class adviser in school. <i>Giadbaysíran ku ang primíru anyu,</i> I am adviser to the freshmen. <form>klas &mdash;</form> class adviser in school. <form>idituryal &mdash;</form> editorial advisor.

<p id=137><form>adbintista</form> <pos>n</pos> a Seventh Day <tr>Adventist</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <pb n=9>be, become a Seventh Day Adventist.

<p id=138><form>adbirbiyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>adverb</tr>.

<p id=139><form>Adbiyintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Advent</tr>.

<p id=140><form>adgaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small tree: <bio>Premna odorata</bio>. The leaves are fragrant and used medicinally.

<p id=141><form>adía</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <formx>día</formx> <number>1</number> <tr>is here</tr> (nearer me than you). <i>Adía sa táas ang lamísa, ikanáug,</i> The table is up here. Bring it downstairs. <number>2</number> <ix>in narration:</ix> <tr>now</tr>, at this juncture. <i>Nalípay siya kay, día, nadátù na man pud siya,</i> He was happy because, here he was, he managed to become rich in turn.

<p id=142><form>ádik</form> <pos>n</pos> drug <tr>addict</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become a drug addict.

<p id=143><form>adilantádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> developed, <tr>advanced</tr>. <i>Adilantádu ang Pilipínas sa Aprika sa panguma,</i> The Philippines is ahead of Africa in agriculture. <number>2</number> for a watch to be advanced.

<p id=144><form>adilantar</form> <xr>= <sc>ADILANTU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=145><form>adilantu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> become better. <i>Dílì ta muadilantu niánang pangitáa,</i> Our financial situation won&apos;t <tr>improve</tr> if that is the only way we can make our living. <form>kaadilantúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>improvement</tr>. <i>Pára sa kaadilantúhan sa átung panimúyù,</i> For the improvement of our standard of living.

<p id=146><form>adilpa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>oleander</tr>, k.o. highly poisonous, tall ornamental shrub with showy pink or white flowers: <bio>Nerium indicum</bio>.

<p id=147><form>adimas</form> furthermore, <tr>besides</tr>. <i>Adimas utúkan man sab siya,</i> Besides, he&apos;s intelligent, too.

<p id=148><form>adingmasin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>adding machine</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> add up on a machine. <i>Adingmasina lang ni arun way sayup,</i> Add this up on the machine, so there won&apos;t be any mistakes.

<p id=149><form>adinúwid</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>adenoids</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> have adenoid trouble.

<p id=150><form>adisir, adísir</form> <tr>before</tr> [so-and-so] happens. <i>Adisir ka muadtu, pagtilipunu úsà,</i> Before you go there, phone him first.

<p id=151><form>adiyus, adiyús</form> <number>1</number> <tr>farewell</tr> (literary). <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; na lámang</formx> never mind, forget about s.t. expended for nothing. <i>Ug mupahulam ka níyag kwarta, adiyus na lang,</i> If you lend him money, you might as well kiss it <corr sic=good-bye>goodbye</corr>. <number>3</number> exclamation at the unpleasant consequences of s.t. one has observed taking place. <i>Adiyús nabásag na hinúun,</i> Oh Jesus! It broke! <i>Adiyús nalimtan nákù ag pitáka,</i> Jesus! I forgot my purse!

<!-- Confused entry, sub-entries may need to move to end; there is no TING-_2 -->

<p id=152><form>adlaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sun</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>day</tr>. <i>May adlaw nga magbásul ka,</i> The day will come that you will be sorry. <number>2a</number> day, as opposed to night. <form>pila ka &mdash;</form> it won&apos;t be long. <i>Pila ka adlaw makapánaw ta sa búwan,</i> Soon we&apos;ll be able to take trips to the moon. <number>2b</number> one&apos;s day for winning. <i>Ímu tanang adlaw,</i> You get all the breaks. <number>3</number> <tr>birthday</tr>. <number>4</number> amount earned in a day. <i>Singku ra may íyang adlaw niánà,</i> He only gets five pesos a day from it. <form>&mdash; sa minatay</form> <tr>All Soul&apos;s Day</tr>. <form>Mahal nga &mdash;</form> <tr>Holy Week</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> receive a certain amount daily. <i>Muadlaw kug tagduha ka líbu ka písus,</i> I net two thousand pesos a day. <i>Adláwi lang siyag tag-diyis,</i> Pay him ten pesos per day. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> celebrate a birthday. <i>Adtu nyà sa ámù kay mag-adlaw ku,</i> Come to my house for my birthday party. <form>adlaw-adlaw</form> every day. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> for it to be daylight. <i>Ayaw úsà pagpaúli. Adláwan pa bítaw,</i> Don&apos;t go home yet! It&apos;s still daylight anyway. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> food used to celebrate a birthday with. <i>Iháwa na ang adlawan,</i> Slaughter the birthday pig. <form>-in-</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>daily</tr>, by the day. <number>2</number> <tr>lukewarm</tr> (lit. put in the sun). <i>Túbig inadlaw,</i> Warm water. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> do on a daily basis. <i>Inadlawun (inadláwun) ka nákug dúaw,</i> I will visit you daily. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make water warm. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>birthday present</tr>. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>birthday</tr>, day of patron saint. <form>ka-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dawn</tr>. <i>Mugíkan ku ugmà sa kaadláwun,</i> I&apos;ll leave tomorrow at dawn. <form>pang-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. used during daytime. <i>Sanínang pang-adlaw,</i> Dress for daytime wear. <number>2</number> day shift work. <form>tala-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>diary</tr>. <form>ti-</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>TING-</sc>. <bx>2</bx></xr> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sunny</tr>. <i>Sa buntag tiadlaw, apan sa hápun nag-ulan,</i> In the morning it was sunny, but in the afternoon it rained. <form>ting-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dry season</tr>.&dagger;

<p id=153><form>adlib<sub>2</sub>, adlip<sub>1</sub></form> <tr>ad lib</tr> in music. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> perform music ad lib.

<p id=154><form>adlip<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab27]</itype> <tr>slice</tr> into long pieces. <i>Adlípa ang mangga sa makatulu,</i> Slice the mango into three pieces. <i>Hiadlipan ákung tudlù,</i> My finger got cut as I was slicing s.t. <pos>n</pos> <tr>slice</tr>.

<p id=155><form>adlù</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish.

<p id=156><form>administradur</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>administrator</tr> of an estate. <number>2</number> <tr>head</tr> of a government agency. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> be an administrator.

<p id=157><form>administrasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>administration</tr> incumbent at a certain period. <i>Sa administrasiyun ni Garsíya,</i> During Garcia&apos;s administration.

<p id=158><form>administratíbu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>administrative</tr>.

<p id=159><form>admirar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>admire</tr>. <i>Ug buhátun nà nímu, admirahan ka giyud,</i> If you do that, people will admire you for it.&dagger;

<p id=160><form>admisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> general <tr>admission</tr> section in a theater or stadium. <number>2</number> cost of admission in a theater or stadium. <number>3</number> admission slip to an exam.

<p id=161><form>admitar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>admit</tr>, <tr>concede</tr> a point. <i>Admitahi lang nà,</i> Just admit it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> admit to a hospital.

<p id=162><form>admitídu</form> <pos>n</pos> one who has conceded a point, admitted s.t. <i>Admitídu siya nga siya nakadawat <pb n=10>sa sulat,</i> He admits that he has received the letter.

<p id=163><form>admitir</form> <xr>= <sc>ADMITAR</sc>.</xr>

<p id=164><form>adngan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small fish.

<p id=165><form>adpan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a4]</itype> be slightly <tr>scorched</tr> to the point of being discolored. <i>Naadpan (giadpan) ang ákung pánit,</i> My skin became <tr>tanned</tr>. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to get easily tanned.

<p id=166><form>adris</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>address</tr>. <form>way &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> tough guy, police character (lit. one who does not have an established residence). <i>Ikaw nga maistru makigbúnù ánang way adris,</i> You, a teacher, want to fight with that police character? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> write an address. <i>Unsay ákung iadris sa suwat?</i> What address shall I put on the letter?

<p id=167><form>adtu<sub>1</sub></form> <number>1</number> <tr>there</tr> (far away, future). <i>Adtu ku higdà sa íla,</i> I will sleep there at their house. <number>2</number> will go s.w. far. <i>Adtu ku sa Karbun,</i> I&apos;m going to the market. <number>3</number> there he (she, etc.) goes doing it (although he shouldn&apos;t be). <i>Adtu nanghambug na sad,</i> There he goes again, showing off. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b3c]</itype> go, bring to a place. <i>Nakaadtu na ku didtu kas-a,</i> I went there once. <i>Unsa mang lugára ang giadtúan ninyu?</i> What place did you go to? <i>Iadtu kini ngadtu sa íla,</i> Go bring this to their house. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a2]</itype> go get s.t. <i>Ikaw bay nag-adtu kang Pidru arun paanhíun siya?</i> Were you the one who went to Pedro&apos;s to tell him to come? <i>Ug dì ka manáug ánang kahúya adtúun tika,</i> If you do not come down from that tree, I&apos;ll come up after you. <form>hi-/ha-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> happen to go. <i>Diyútay ra kaáyu ang mahiadtu sa mga táwu,</i> A very small amount seeps down to the people. <form>adtuan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>always go</tr> s.w. <i>Mag-adtuan ku sa íla káda buntag,</i> I always go see them every morning. <form>adtuúnun, aladtúun</form> <pos>n</pos> things one has to get. <pos>a</pos> hard to get to. <i>Dì ku muadtu sa inyu kay aladtúun kaáyu,</i> I won&apos;t go to your place because it is hard to get to. <form>umaadtúay, umaadtu</form> <pos>n</pos> about to go. <form>kaadtuun</form> <pos>a</pos> feel very much like going s.w.

<p id=168><form>adtu<sub>2</sub></form> <number>1</number> short for <xr><sc>NIADTU</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> short for <xr><sc>KANIADTU</sc>.</xr> <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>KADTU</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p id=169><form>adtut</form> <xr>= <sc>ADTU</sc> (colloquial).</xr>

<p id=170><form>adubádu</form> <xr>= <sc>ADUBÁWU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=171><form>adubáwu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> meat cooked in salt, vinegar with spices then fried, with fat or liquid leftover. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cook <ix>adubáwu.</ix> <i>Átù lang adubawúhun ning bábuy,</i> We&apos;ll just make <ix>adubáwu</ix> out of this pork.

<p id=172><form>adubáwu<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>KÚTIL</sc>, <ix>n</ix>, <ix>v1.</ix></xr>

<p id=173><form>adúbi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>adobe</tr>, bricks made of clay. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> build s.t. with adobe.

<p id=174><form>adúbu</form> <pos>n</pos> meat fried in salt and vinegar. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cook <ix>adúbu.</ix>

<p id=175><form>adul</form> <pos>a</pos> mentally deficient. <i>Dì giyud kasabut ang adul bísag unsáug isplikar,</i> No matter how you explain it to the imbecile, he will never understand.

<!-- Shouln&apos;t order of pos and subentry be different? -->

<p id=176><form>*adult</form> <pos>n</pos> <form>&mdash; idyukisyun</form> adult education.&dagger;

<p id=177><form>adultiryu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>adultery</tr>.

<p id=178><form>ad-un</form> <xr>= <sc>ADÚNA</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p id=179><form>adúna</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <formx>dúna</formx> there is, are, will be. <i>Dúnay libru sa lamísa,</i> There is a book on the table. <form>-y <r>[<ix>subject</ix>]</r></form> [subject] has. <i>Dúnay libru si Huwan,</i> John has a book. <form>paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> strive to have s.t. <i>Bisag wà kuy kwarta, pakaadunáhun giyud aku nímu,</i> Even though I have no money, you want to force me to get some. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>PAKAADUNÁHAN</sc>.</xr> <form>adunáhan</form> <pos>a</pos> wealthy. <i>Usa siya sa mga adunáhan sa ámung lungsud,</i> He is one of the wealthy people in our town. <form>pakaadunáhan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> pretend to be wealthy, consider to be wealthy. <i>Nagpakaadunáhan siya bisag way nahut,</i> He pretends to be rich even though he hasn&apos;t got a penny. <i>Gipakaadunáhan ba aku nímu?</i> Do you think I&apos;m rich?

<p id=180><form>adupt&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>adopt</tr> a child.&dagger;

<p id=181><form>adurnu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>decoration</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>decorate</tr>. <i>Nindut kaáyu ang kapilya nga giadurnúhan ug búlak,</i> The chapel was beautifully decorated with flowers. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> make oneself up, put on s.t. special. <i>Nangadurnu ang mga dalága,</i> The girls are getting themselves all fixed up.

<p id=182><form>adwána</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>customs</tr>.&dagger;

<p id=183><form>*adyà</form> <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> selective, <tr>choosy</tr>. <i>Adyaan man gud nang bayhána; mau nga wà maminyù,</i> That woman is choosy; that is why she did not get married. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become choosy.

<p id=184><form>adyaks</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a brand name for a dish cleanser. <number>2</number> prostitute (slang).

<p id=185><form>adyas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put at a specific setting, <tr>adjust</tr>. <i>Ákung adyasun (iadyas) ang pabílu sa sugà,</i> I&apos;ll adjust the lamp wick.

<p id=186><form>adyinda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>agenda</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put on the agenda. <i>Iadyinda nà sa sunud míting,</i> Put that in the agenda for the next meeting.

<p id=187><form>adyinumútu</form> <pos>n</pos> brand of monosodium glutamate. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> cook with Ajinomoto.

<p id=188><form>ag</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <formx>g</formx> subject marker for specific or past time subject (dialectal). <i>Ag táwung gibukbuk sa buguy namatay ganíha,</i> The man that was mauled by the ruffian died a while ago. <form>&mdash; sa</form> past time substitute for <ix>sa.</ix> <i>Pwirting uwánga ag sa irù,</i> My, how that dog barked.

<p id=189><form>agaab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b3]</itype> cry out loudly. <i>Miagaab ang bátà kay giilúgan sa íyang duláan,</i> The child cried loudly when his toys were <pb n=11>snatched away.

<p id=190><form>agáak</form> <xr>= <sc>AKÁAK</sc>.</xr>

<p id=191><form>*agad</form> <form>&mdash; ug, y</form> it would be a good thing if such-and-such were the case. <i>Agad pag magtuun ka imbis magdúlà,</i> It would be better for you to study instead of playing. <i>Agad pa untay nagduktur ka sa kaping mag-abugádu,</i> It would have been nice if you had become a doctor instead of a lawyer. <form>&mdash; nga</form> it was good enough as it was before a change took place. <i>Agad siyang natúlug, ngánu pa mang ímung gipúkaw?</i> He was doing all right sleeping. What did you have to go and wake him up for?

<p id=192><form>ágad</form> <xr>= <sc>ALÁGAD</sc>.</xr> <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> for a prospective bridegroom to stay in the girl&apos;s place just prior to the marriage ceremony in order to serve the family. <i>Pangagáran úsà nímu ang ginikánan arun kauyúnan ka níla,</i> You serve the girl&apos;s parents so that they will come to like you. <form>-um-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>son-in-law</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23S; a12]</itype> take as a son-in-law. <form>umagarun</form> <pos>n</pos> prospective son-in-law.

<p id=193><form>agad-ad<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> slightly <tr>rubbery</tr>, but soft to chew. <i>Ang alud-ud sa manuk agad-ad kaúnun,</i> Chicken cartilage is soft to chew.

<p id=194><form>agad-ad<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>grunt</tr> contentedly. <i>Muagad-ad ang anay ug magpasúsu sa íyang mga baktin,</i> A sow grunts when nursing its litter. <pos>n</pos> prolonged grunt of contentment emitted by pigs.

<p id=195><form>ag-ag</form> <xr>= <sc>ALAG-AG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=196><form>*agagang</form> <form>hi-/ha-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <tr>hesitate</tr> doing s.t. due to indecision or confusion. <i>Nahiagagang siya pagdáwat sa rigálu,</i> She hesitated before accepting the present.

<p id=197><form>agáhad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> clear one&apos;s throat. <i>Miagáhad siya, unyà nangluwà,</i> He cleared his throat, then spat. <pos>n</pos> action of clearing the throat.

<p id=198><form>ágak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> give the hand to lead or lend <tr>support</tr>. <i>Akù siyang agákun tapun sa karsáda,</i> I&apos;ll help him cross the street. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>guide</tr> s.o. in moral principles. <i>Kitang mga hamtung angayang muágak sa mga batan-un,</i> We older folks should guide the younger generation. <form>-ay</form> <xr>= <sc>ÁGAK</sc>.</xr> <form>mag-r-(&rarr;), mag-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> trainer, one who guides others in learning s.t. <form>-l-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> weak, to be led when walking. <i>Gúlang na táwun si Lúlu alagakun ug mulakaw,</i> Grandpa is so old that he is to be led when he walks.&dagger;

<p id=199><form>agak-ak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1</number> for chickens to make the <tr>clucking sound</tr> of being disturbed. <i>Miagak-ak ang manuk kay nasangkilan,</i> The chicken squawked when s.o. touched it. <number>2</number> <tr>cackle</tr>, <tr>squawk</tr> with laughter.

<p id=200><form>agálun</form> (from <ix>ágad</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>master</tr>, <tr>boss</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A123S]</itype> happen to get a master. <i>Nakaagawun akug dagmalan,</i> I happened to work for a cruel master. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2SN]</itype> for animals or possessions to allow only the owner to make use of it. <i>Nag-agawun kining ákung kabáyù, aku ray makakabayù,</i> My horse is <tr>choosy</tr>. I&apos;m the only one who can ride on him. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b(1)]</itype> work for a master. <i>Mangagálun lang kug way láing kapangabuhían,</i> I&apos;ll work as a servant if I can&apos;t find any other job. <i>Insik ang íyang gipangagawunan,</i> He worked for a Chinese.&dagger;

<p id=201><form>agan-an</form> <pos>n</pos> sand-like <tr>pellets</tr> which are the droppings of a k.o. wood-boring insect. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4b4]</itype> be infested with wood-borers. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> having <ix>agan-an.</ix>

<p id=202><form>agáng</form> <number>1</number> exclamation uttered upon experiencing pain. <i>Agáng sakíta!</i> <tr>Ouch</tr>, how painful! <number>2</number> exclamation of disbelief or disgust. <i>Agáng, ikaw na lang nawnga ang manlangyaw? Tapulan!</i> Humph! The likes of you immigrating? You&apos;re too lazy.

<p id=203><form>agang-agang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>hesitate</tr> before doing s.t. <i>Miagang-agang kug palit, mau nga naunhan aku,</i> I hesitated before buying, so s.o. got it before me. <i>Dílì ku nímu ángay nga agang-agangan,</i> You should not hesitate (to ask) me. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN23; a12]</itype> shoulder work, responsibility, and other duties which ought to be done by s.o. else. <i>Dílì maáyu nga ang mga inahan mauy muagang-agang (mangagang-agang) sa trabáhu sa balay ug dagkù na ang mga anak,</i> It&apos;s not good for a mother to do the household chores when her children are big. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to shouldering work, responsibilities, and the like which should be done by other persons.

<p id=204><form>agap</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> in a great <tr>hurry</tr> to do s.t. <i>Agap ka ra kaáyung misudyà níya,</i> You were much too quick to remind him he was wrong. <number>2</number> intensely interested in obtaining s.t. <i>Aku nga agap ug salapì mihátag sa ákung láwas,</i> Greedy for money, I surrendered my body. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> make haste to. <i>Agapun nátù pagtabuk únà magbálud,</i> Let&apos;s make haste to cross before the waves rise. <number>2</number> be after s.t. <i>Nagpabulubuútan uruy nà siya kay nag-agap man ug dulsi,</i> He is pretending to be well-behaved because he is interested in getting candy.

<p id=205><form>agápang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>mullet</tr>.

<p id=206><form>agára</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>claim</tr> as his own s.t. owned in common with s.o. else or belonging to s.o. else. <i>Hasta ang ákung tutbras ímung agaráhun,</i> You want to lay claim to my toothbrush, too? <i>Giagaráhan mig yútà sa asindíru,</i> The landowner laid claim to our land.

<p id=207><form>agaray</form> <tr>ouch</tr>! <i>Agaray! Bídang sakíta nímung <pb n=12>mangusì!</i> Ouch! That pinch hurt. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> say &lsquo;ouch&rsquo;.

<p id=208><form>ágas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> <tr>flow</tr> from an opening. <i>Nag-agas na ang túbig,</i> There is water now. (Lit. The water is flowing now.) <i>Giagásan ang dálan ug gasulína,</i> Gasoline flowed over the street. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>leaky</tr>. <i>Agas kaáyu ang táru,</i> The can is leaky. <form>&mdash; ug pálad</form> <tr>spendthrift</tr> (lit. having leaky hands).

<p id=209><form>agaw</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <formx>gaw</formx> title for people who are cousins. <i>Anía si Agaw Tídu,</i> Here is Cousin Tido. <form>ig-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cousin</tr>: children of one&apos;s parent&apos;s sibling or parent&apos;s <ix>ig-ágaw.</ix> <form>ig-(&larr;) igtagsa</form> first cousin, children of a parent&apos;s siblings. <form>ig-(&larr;) igtagurha</form> second cousin, children of a parent&apos;s <ix>ig-ágaw igtagsa.</ix> <form>ig-(&larr;) igtagutlu</form> third cousin, children of a parent&apos;s <ix>ig-ágaw igtagurha.</ix> <form>ig-(&larr;) sa kasingkásing</form> <pos>n</pos> a lover one pretends is his cousin in public. <form>mag-(&larr;), manag-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> people who are <ix>ig-ágaw</ix> with each other. <form>pag-agáwan, panag-agáwan</form> <pos>n</pos> <form>sa &mdash;</form> related by virtue of being <ix>ig-ágaw</ix> to the (grand)parents or (grand)children of one&apos;s cousin. <i>Uyuan ku siya sa panag-agáwan,</i> He is my uncle by being a cousin of my parents. <i>Pag-umangkun ku siya sa panag-agáwan,</i> She is my niece by being a daughter of my cousin.&dagger;

<p id=210><form>ágaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A, A3S; a]</itype> <tr>take</tr> s.t. away from s.o. <i>Ayawg agáwa ang duláan sa bátà,</i> Don&apos;t take the toy away from the child. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of <tr>snatching</tr>. <i>Babáying agawag bána,</i> A woman that is a husband snatcher. <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> one who snatches.

<p id=211><form>agáwun</form> <xr>= <sc>AGÁLUN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=212><form>agay</form> <tr>ouch</tr>!

<p id=213><form>ágay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> <tr>flow</tr> from a faucet, in a stream. <i>Dílì muágay ang túbig kay gisiradúhan ang grípu,</i> The water won&apos;t flow because the faucet is closed. <i>Nag-ágay ang íyang mga lúhà,</i> Her tears flowed.

<!-- agay-ay_2 in addenda, page 1142 -->

<p id=214><form>agay-ay<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>AGAN-AN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=215><form>agbat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>ÁBAT<sub>1</sub></sc>, <ix>v</ix>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>go after</tr> s.o. to catch up with him. <i>Dalì<corr>,</corr> agbata si Tátay,</i> Quick<corr>,</corr> go catch up with Father. <i>Maagbatan pa nímu ang íyang grádu,</i> You can still catch up to him in your grades.

<p id=216><form>agbáti</form> <xr>= <sc>ALUGBÁTI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=217><form>agbaw</form> <xr>= <sc>ADGAW</sc>.</xr>

<p id=218><form>agbay</form> <xr>= <sc>ALAGBAY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=219><form>agbun</form> <pos>n</pos> fine <tr>particles</tr> of soil or <tr>ashes</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> fly in fine particles. <i>Ayawg isagudsud ang ímung tiil kay muagbun ang abug,</i> Don&apos;t drag your feet because dust will fly. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> turn to <tr>dust</tr>. <i>Nagkaagbun na ang mga karáang mga papílis,</i> The old papers are turning into dust.

<p id=220><form>agda</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> invite s.o. to do s.t. <i>Miagda (nangagda) ku níya ug pakigkalígù,</i> I invited him to join me in going swimming. <i>Paghulat lag agdáhun kag káun,</i> Just wait until you&apos;re invited to eat. <pos>n</pos> <tr>request</tr>, <tr>invitation</tr> to s.o. to do s.t. <form>alagdahun, agdahúnun</form> <pos>n</pos> one who has to be told to do things. <i>Ang alagdahung binatunan maáyu dáyung ilísan,</i> A servant that needs a special invitation to work should be immediately replaced.

<p id=221><form>agdul</form> <xr>= <sc>ARUL</sc>, <ix>v 2.</ix></xr>

<p id=222><form>agh</form> written representation of throaty sound produced in uttering a gasp of pain or in clearing the throat.

<p id=223><form>aghad</form> <xr>= <sc>UGHAD</sc>.</xr>

<p id=224><form>aghat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> <tr>challenge</tr> s.o. to a fight. <i>Aghátun siya nátug sumbagay,</i> Let&apos;s challenge him to a fight. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; a12]</itype> <tr>induce</tr>, <tr>prompt</tr> s.o. to do s.t. <i>Ang kapubri makaaghat (makapaaghat) nátù sa pagpangáwat,</i> Poverty can drive us to steal. <i>Aghátun tikaw sa pagbása sa libru,</i> I will urge you to read the book. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>provoking</tr>, <tr>inviting</tr>. <i>Nadápit ku pagdúul níya sa maaghátun niyang pahiyum,</i> I was drawn to her by her inviting smile.

<p id=225><form>aghud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b(1)]</itype> force oneself to bear with a backbreaking task. <i>Ngánung nag-aghud ka <corr sic="mag uma">mag-uma</corr> nga tigúlang ka na man?</i> Why are you breaking your back farming when you are old?

<p id=226><form>aghup</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>tender</tr> in feelings or treatment. <form>ma-</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>tender</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> do in a tender way. <i>Giaghup ku silag buyag,</i> I scolded them tenderly.

<p id=227><form>aghuy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>supernatural being</tr> which does good, does not show itself, and puts itself at the service of a single sorcerer and no other person. He cures sick persons and sorcery victims only through the intercession of this sorcerer. He also acts as a spy for the sorcerer. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>sorcerer</tr> with an <ix>aghuy</ix>.

<p id=228><form>aghuy<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab5]</itype> <tr>shout</tr> over distance to attract attention. <i>Adtúa na lang; ayaw na lang aghuya (aghuyi),</i> Just go to him; don&apos;t shout to call his attention. <pos>n</pos> a shout over a distance.

<p id=229><form>agi</form> <number>1</number> <tr>oh my!</tr>, expression of surprise. <i>Agi, kadakù ánang isdáa!</i> Oh my! How big that fish is! <number>1a</number> expression of revulsion to s.t. perceived. <i>Agi, kangilngig naadtu!</i> My! how terrible that was! <number>1b</number> expression of objection to s.t. different from what is desired. <i>Agi! Dì man nà mau!</i> My! That is not the one I asked for. <number>1c</number> expression of happiness at s.t. found out. <i>Agi, kanindut, kun tinúud,</i> My! How nice, if it&apos;s true. <number>2</number> expression of sudden pain. <i>Agi! Sakíta,</i> Ow! That hurts.

<p id=230><form>ági</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S3S; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> go by, through a place. <pb n=13><i>Dílì ku muági dihà kay náay irù,</i> I won&apos;t go that way because there&apos;s a dog there. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A2S; c]</itype> for food to be cooked in s.t. <i>Dì ku makakáug sud-an nga giági ug mantíkà,</i> I can&apos;t eat food that was cooked in fat. <number>2</number> for time to go by. <i>Nakadaug aku sa swipstik sa miáging simána,</i> I won the sweepstakes last week. <i>Sa nag-aging mga búlan, nagkaluya pud siya,</i> As the months went by, he became steadily weaker. <number>3</number> gone through one&apos;s hands, had experience with one. <i>Pila na ka babáyi ang niági kaníya?</i> How many women have gone through his hands? <i>Daghan na ang ispisyalista nga miági kaníya,</i> Many specialists have examined her. <number>4</number> have experienced s.t. <i>Nakaagi na ku sa pagpamutsatsu,</i> I have already experienced being a servant. <number>5</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> for a writing instrument to work. <i>Dì na muági ning bulpína,</i> This ballpoint pen doesn&apos;t write any more. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> path traversed. <i>Mibálik siya sa íyang ági,</i> He retraced his steps. <number>2</number> result of the action of some instrument. <i>Ági sa gabas,</i> The kerf of the saw. <i>Ági sa lápis,</i> The imprint of the pencil. <i>Ági sa makina,</i> Stitches of the sewing machine. <i>Ági sa bunal,</i> Welts made by a whip. <i>Ági sa dáru,</i> Furrows. <number>3</number> handwriting. <number>4</number> <tr>output</tr>, work accomplished. <i>Gamay kaáyu siyag ági kay tapulan,</i> He has little output because he&apos;s lazy. <number>6</number> profits. <i>Dakù siyag ági sa pagpahulam,</i> He made big profits from his usury. <number>7</number> transient. <i>Ági lang ang íyang kasukù,</i> His anger will soon pass. <number>8</number> <formx>&mdash; ug, sa</formx> by way of, as an expression of. <i>Kining rilu ágig handumánan nátù,</i> This watch is by way of remembrance. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> pass by to pick up or leave s.t. on the way. <i>Agiun tika unyà,</i> I&apos;ll stop by to pick you up. <i>Iagi ang karsunsilyu sa ka Pidru,</i> Bring the shorts to Pedro&apos;s on your way. <pos>a</pos> <tr>leaky</tr>. <i>Tárung agi,</i> A leaky can. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become leaky. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> cause to go in a certain way. <i>Unsáun man nátù pagpaági nga dílì mailhan?</i> How will we do it so it won&apos;t be recognized? <i>Ang íyang gugma gipaági níya sa suwat,</i> He made his love known through letters. <pos>n</pos> <tr>way</tr>. <i>Unsay maáyung paági sa paglútug bam-i?</i> What is a good way to prepare noodles? <form>pina-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>means</tr>. <i>Nabuksan ang kandádu pinaági sa yáwi,</i> The lock was opened by means of a key. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> for an expectant mother to have her bag of waters break. <i>Gipangagían na siya piru wà pa magbatì,</i> Her bag of waters has broken, but she is not in labor yet. <form>agiánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>passageway</tr>. <i>Makalapus ka ngadtu kay náa may agiánan,</i> You can pass <corr sic=thru>through</corr> there because there is a passageway. <number>2</number> a means to an end or accomplishment. <i>Kanang hulamhúlam ug libru mauy usa ka pasángil, agiánan sa panagsulátay níla,</i> Borrowing each other&apos;s books was a means for them to write each other. <form>alagían</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>AGIÁNAN</sc>.</xr> <pos>a</pos> near a place people pass. <i>Ang ílang balay alagían kanang paingun ta sa lungsud,</i> Their house is right on the way when we go to town. <form>-um-r-, -um-l-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> about to <tr>pass</tr>. <number>2</number> of a passing character. <i>Umaági (umalági) ra ning ulána,</i> This is just a passing rain. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> an event, <tr>happening</tr>, or experience. <i>Ang súnug usa ka kaági nga dílì malimtan,</i> The conflagration is an unforgettable event. <form>kaaginhun, maaginhun</form> <pos>a</pos> full of history, <tr>eventful</tr>.&dagger;

<p id=231><form>ágid</form> <xr>= <sc>AMGID</sc>.</xr>

<p id=232><form>agigísing</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>temples</tr>, hair on the temples.

<p id=233><form>agíik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>creak</tr>, squeak. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> creak, squeak. <i>Nag-agíik ang íyang mga túhud,</i> His knees creaked. <i>Ayawg agiíka (iagíik) ang sira,</i> Don&apos;t let the door creak.

<p id=234><form>agik-ik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> laugh, but not openly. <i>Nag-agik-ik sila pagpangutut sa maistra,</i> They snickered when the teacher broke wind.

<p id=235><form>agil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b5]</itype> shave hair off (not beard). <i>Ug mangagil (mangágil) ka sa bábuy ayawg samári ang pánit,</i> When you shave the pig, do not damage the skin. <i>Ayaw ug agila (agili) ang patilya,</i> Don&apos;t shave the sideburns. <pos>n</pos> <tr>razor</tr>. <form>ig-l-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> razor to shave pig bristle.

<p id=236><form>agila</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>eagle</tr>.

<p id=237><form>agímud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> stick out the lips in pouting or in displeasure. <i>Muagímud (mangagímud) man lang ug átung sugúun,</i> He just puckers his lips when we ask him to run an errand.

<p id=238><form>*aginaldu</form> <form>mísa di-</form> <xr>= <sc>MÍSA DIGALYU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=239><form>agíngay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tall hairy grass of open fields used as forage.

<p id=240><form>aginsud</form> <xr>= <sc>AGÍNUD</sc>.</xr>

<p id=241><form>agínud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; a]</itype> <number>1</number> move dragging s.t. on the ground. <i>Nag-agínud ang bakul padúng sa simbahan,</i> The cripple dragged himself to the church. <number>2</number> move forward slowly but steadily. <i>Miagínud ang barku pagsulud sa dungguánan,</i> The boat slowly moved into the dock. <pos>n</pos> slow, dragging movement. <i>Agínud sa hálas,</i> The creeping of a snake. <i>Ang agínud sa mga úras,</i> The slow passing of the hours.

<p id=242><form>agipu</form> <pos>n</pos> piece of wood with a glowing or burning tip.

<p id=243><form>agiri</form> <number>1</number> ouch! <number>2</number> exclamation of jubilation.

<p id=244><form>agis-is</form> <pos>n</pos> white scales on skin of the type which develop when the skin is dry. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; a4]</itype> develop whitish scales on skin. <i>Muagis-is (maagis-is, agis-isun) ang íyang bagtak,</i> Her legs develop whitish scales.

<pb n=14>

<p id=245><form>agit-it<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> squeaking strident sound made by two surfaces rubbing against each other. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> squeak stridently, become squeaky. <i>Kasábà sad íning siráha, muagit-it (nag-agit-it) man,</i> How noisy this door is! It squeaks.

<p id=246><form>agit-it<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> white streaks of dirt or dried up perspiration. <number>2</number> dirt that sticks to things or the skin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4b4]</itype> be begrimed with <ix>agit-it.</ix> <i>Giagit-itan (giagit-it) ang ímung líug,</i> Your neck is streaked with dirt. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> covered with <ix>agit-it.</ix>

<p id=247><form>agítung</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>burnt to charcoal</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; c1]</itype> get burnt to become charcoal. <i>Miagítung (naagítung) ang mais nga ákung gisugba,</i> I broiled the corn on the cob until it turned to charcoal. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> fire kept burning low over a long period of time so that it won&apos;t have to be rekindled.

<p id=248><form>ágiw</form> <pos>n</pos> fine, white <tr>ashes</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2; a12]</itype> burn to white ashes, cause to burn to ashes. <i>Muágiw (maágiw) na gánì nang úling tayhúpi,</i> When the charcoal turns to ashes, blow some of them away. <i>Mag-ágiw kug tabákù nga itambal,</i> I&apos;ll make some tobacco ashes to use as medicine. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> let s.t. turn into ashes. <i>Ayaw ipaágiw (paagíwa) ang úling,</i> Don&apos;t let the charcoal burn to ashes. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> have s.o. make ashes. <form>-l-an, -anan</form> <pos>n</pos> ash tray.

<p id=249><form>agkut</form> <xr>= <sc>HAGKUT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=250><form>aglidulsi</form> <xr>= <sc>LIMUNSÍTU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=251><form>aglípay, aglipayánu</form> <pos>n</pos> member of the Aglipayan religious sect. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> become an Aglipayan.

<p id=252><form>agmang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. eel.

<p id=253><form>agmud</form> <pos>n</pos> grunting, snorting noises. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> <tr>grunt</tr>, snort. <i>Ígù lang siyang miagmud (nangagmud) sa ákung pagpananghid,</i> He just grunted when I asked his permission.

<p id=254><form>agngan</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>ADNGAN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=255><form>agni</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>urge</tr> s.o. to do s.t. <i>Giagni siya sa pagpaúlì sa asáwa,</i> He was urged to return to his wife.

<p id=256><form>agnus</form> <pos>n</pos> holy <tr>charm</tr> or relic affixed to the body to ward off evil. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b]</itype> wear an <ix>agnus.</ix>

<p id=257><form>agpan</form> <xr>= <sc>ADPAN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=258><form>agpang</form> <pos>n</pos> a thin piece of bamboo, three or four inches in length used to set the size of the hole in weaving fish nets.

<p id=259><form>agpas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> <number>1</number> go after s.o. to catch up with him. <i>Agpása, kay wà tu siya kabayad,</i> Go after him. He hasn&apos;t paid. <number>2</number> meet a seller&apos;s offer. <i>Dì pud ku muagpas ug baynti ánang sapatúsa,</i> I would not even give you twenty for those shoes. <number>3</number> catch up in time. <i>Dì na nákù maagpas ang trabáhu, taudtaud na kung naabsin,</i> I can&apos;t catch up with the work. I&apos;ve been absent too long. <number>4</number> be after, interested in obtaining s.t. <i>Kwarta lay íyang giagpas,</i> All she&apos;s after is money. <number>5</number> <itype>[A12; b5]</itype> <number>a</number> catch a meaning. <i>Wà siya kaagpas sa lísu,</i> He didn&apos;t catch the joke. <number>b</number> know the cause or defect. <i>Wà ku kaagpas unsay dipiktu íning mutúra,</i> I can&apos;t figure out what is wrong with this motorcycle. <number>6</number> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> think of s.t. to say. <i>Walà nay ikapangagpas (ikaagpas) ang dalága sa pagpamalíbad,</i> The girl could think of no more excuses for refusing him. <pos>n</pos> highest price offered in buying s.t. <i>Pila man giyuy agpas mu?</i> What is the highest price you offer? <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> say s.t. additional as an afterthought. <i>Mipaagpas siyag túgun sa paglakaw nákù,</i> He called after me to ask me to do s.t. for him as I was leaving. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1</number> go after s.t. and take advantage of it in time. <i>Mangagpas ta sa higayun samtang barátu pa,</i> Let&apos;s take advantage of the opportunity while it is still cheap. <number>2</number> figure s.t. out. <i>May nangagpas nga láin siyag túyù,</i> S.o. figured out that he had evil intentions. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>interpretation</tr> of a situation. <number>2</number> a second planting to replace seeds that did not do well. <i>Namatay ang ubang tanum. Pangagpas ning tanúma,</i> Some of the plants died. This planting is to replace them.&dagger;

<p id=260><form>agrabiyar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> have a <tr>complaint</tr> about treatment. <i>Makaagrabiyar ka pa uruy nga nakabintahà ka man,</i> You claim you&apos;re being treated unfairly, though before, you had the advantage.

<p id=261><form>agrabyádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>taking offense</tr>. <i>Agrabyádu ku sa ímung gisulti,</i> I feel offended at what you said. <number>2</number> having a <tr>grievance</tr>, reason for complaint.

<p id=262><form>agrabyu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a2b3]</itype> have a <tr>complaint</tr> about a treatment. <i>Ayaw agrabyúha ning ákung gibúhat,</i> Don&apos;t complain about what I did. <pos>n</pos> s.t. which gives rise to grievances. <i>Ang agrabyu sa mga Pilipínu gíkan sa mga Katsílà walà na maagwanta,</i> The Filipinos could no longer endure their grievances against the Spaniards.

<p id=263><form>agri, agridulsi</form> <xr>= <sc>LIMUNSÍTU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=264><form>agrigáwu</form> <xr>= <sc>ABRIGÁWU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=265><form>agrikultúra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>agriculture</tr>. <form>agrikulturista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>agriculturist</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be an agriculturist.

<p id=266><form>agriminsur</form> <pos>n</pos> land <tr>surveyor</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a land surveyor.

<p id=267><form>agrísib</form> <xr>= <sc>AGRISÍBA, AGRISÍBU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=268><form>agrisíba</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>AGRISÍBU</sc>, (female).</xr> <number>2</number> <tr>aggressive</tr>, eager for sex. <i>Agrisíba kunu ang mga mistísa,</i> They say the mestiza girls are sexually <corr sic=aggresive>aggressive</corr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be sexually aggressive.

<pb n=15>

<p id=269><form>agrisíbu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>aggressive</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b]</itype> be aggressive. <form>-in-</form> <pos>a</pos> in an aggressive manner. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> do s.t. aggressively. <i>Inagrisibúhun nátù pag-aplay ang trabáhu,</i> Let&apos;s be aggressive in our application for the job.

<p id=270><form>agsa<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> work on s.t. and be paid with half of product. <i>Muagsa ku sa ímung tíkug kay wà kuy puhúnan,</i> I will work with your material for half the output, as I have none of my own.

<p id=271><form>agsa<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>IGTAGSA</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>AGAW</sc>.</xr>

<p id=272><form>agsing</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b2]</itype> for a missile to graze s.o. <i>Ígù lang nakaagsing ang bála sa íyang agtang,</i> The bullet just grazed his forehead.

<p id=273><form>agtà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> supernatural man of dark complexion and extraordinary size, said to inhabit trees, cliffs, or empty houses. He is said to play practical jokes on people, kidnap them. He has a large cigar in his mouth. <number>2</number> name occasionally given to <corr sic=Negritoes>Negritos</corr>.

<p id=274><form>agtang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>forehead</tr>. <number>2</number> region just above the genitalia (humorous metaphorical). <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> hit at the forehead. <i>Agtangun tika run,</i> I will hit you on the forehead. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having a prominent forehead.

<p id=275><form>agtì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN]</itype> <number>1</number> become very dark due to heat. <i>Miagtì (nangagtì) íyang nawung sa ínit,</i> His face has become black because of the sun. <number>2</number> be dry and brittle. <i>Ning-agtì ang káhuy,</i> The wood became dry and brittle.

<p id=276><form>agú</form> exclamation of woe or pain: ouch! <i>Agú! Kalisud sa way inahan,</i> Woe, how difficult it is to have no mother. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> exclaim <ix>agú.</ix>

<p id=277><form>Agu.</form> abbreviation for <ix>Agustu,</ix> August.

<p id=278><form>ag&umacrgra;</form> <xr>= <sc>AGÚLÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=279><form>agubhub</form> <pos>n</pos> hollow thudding sound. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> resound with hollow thudding sound. <i>Miagubhub ang platapurma nga ílang gisayáwan ug tiniil,</i> The platform they were dancing on in their bare feet resounded with a thudding sound.

<p id=280><form>agub-ub<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> crunchy and hard to chew, like hardtack. <i>Agub-ub kaúnun ang sinángag pasì,</i> Fried corn grains are crunchy to eat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A4]</itype> make crunchy sound.

<p id=281><form>agub-ub<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mold</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4b4]</itype> be moldy. <i>Giagub-ub (giagub-uban) ang surísu nga dúgayng gitagúan,</i> The sausages have become moldy because they were kept too long.

<p id=282><form>agud</form> <xr>= <sc>ARUN<sub>1</sub></sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p id=283><form>agúha</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> big sewing needle for sewing up sacks. <number>2</number> name given to any large needle or safety pin.

<p id=284><form>aguhilya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> U-shaped hairpin. <number>2</number> a small <tr>needle</tr> bigger than the ordinary sewing needle, but smaller than the <ix>agúha.</ix> <number>3</number> hypodermic needle. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> use an <ix>aguhilya.</ix> <i>Aguhilyáun lang ni nátung gisì sa sáku,</i> Let&apos;s sew the sack with a large needle. <i>Ug dílì ka mukáun, maaguhilyáan ka sa duktur,</i> If you refuse to eat, the doctor will have to use his needle on you. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make an <ix>aguhilya.</ix>

<p id=285><form>agúhù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Australian pine</tr>: <bio>Casuarina equistifolia</bio>. Lumber and ornamental tree. The roots and bark have medicinal uses. Young specimens are used as Christmas trees.

<p id=286><form>aguk-uk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> laugh vigorously in suppressed or stifled laughter. <i>Muaguk-uk giyud kug katáwa kun mahinumdum ku,</i> I break into suppressed laughter when I think about it. <pos>n</pos> vigorous but suppressed laughter. <pos>n</pos> k.o. grunt: <bio>Pomadasys hasta</bio>.

<p id=287><form>agúkuy</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ALAGÚKUY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=288><form>agul</form> <pos>a</pos> with the hair completely shaved off. <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>AGIL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=289><form>agulang</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>GÚLANG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=290><form>agúlù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S]</itype> <tr>groan</tr>, moan. <i>Ngánung nag-agúlù man ka, may sakit ka ba sa tiyan?</i> Why are you groaning? Do you have a stomach ache? <pos>n</pos> groan.

<p id=291><form>agum</form> <xr>= <sc>LAGUM</sc>.</xr>

<p id=292><form>águm</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b4(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> undergo a bitter or painful experience. <i>Naágum sa dakung kapildíhan ang lungsud adtung bagyúha,</i> The town suffered a great loss in that storm. <number>2</number> get full use out of some benefit s.o. bestows on one. <i>Makaminyù ka na kay naágum na ku sa ímung kabudlay,</i> I allow you to get married because I made use of your labor (while you were single). <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> cause one to learn a lesson. <i>Ang dakung pildi nakapaágum nákù,</i> Losing a large amount taught me a lesson. <form>hi-/ha-</form> <xr>= <sc>ÁGUM</sc>.</xr> <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> bitter experience.

<p id=293><form>agumáa</form> <pos>n</pos> chub or striped mackerel: <bio>Rastrelliger sp</bio>.

<p id=294><form>agúmud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> <tr>grunt</tr>. <i>Nag-agumud ang bábuy nga naglúnang,</i> The pig was grunting as he wallowed in the mud.

<p id=295><form>agum-um</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large dove.

<p id=296><form>águng</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gong</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> sound a gong.

<p id=297><form>agúngal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>corn cob</tr>.

<p id=298><form>agung-ung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> loud sound that reverberates. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB46]</itype> <tr>reverberate</tr>, make s.t. reverberate. <i>Muagung-ung na gánì ang ayruplánu,</i> When the roar of the airplane resounds.

<p id=299><form>agung-ung<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> <tr>whine</tr> in a somewhat suppressed way, as in pain. <i>Nakaagung-ung sa kasakit ang irù nga gibunálan,</i> The dog he whipped whined in pain.

<p id=300><form>agúnguy</form> <pos>n</pos> prolonged <tr>wail</tr> of grief or pain, any wailing-like sound. <i>Agúnguy sa ambulansiya,</i> The wail of the ambulance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> wail. <i>Dì man angayang agungúyan nang <pb n=16>samára,</i> That wound is nothing to wail about.

<p id=301><form>aguníyas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>death knell</tr> at a funeral; also the knell on Good Friday to indicate the hour of Christ&apos;s death. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> sound the death knell.

<p id=302><form>aguntù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> emit a short grunt when hit in the pit of the stomach or when exerting an effort. <i>Miaguntù siya dihang naigù sa kutukutu,</i> He groaned when he was hit in the pit of the stomach. <pos>n</pos> <tr>short grunt</tr>.

<p id=303><form>agup-up</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mildew</tr>, mold. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4b4]</itype> get mildewed, moldy. <i>Ayawg paumgi ang ímung dintru arun dílì agup-upun,</i> Don&apos;t let your shirt get moist so that it won&apos;t get mildewed. <i>Giagup-up (giagup-upan) na ang sud-ang hikalimtan,</i> The food they forgot about got all moldy. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> mildewy, moldy.

<p id=304><form>aguruy</form> <tr>ouch</tr>! <i>Aguruy, ngánung namáak man ka?</i> Ouch! Why did you bite me? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> cry &lsquo;ouch&rsquo;.

<p id=305><form>águs</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S]</itype> <tr>ooze</tr>, flow out slowly. <i>Miágus ang nánà,</i> The pus oozed out.

<p id=306><form>agusahis</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. shrub or small tree. The leaves have rough upper surface and are used as sandpaper: <bio>Ficus odorata</bio> and <bio>ulmifolia</bio>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> sand s.t. with <ix>agusahis</ix> leaves.

<p id=307><form>Agustu</form> <pos>n</pos> August. <pos>v</pos> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ABRIL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=308><form>agus-us</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> delicacy made of cornstarch mixed with sugar, water, and sometimes other ingredients made into cylindrical rolls with banana leaves and broiled. <number>2</number> delicacy made of sweet potatoes and pork wrapped in coconut leaves. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC12; a2]</itype> make <ix>agus-us.</ix>

<p id=309><form>agut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> simple-minded. <i>Dalì mutúu ang agut,</i> The simple-minded fool believes anything you tell him. <number>2</number> slow, stunted in growth. <i>Agut ka man. Hilabwan na man lang ka sa ímung manghud,</i> You are stunted. Your little brother is taller than you are. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; a]</itype> be ignorant, simple-minded. <i>Makaagut man diay ning mag-istar ug búkid,</i> Staying in the mountains makes you simple-minded. <number>2</number> be stunted in growth. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> of a stunted or simple-minded sort. <i>Agutun mig kalíwat,</i> We are a family of short people.

<p id=310><form>agút</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>gritty</tr>. <i>Agút ang ginamus sa bás,</i> The fish paste is gritty with sand. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b]</itype> become gritty.

<p id=311><form>agútay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. wild banana, producing 2&Prime; long seedy fruit with a yellowish peel and sweet orange meat when ripe.

<p id=312><form>aguting</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. tobacco blight which makes the leaves turn whitish and curl up when they are dried. <number>2</number> k.o. banana blight which forms spots and makes the meat hard and inedible. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be affected with <ix>aguting.</ix>

<p id=313><form>agutíut</form> <pos>n</pos> squeaking, creaking sound produced by two surfaces rubbing against each other. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for surfaces to <tr>squeak</tr>, <tr>creak</tr>. <i>Muagutíut man ning ákung sapátus,</i> My shoes squeak.

<p id=314><form>agutnga</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> emit a somewhat prolonged <tr>grunt</tr> as when one is lifting a heavy load or has suffered pain. <i>Miagutnga siya sa kabug-at sa íyang gipas-an,</i> He groaned under the load he was carrying. <pos>n</pos> grunt.

<p id=315><form>agut-ut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>squeaking</tr> sound like that made by chewing on meat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make a squeaking sound.

<p id=316><form>agut-ut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>stunted</tr> in growth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> be stunted in growth. <i>Nagkaagut-ut ang mga tanum kay kúlang na sa tambuk ang yútà,</i> The plants are coming out stunted because the soil is infertile.

<p id=317><form>agut-ut<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>painful</tr> in a throbbing, gnawing way. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; b4]</itype> be throbbingly painful. <i>Nag-agut-ut ang ákung hubag,</i> My boil is giving me a gnawing pain. <i>Muhílak ku ug agut-utan ku sa ákung upirasyun,</i> I cry if the wound from my operation gnaws painfully.

<p id=318><form>agúut</form> <pos>a</pos> for s.t. soft or smooth to have a sandy, gritty texture because of improper cooking or some hard materials mixed in with it. <i>Agúut pa kaáyu ning kan-un, pataudtauri pa,</i> This rice is still hard in the center. Leave it on a little longer. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be <tr>gritty</tr>. <i>Nag-agúut ang ginamus sa balas,</i> The fish paste is gritty because of the sand.

<p id=319><form>aguy</form> <number>1</number> <tr>ouch</tr>! <i>Aguy, sakíta! Nasuyuran kus buyug,</i> Ouch! It hurts. I was stung by a wasp! <number>2</number> particle expressing pleasant surprise. <i>Aguy! Dúna diay kuy bag-ung sapátus<corr sic=".">,</corr></i> <ix>Yipee!</ix> I have a new pair of shoes! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> shout <ix>aguy.</ix>

<p id=320><form>aguyangyang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. poisonous field <tr>spider</tr> with a red tip at the abdomen.

<p id=321><form>aguyangyang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. wild annual <tr>vine</tr> that bears small, poisonous beans which are hard and red with a black tip. The beans are used ornamentally and medicinally: <bio>Abrus precatorius</bio>.

<!-- Subentry agwa bindíta seems out of order -->

<p id=322><form>agwa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>perfume</tr>, <tr>lotion</tr>. <form>&mdash; bindíta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>holy water</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> apply perfume to s.o. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get perfume. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> use perfume. <i>Humut ka dà. Nangagwa ka ba?</i> You smell nice. Are you using perfume? <form>agwahan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>perfume atomizer</tr>. <form>&mdash; uksináda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hydrogen peroxide</tr>.

<p id=323><form>agwáda</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>fetch</tr> water. <i>Agwadáhan lang tikag túbig,</i> I&apos;ll fetch water for you. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> fetch water for a fee. <pos>n</pos> the occupation of fetching water. <i>Makasapì pud siyag diyútay sa pangagwáda,</i> He can earn a little money in fetching water.&dagger;

<pb n=17>

<p id=324><form>agwádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>watery</tr>, of a thin mixture. <i>Pagkaagwádu sa ímung tsukuláti, mu rag hinúgas,</i> How watery your chocolate is. It is like dishwater. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make a thin mixture.&dagger;

<p id=325><form>agwadur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>water vendor</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a water vendor.


<!-- Handle xref at end -->

<p id=326><form>agwanta</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>endure</tr>, put up with. <i>Walay pawntinping muagwanta ánang ímung ginawian,</i> No pen can last the way you are using it. <i>Dì kung kaagwanta níya,</i> I cannot stand her. <i>Agwantahun lang nátù ang kagútum,</i> We&apos;ll just endure our hunger. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> put up with. <i>Bisag bagìbian ang asáwa, agwantahan (agwantahun) ku na lang,</i> My wife is a shrew, but I&apos;ll just put up with her. <form>&mdash; nga</form> how very. <i>Agwantang lisúra,</i> My! How difficult it is! <form>&mdash; muy</form> Can you imagine! <i>Agwanta mu bay mupalit ug kadilak mukás dáyun!</i> Can you imagine? He bought a Cadillac for cash! <form>-du, -dur(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> able to endure. <i>Agwantadur ang tagabaryu sa trabáhu,</i> Village folk can endure hard work. <xr><ix>see also</ix> &dagger;<sc>MARÍYA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=327><form>agwardiyinti</form> <pos>n</pos> refined alcohol, usually used in making liquor.

<p id=328><form>agwas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>public water system</tr>. <i>Ámung túbig gíkan sa agwas,</i> Our water comes from the public supply. <form>&mdash; putablis</form> <xr>= <sc>AGWAS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=329><form>agwasil</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>ALGUWASIL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=330><form>agwásun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large poisonous snake, black on the back and yellow-bellied.

<p id=331><form>ah</form> particle expressing rejection or denial. <i>Ah! Dílì kanà mahímù,</i> Oh! That&apos;s impossible. <i>Ah, dì ku. Kápuy,</i> Oh, I don&apos;t want to. It&apos;s too much like work.

<p id=332><form>aha</form> <tr>aha</tr>! <i>Aha! Nasakpan ka na giyud,</i> Aha! At last I&apos;ve caught you!

<p id=333><form>aháan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. blue-lined snapper: <bio>Lutianus rivulatus</bio>.

<p id=334><form>áhag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>sift</tr> fine particles from coarser ones. <i>Ahágun ku ang ginaling kapi,</i> I&apos;ll sift the ground coffee. <number>2</number> shake the remaining grains out of rice straw. <i>Ahága ang uhut,</i> Shake out the straw. <number>3</number> choose the best or biggest from a group. <i>Ikaw bay muáhag sa maáyung klásing isdà,</i> You choose the best fish. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sifter</tr> for milled corn.

<p id=335><form>áhak</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>crazy</tr> (used only in exclamations).<i> Aháka sad nímu uy!</i> You&apos;re nuts! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be crazy. <i>Gipabáyad kag singku? Giáhak,</i> She made you pay five pesos? Is she out of her mind? <i>Wà ku nímu sugta. Ahákun ka pa untà,</i> You don&apos;t accept me? I hope you go mad.

<p id=336><form>áhas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> haul in a fishing net. <i>Ahásun ni Durik ug sayu ang íyang púkut,</i> Doric will haul in his net early. <number>2</number> get s.t. from s.t. <i>Wà tay maáhas ug mangasáwa tag way kanghu,</i> There&apos;s no profit in marrying a poor woman.

<p id=337><form>áhas<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; c1]</itype> separate husked from unhusked rice. <i>Ahása (iáhas) pag-alig-ig ang gilubuk,</i> Separate the husked from the unhusked rice by shaking it.

<p id=338><form>ahat</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> done before the proper time. <i>Ahat nga kamatáyun,</i> <tr>Premature</tr> death. <number>2</number> <tr>forced</tr>. <i>Ahat nga pahiyum,</i> A forced smile. <i>Ahat nga pagkaminyù,</i> Forced marriage. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> do s.t. suddenly and unexpectedly. <i>Giunsa man nímu tung bátà nga miahat <corr sic="mag hílak">maghílak</corr>?</i> What did you do to the child that it cried suddenly? <number>2</number> <itype>[B3(1); a12]</itype> <number>a</number> do s.t. before the proper time. <i>Kinsa may nag-ahat ug pùpù sa mangga?</i> Who picked the mango prematurely? <i>Naahat siyag pagkabut-an pagkamatay sa íyang amahan,</i> He had to become a grown-up before his time, when his father died. <number>b</number> do s.t. at an inopportune time. <i>Nakaahat lang kug katáwa. Nangutut man gud ka!</i> I couldn&apos;t help laughing. You broke wind! <number>3</number> be forced into doing s.t. by circumstances. <i>Miahat kug huwam ug kwarta,</i> I was forced to borrow money. <form>athanay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C3]</itype> force each other to do s.t.

<p id=339><form>ahaw</form> <pos>a</pos> lacking entirely. <i>Ahaw sa tanum ang yútà nga palanas,</i> The rocky area is bare of plants. <i>Ahaw ang bátà sa pagpanggà sa inahan,</i> The child lacks a mother&apos;s love. <pos>n</pos> vegetable cooked with no meat or other condiments except, perhaps, tomatoes, onions, and salt. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> <tr>be empty</tr>, lacking. <i>Nag-ahaw ang ákung kinabúhì sukad aku papháa sa trabáhu,</i> My life has been empty ever since I was fired. <i>Giahawan aku sa ímung pangatarúngan,</i> I consider your reasoning to be empty. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a]</itype> cook vegetables plain. <i>Ahawun ku ang útan,</i> I will cook the vegetables plain.&dagger;

<p id=340><form>ahay</form> exclamation expressing utter tiredness or frustration. <i>Ahay, kapait ning walay ginikánan,</i> My! How bitter it is not to have parents.

<p id=341><form>ahidris</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chess</tr> set. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC3; c3]</itype> play chess. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> chessboard.

<p id=342><form>ahinghu</form> <pos>n</pos> tiny shrub grown in flower pots, not native to the Visayas: <bio>Crossostephium chinense</bio>.

<p id=343><form>ahinsiya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pawnshop</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>agency</tr>. <i>Ahinsiya sa trabáhu,</i> Employment agency. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> open up a pawnshop.

<p id=344><form>ahinti</form> <pos>n</pos> agent, one who sells on commission. <i>Níay ahinti sa sabun,</i> There&apos;s a man selling soap here. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN56; b6]</itype> be a salesman on commission. <i>Ahintíhan ku ning ímung yútà,</i> I&apos;ll be your agent in selling the land. <form>&mdash; sa bábuy</form> one with an <xr><sc>AB</sc> (humorous).</xr>

<pb n=18>

<p id=345><form>ahítu</form> <pos>n</pos> marigold.

<p id=346><form>áhù</form> <xr>= <sc>ÁKÙ</sc></xr>; <xr>see <sc>AKU</sc>.</xr> <form>idyaidya ahuáhù</form> <xr>see <sc>IDYAIDYA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=347><form>áhug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> <tr>mix</tr> s.t. moist or wet with s.t. dry. <i>Nag-áhug ang gátas ug harína,</i> The flour and the milk are mixed together. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mixture</tr>. <i>Gátas, harína, kámay. Hustu giyud nang ahug,</i> Milk, flour, sugar are just the right mixture.

<p id=348><form>áhus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>garlic</tr>. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> season with garlic. <i>Dì ba nímu ahusan ang tinúlang isdà?</i> Are you not going to season the stewed fish with garlic? <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> garlic patch. <form>ahus-áhus</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>AWRÚRA<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr> <form>ahus-ahus</form> <pos>n</pos> ornamental vine with purple flowers which smells somewhat like garlic. <form>&mdash; nga putì</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ornamental bulb with white flowers.

<p id=349><form>ak</form> word used in writing to represent the sound of a blow.

<p id=350><form>akáak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make a cracking sound, loud creaking sound. <i>Miakáak ang pultahan sa pag-abri námù,</i> The door creaked (went <ix>aak</ix>) when we opened it.

<p id=351><form>ákab</form> <xr>= <sc>ABHAK</sc>.</xr>

<p id=352><form>akadimíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>academy</tr>.

<p id=353><form>ak-ak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> peel, <tr>rip off</tr>, usually s.t. not flexible. <i>Ikaw bay muak-ak sa pánit sa káhuy?</i> Will you strip the bark off the tree? <i>Naak-ak ang lapalapa sa ákung sapátus,</i> The sole of my shoe came off.

<p id=354><form>ákal</form> <pos>a</pos> bulging and bulky in the pocket or pocketbook. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be bulgy. <i>Nag-ákal ang íyang bulsa sa batu,</i> His pocket was bulging with rocks.

<p id=355><form>akasya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>monkey-pod tree</tr>, a large tree extensively planted as shade tree and producing excellent lumber: <bio>Samanea saman</bio>. <form>akasyahan</form> <pos>n</pos> acacia tree stand.

<p id=356><form>akata, akatar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>look after</tr>, take care of. <i>Kinsa may muakatar sa tigúlang ug muuban ku nímu?</i> Who will look after the old man if I go with you? <i>Ang táwung kasámuk ray akatahan (akatahun) dì giyud muhangtud,</i> A man that has nothing to do except look for trouble will not live long.

<p id=357><form>akawntant</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>accountant</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> be an accountant.

<p id=358><form>akba</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B3(1); c]</itype> lean on the chest with the arms hanging over the edge. <i>Nag-akba siya sa pasamánu samtang nagtambù sa sílung,</i> She was leaning over the <corr sic=bannister>banister</corr> as she looked downstairs. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1P]</itype> carry s.o. with his chest just below or against the shoulder. <i>Iakba (akbaha, ipaakba) ang bátà arun manug-ab,</i> Pick up the child with his chest facing you to burp him.

<p id=359><form>akbay</form> <xr>= <sc>ALAGBAY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=360><form>akbù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> lean on the lower arms. <i>Nag-akbù siya sa bintánà,</i> She&apos;s in the window leaning on her arms. <i>Ayaw ug akbúi nang balabag,</i> Don&apos;t lean on that rail. <form>-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rail</tr> over which one usually leans. <i>Akbuánan sa kumpisyunaryu,</i> Confessional rail.

<p id=361><form>akhab</form> <xr>= <sc>ABHAK</sc>.</xr>

<p id=362><form>akin</form> <xr>= <sc>NAKINNÁKIN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=363><form>akip</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> be <tr>included</tr>, <tr>include</tr> oneself in s.t. <i>Ang bátang mag-akip ug sulti sa dagkù way batásan,</i> A child who joins in an adults&apos; conversation is ill-mannered. <i>Kinsay nakaakip ug kúhà sa ákung papílis?</i> Who accidentally took my papers along with his? <form>akip-akipun</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to include oneself in on things.

<p id=364><form>aklas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> go on <tr>strike</tr>. <i>Ug dílì ta tugtan, aklásun nátù,</i> If our demands are not met, we&apos;ll strike. <i>Giaklásan ang kumpaníya,</i> They went on strike against the company. <pos>n</pos> strike of workers.

<p id=365><form>akmù</form> <xr>= <sc>AKBÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=366><form>akni</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>acne</tr>.

<p id=367><form>aknit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> peel s.t. flexible off in such a way that it does not get torn. <i>Akníta ang silyu,</i> Peel the stamps off carefully.

<p id=368><form>aksì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>tear off</tr> flexible material attached or pasted to s.t. <i>Wà níya aksía ang pahibalu nga gitaput sa bungbung,</i> He didn&apos;t rip off the poster pasted on the wall.

<p id=369><form>aksidinti</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>accident</tr>. <number>2</number> accident, <tr>happenstance</tr>. <i>Aksidinti lang nga nagkítà mi,</i> We just met by accident. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> have an accident. <i>Naaksidinti si Pidru,</i> Pedro had an accident.

<p id=370><form>aksidu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>acid</tr>, usually hydrochloric acid. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> put acid. <i>Aksiduhan nímug diyútay ang batiríya,</i> Put a little acid in the battery. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> get covered with acid.

<p id=371><form>aksintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>accent</tr>, <tr>mark</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> put an accent, mark.

<p id=372><form>aksiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>action</tr>, <tr>movement</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>interest</tr> or part owned in a business. <i>May aksiyun siya sa Maníla Iliktrik,</i> He has part interest in the Manila Electric Company. <i>Usa lang ka aksiyun sa swipstik,</i> One share of a lottery ticket. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> make a move to, show signs of doing s.t. <i>Wà makaaksiyun ug pamúlak ang tanum,</i> The plants haven&apos;t shown any signs of flowering yet. <i>Giaksiyunan ku siyag pátid,</i> I made a move to kick him. <form>-ista</form> <pos>n</pos> one who has an interest or share in a business.

<p id=373><form>aksul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>axle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a]</itype> make into, supply with an axle. <i>Giaksúlan níya ang karumátag káhuy,</i> He put a wooden axle on the cart.

<p id=374><form>akta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>minutes</tr> of a business meeting.

<p id=375><form>aktibidádis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>activities</tr>.

<pb n=19>

<p id=376><form>aktibista</form> <pos>n</pos> political activist.

<p id=377><form>aktíbu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>active</tr>, energetic. <i>Aktíbu kaáyu ang inyung mga bátà,</i> Your children are very active. <i>Aktíbung mimbru,</i> An active member. <i>Bulkan nga aktíbu,</i> An active volcano. <i>Ingridiyinting aktíbu,</i> An active ingredient. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> get to be active.

<p id=378><form>akting</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>acting</tr>, functioning in a temporary capacity. <number>2</number> way of acting. <i>Layhan ku sa akting ni Gluriya Rumíru,</i> I like Gloria Romero&apos;s acting.

<p id=379><form>aktitud</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>attitude</tr>. <i>Ang aktitud sa mga táwu báhin sa prisidinti,</i> The people&apos;s attitude towards the president.

<p id=380><form>aktris</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>actress</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be an actress. <form>-l-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> having the looks or character of an actress. <i>Musalir sa pilikula si Tirya kay alaktrisun ug hitsúra,</i> Terry will do well in the film because she has the appearance of an actress.

<p id=381><form>aktu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the <tr>act</tr> of doing s.t. <i>Ang tanang mga aktu sa simbahan pagabayran na,</i> You have to pay for every church ceremony now. <i>Nasakpan siya sa aktu,</i> He was caught in the act. <number>1a</number> acts in the church. <i>Aktu sa pagbásul, kuntrisiyun,</i> Act of Contrition. <number>2</number> the time that s.t. happens. <i>Sa aksidinti tulu ang namatay sa aktu,</i> In the accident three died on the spot. <i>Ang táwu nga náa sa aktu sa kamatáyun dílì mamakak,</i> A man does not lie when he is at the point of death. <number>3</number> acts of a legislative body. <number>4</number> acts of a drama. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b4(1)]</itype> be caught in doing an act. <i>Hiaktuhan siyang nangáwat,</i> He was caught in the act of stealing. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> a engage in some action. <i>Ug muaktu siyag dautan, singgit,</i> If he acts suspiciously, scream. <number>b</number> show signs of dying. <i>Ug muaktu na, ipatawag ku,</i> If he shows signs of dying, send for me.

<p id=382><form>aktur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>actor</tr> on stage or screen. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be an actor. <form>-l-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> be like an actor. <form>&mdash; kantur</form> <pos>n</pos> actor-singer.

<p id=383><form>aktuwal</form> <pos>n</pos> <form>sa &mdash;</form> <number>1</number> at the very moment. <i>Sa aktuwal na giyud siya midágan, gitirúhan dáyun,</i> The very moment he made to run away, he was shot. <number>2</number> in person, in real life. <i>Sa aktuwal batan-un pa kay sa litrátu,</i> He is younger looking in real life than in his picture. <i>Isturiya lang nà. Dílì sa aktuwal,</i> It&apos;s just a story, not real.

<p id=384><form>aku</form> <tr>I, me</tr>. <i>Aku lang,</i> Let me do it. <ix>Short form:</ix> <formx>ku</formx>. <i>Adtu na ku (aku),</i> I&apos;m going now. <form>ay &mdash; nímu</form> expression of helpless frustration at s.o.&apos;s incompetence. <i>Ay ku nímu, undù. Mag-unsa man lang ka ug wà na ku,</i> My God, son. What will you do when I am not around any more! <form>tig-akuaku</form> <pos>a</pos> always say &lsquo;<ix>aku</ix>&rsquo;. <i>Tig-akuaku ka man bisag dílì ka kamau,</i> You don&apos;t know how, but you keep saying &lsquo;lemme&rsquo;. <form>ákù</form> <number>1</number> <ix>preposed gen.:</ix> <tr>me</tr>, <tr>my</tr>. <i>Ákung anak,</i> My child. <i>Ákung gibása,</i> I read it. <number>2</number> be mine. <i>Ákù nà,</i> That is mine. <i>Unsa may ákù niánà?</i> What do I get out of that? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become mine. <i>Maákù ka na giyud,</i> At last you will be mine. <form>&mdash; na</form> May I have to keep? <i>Ákù na nang kindi, ha?</i> May I have that candy? <form>Ang &mdash; gud</form> <number>1</number> what worries me. <i>Ang ákù gud ug dì siya kaanhi,</i> What worries me is if he can&apos;t come. <number>2</number> all I am concerned with, interested in. <i>Ang ákù gud nga makatinir kug pruyba,</i> All I care about is that I can have proof. <form>maakuakuun</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to want things for oneself. <form>akúa</form> mine as opposed to other things that are not. <i>Akúa nà,</i> That one (as opposed to the others) is mine. <form>kanákù</form> <ix>dat.:</ix> <tr>me</tr>. <i>Ihátag kanákù,</i> Give it to me. <i>Nagtan-aw siya kanákù,</i> He was looking at me. <form>ku</form> <number>1</number> <ix>nom.</ix> (<ix>short for</ix> <formx>aku</formx>). <number>2</number> <ix>gen.:</ix> <xr>= <sc>NÁKÙ</sc>.</xr> <form>nákù</form> <number>1</number> <ix>gen.:</ix> <tr>my</tr>, by me. <i>Anak nákù,</i> My son. <i>Gibása nákù,</i> I read it. <form>&mdash; ug</form> (<ix>short for</ix> <formx>gipakaingun nákù</formx>) I thought. <i>Nákug muadtu ka,</i> I thought you would go. <number>2</number> short for <xr><sc>KANÁKÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=385><form>áku</form> (from <ix>aku</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> <number>1</number> stand to do s.t. <i>Dì ku kaákug tan-aw nímu,</i> I cannot stand to look at you. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>PAN-</sc>.</xr> <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> have nerve to do s.t. <i>Walà giyud ku makapangáku (makaáku) sa pagbuyag kang Maríya,</i> I couldn&apos;t gather the nerve to admonish Maria. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b5]</itype> do s.t. on one&apos;s own responsibility. <i>Dílì ku mangáku sa pagpaandar sa makina,</i> I will not take it on myself to start the engine. <i>Ngánung gipangakúhan (gipangáku) man nímu <corr sic="nag istrungkar">nag-istrungkar</corr>?</i> Why did you take it on yourself to take that apart? <pos>n</pos> particular <tr>responsibility</tr> or <tr>task</tr>. <i>Dakù kaáyung pangáku sa lungsud ang pagtúkud sa simbahan,</i> It was a great responsibility which the town undertook to build the church. <form>kaakúhan, kapangakúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>responsibility</tr>. <i>Kaakúhan (kapangakúhan) sa usa ka amahan,</i> A father&apos;s responsibility. <form>akuakuhan, maakuakuhan, manggiakuakuhan</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to take things on oneself one should not. <i>Akuakuhan kaáyu siya manlísù sa twirka,</i> He likes to take it on himself to mess around with the screws. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be so that one takes on things one should not.

<p id=386><form>akub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> fit s.t. over s.t. else face to face so that the edges meet, or the edge of the cover overlaps the edges of the thing covered. <i>Kinsa may nag-akub sa nígu sa tabig?</i> Who covered the clothes basket with a winnowing tray? <i>Ang duha ka bagaw sa imbaw nag-ákub,</i> The two shells of the clam fit together precisely. <i>Akúba ang duha <pb n=20>ka papil,</i> Lay the two papers face to face with the edges even. <i>Akbi ang pawntinpin,</i> Put the top on the fountain pen. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> things that fit against each other with the outer edges matching. <i>Duha ka ákub ang ílang kík,</i> Their cake has two layers.

<p id=387><form>ákud<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for the chest to be tight or heart to be heaving. <i>Nagsubsub ang ákud sa íyang dughan. Gihúbak na sad,</i> Her wheezing fits in her chest intensified. She was having another asthma attack.

<p id=388><form>ákud<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB126; b5]</itype> <tr>disable</tr>, be disabled. <i>Naákud ang táwu nga nabalían sa páa,</i> The man who broke his thigh became crippled. <i>Akúrun (akúran) tikaw run yawáa ka,</i> I&apos;ll disable you, you devil. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cripple</tr>.

<p id=389><form>akúdi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c]</itype> mind, <tr>take care</tr>, look after. <i>Maakúdi (maakudíhan) nákù ang tanan kung mga anak bísag wà kuy katábang,</i> I can take care of all my children even without a helper. <i>Akudíha, akudíhig maáyu nang ímung kabílin,</i> Take good care of your inheritance.

<p id=390><form>akulitu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>altar boy</tr>, server in a mass. <number>2</number> one who is at a person&apos;s beck and call and kowtows to him. <i>Ása man nà mudáut ni Markus. Akulitu man nà siya,</i> He would never talk against Marcos. All he is is his yes-man. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56]</itype> be a server.

<p id=391><form>akumpaniing</form> <pos>n</pos> one who stays with a patient in a hospital to look after his needs. <i>Kaning katríha pára sa akumpaniing,</i> This bed is for the one who stays in the room with the patient to attend to him. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> be, become the one who stays with a patient in a hospital to attend to his needs. <i>Giakumpaniing ku sa ámung silíngan nga naaksidinti,</i> I went to the hospital to stay in the room with our neighbor that met an accident.

<p id=392><form>akumpaniyamintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>accompaniment</tr> in music.

<p id=393><form>akumpaniyar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>accompany</tr> s.o. in music. <i>Akumpanyahi aku sa ímung sista,</i> Accompany me with your guitar. <number>2</number> go with s.o. <i>Akumpanyahi ku didtu bi,</i> Accompany me there.

<p id=394><form>akumplísi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>accomplice</tr>.

<p id=395><form>akup-akup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> <tr>monopolize</tr> a job, possession, or enjoyment of s.t. <i>Kinsay layhan mutábang nga muakup-akup man siya sa mga trabahuun?</i> Who likes to help when he monopolizes all the work? <i>Ayaw akup-akupa ang tanang duwáan,</i> Don&apos;t monopolize all of the toys.

<p id=396><form>akurdiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>accordion</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> play the accordion.

<p id=397><form>akusádu</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>AKUSAR</sc>.</xr>

<p id=398><form>akusar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> <tr>accuse</tr>. <i>Ayaw ku akusaha (akusahi, iakusar),</i> Don&apos;t accuse me. <form>akusádu</form> <pos>n</pos> one accused, <tr>defendant</tr>. <form>akusasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>accusation</tr>.

<p id=399><form>akwaryum</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>aquarium</tr>.

<p id=400><form>akwintans</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>acquaintance</tr>. <form>&mdash; parti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>get-acquainted party</tr>.

<p id=401><form>akyut</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>acute</tr>, <tr>critical</tr> sickness. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> for a sickness to become acute. <i>Naakyut ang íyang apindisaytis,</i> His appendicitis has gotten acute.

<p id=402><form>*ala</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <form>&mdash; úna</form> <number>1</number> <tr>one o&apos;clock</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>going once</tr> (in auction). <i>Dusintus. Ala úna, alas dus, alas tris, sirtu,</i> Two hundred. Going once, going twice, gone. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B5; b]</itype> see <sc>ALAS<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p id=403><form>Ála</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>Allah</tr>.

<p id=404><form>alà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13P; c6]</itype> <tr>avoid</tr> engaging in certain activities, esp. eating proscribed foods. <i>Dì gánì ka mag-alà sa ímung pagkáun, dì ka giyud mamaáyu,</i> If you don&apos;t avoid eating proscribed foods, you will never get better. <i>Kining ákung balatían mauy nakaalà (nakapaalà) nákù sa pagkalígù sa dágat,</i> My ailment has kept me from bathing in the sea. <form>walay &mdash;</form> not avoiding things, esp. in eating. <i>Wà siyay alà. Mukáun bisag unsa,</i> He&apos;s not choosy. He&apos;ll eat anything. <form>paN-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> for pregnant women to conceive an intense desire for or dislike for s.t. <i>Si Íli nangálà sa ímung ilung, básin pag muliwat ang bátà,</i> Ely has a great liking for your nose. Maybe her baby will get that nose. <i>Manggang hilaw ang íyang gipangaláan,</i> She had an intense craving for green mangoes. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> be in the early months of pregnancy. <i>Bag-u pa siyang nanganak, nangálà na pud,</i> She just had a baby, but she&apos;s pregnant again.

<p id=405><form>álà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b]</itype> be <tr>mistaken</tr> for another person. <i>Naaláan ku siyang kawatan,</i> I mistook him for a thief.

<p id=406><form>alabádu</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> say the final prayer in a novena, on any day. <i>Hápit na mahuman ang pangadyì kay nag-alabádu na,</i> The prayer is about to end because they are offering the final prayer.

<p id=407><form>alabanit</form> <xr>= <sc>RABANIT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=408><form>alabíhid</form> <pos>n</pos> wild <tr>tree</tr> in same genus as <ix>siriguylas</ix> with sour leaves and fruits: <bio>Spondias pinnata</bio>. The leaves and fruits are used in stews, and the leaves have medicinal uses.

<p id=409><form>alabútun</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ABUT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=410><form>álad</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> wooden <tr>fence</tr>, <tr>enclosure</tr>. <number>2</number> pig sty. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> enclose in a fence. <i>Alára ning babúya,</i> Put this pig in an enclosure. <i>Alári ang mga tinanum,</i> Put a fence around the plants.

<p id=411><form>alagad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> wait for s.o. to do s.t. <i>Muagad lang ku sa inyung hukum,</i> I am guided by your decision. <i>Panahun ray ákung <pb n=21>agdun,</i> I will let time decide. <form>ulualágad, agad-ágad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> put off doing s.t. temporarily until s.t. else happens. <i>Mag-agad-ágad ku sa pag-abut ni Tátay úsà ku mulakaw,</i> I am waiting for Dad to get here before I go. <i>Iagad-ágad (agad-agára) lang úsà ang báyad,</i> Put the payment off awhile. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> put off doing s.t. to wait for s.o. <i>Agad-agára ku kadiyut arun magkúyug ta,</i> Wait a second for me, so we can go together.

<p id=412><form>alágad</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>servant</tr>, <tr>employee</tr>. <formx>&mdash; sa baláud</formx> <tr>law officer</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>service</tr> rendered. <i>Mapasalamátun kami sa alágad sa Krus nga Pula,</i> We are grateful for the services of the Red Cross. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> serve, be a servant or employee. <i>Dílì siya layhang mualágad sa pamilya nga daghag kasíra,</i> She doesn&apos;t like to serve in a household with lots of boarders. <i>Nag-alágad siya sa gubyirnu,</i> He works for the government. <i>Dúgay ku níyang gialagáran, ningbíyà na lang ku sa tindáhan,</i> It took her a long time to wait on me, so I just left the store. <number>2</number> attend to, care for. <i>Aku ang mualágad sa bátà samtang túa pa sa huspital ang inahan,</i> I will take care of the child while the mother is in the hospital. <form>kaalagáran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>duty</tr>. <form>maalagárun</form> <pos>a</pos> serving conscientiously. <i>Kanímu maalagárun,</i> Your faithful servant. <form>alagdun</form> <pos>a</pos> requiring intensive care. <i>Alagdung masakitun,</i> Patients who require intensive care.

<p id=413><form>alag-ag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>sift</tr>. <i>Ag-águn ta ni rung buli,</i> Let&apos;s sift the buri flour. <form>-l-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> powdered matter ready for sifting. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> a device for sifting.

<p id=414><form>alagási</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small tree of thickets producing soft wood: <bio>Leucosyke capitellata</bio>.

<p id=415><form>alagaw</form> <xr>= <sc>ADGAW</sc>.</xr>

<p id=416><form>alagay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> <tr>groan</tr> in pain. <i>Nag-alagay siya sa kasakit,</i> He groaned in pain.

<p id=417><form>alagbáti</form> <xr>= <sc>ALUGBÁTI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=418><form>alagbay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> to put one&apos;s arm around s.o.&apos;s shoulders. <i>Miagbay ang ryumáhun sa nars,</i> The rheumatic patient put his arm around the nurse&apos;s shoulders. <i>Ayaw ku agbáyi,</i> Don&apos;t put your arm around my shoulder.

<p id=419><form>alagúbay</form> <xr>= <sc>BAGAYBAY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=420><form>alagúkuy</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. light orange <tr>crab</tr> living in holes along the shore. It is about an inch across, and one claw is much bigger than the other.

<p id=421><form>aláhas</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>jewelry</tr>. <form>maN-r-(&rarr;), alahíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jewelry dealer</tr>.

<p id=422><form>alahíru</form> <xr>= <sc>MANGANGALAHAS</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ALÁHAS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=423><form>álak</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>liquor</tr>, strong alcoholic beverage.

<p id=424><form>alakáak</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible mollusk resembling the chiton, about an inch in length.

<p id=425><form>alakri</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>sealing wax</tr>, for package, letters, etc. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b]</itype> <tr>seal</tr> s.t. with sealing wax.

<p id=426><form>alaksiw</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>hard liquor of the cheapest sort</tr>.

<p id=427><form>al-al<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>adult</tr>, <tr>full-grown</tr> birds. <i>Lisud tudlúag sulti ning al-al nga piríku,</i> It&apos;s hard to teach a full-grown parrot to speak. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B15]</itype> <tr>become full-grown</tr>. <i>Samtang nagkaal-al ang langgam nagsúgud pud ug kapakápa,</i> As the bird was growing up it began to flap its wings.

<p id=428><form>al-al<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>childish</tr> in action, particularly in speech and articulation. <i>Kadakù na nímu. Al-al gihápun kang musulti,</i> How big you are, but you still talk like a child! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become, consider <tr>childish</tr>. <i>Mual-al giyud ang bátà basta labihan sa paráyig,</i> A child will stay immature as long as he is spoiled.

<p id=429><form>alálay</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> one who helps or supports s.o. in doing s.t. (slang). <i>Dì siya mahadluk mamarigla kay daghan mag alálay,</i> He is not afraid to maul anybody without provocation because he has plenty of supporters. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>help s.o.</tr> (slang). <i>Alaláyan ta ka sa pag-iksplikar,</i> I&apos;ll help you explain.

<p id=430><form>*álam</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>knowledge</tr> of some special field, specific know-how. <i>Wà kuy kaálam sa pagpanghílut,</i> I have no expertise in massage. <form>kinaadman</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>general knowledge</tr>. <i>Lalum siyag kinaadman,</i> He is deeply learned. <number>2</number> <tr>special magical knowledge</tr>. <form>ma-</form> <pos>a</pos> know how to [do]. <i>Maálam siya nga mutukar ug pyánu,</i> He knows how to play the piano. <form>ma-un, manggi-un, makinaadmánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>wise, knowledgeable</tr>. <i>Nahibúlung ang mga tigúlang sa makinaadmánun nga tubag ni Hisus,</i> The old men were amazed at Jesus&apos; wise answers. <form>pakama-un, pakamanggiun, pakamakinaadmánun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <tr>pretend to be, consider wise</tr>.&dagger;

<p id=431><form>alámag</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>reflected, luminescent light</tr>. <i>Ang alámag nga ímung makítà sa túbig gíkan sa sugà sa mga mananagat,</i> The light you see in the water is from the fishermen&apos;s lamps. <number>2</number> <formx>may, walay &mdash;</formx> (<ix>l</ix> not dropped) <number>a</number> <tr>be informed, uninformed</tr>. <i>Walà siyay alámag sa baláud,</i> He is ignorant of the law. <number>b</number> have awareness of a happening. <i>Pagbisíta námù sa uspital walà na siyay alámag,</i> When we visited him in the hospital he had no awareness of his surroundings. <pos>v</pos> (<ix>l</ix> usually dropped) <number>1</number> <itype>[AP2S; b2S]</itype> gleam, cause to gleam, usually with reflected light. <i>Ang kaháit sa suwab miámag,</i> The blade gleamed because <pb n=22>of its sharpness. <i>Mialámag ang íyang mata sa túmang kalípay,</i> Her eyes gleamed with joy. <i>Ang mga sugà nag-ámag (nag-amag, nagpaámag) sa túbig,</i> The water reflected the lights. <number>2</number> <itype>[APB; c]</itype> <tr>enlighten</tr>, make aware. <i>Mialámag sa ákung panumdúman ang hustung tubag,</i> The correct answer presented itself to my mind. <i>Kun alamágan lang sa Diyus ang Santu Pápa,</i> If God would only enlighten the Pope. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> stay up late in doing s.t. <i>Nangalámag aku pagpanahì,</i> I stayed up late sewing. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. glowing <tr>toadstool</tr>. <number>2</number> k.o. <tr>fish</tr>. <form>amag-amag, amagan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small <tr>fish</tr>.

<p id=432><form>alam-álam</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>coax</tr> s.o. to do s.t. he does not want to do. <i>Alam-alámi siya,</i> Coax him. <number>2</number> <tr>mollify</tr> or <tr>assuage</tr> s.o. by comforting him. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>coaxing</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>assuaging</tr>. <i>&lsquo;Dì bitaw ka nákù unsáun,&rsquo; maalam-alámun níyang sulti,</i> &lsquo;I&apos;m not going to hurt you,&rsquo; she said, mollifying me.

<p id=433><form>alambíhid, alambíhud</form> <xr>= <sc>ALABÍHID</sc>.</xr>

<p id=434><form>alambri<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wire</tr>. <form>-ng pinutus</form> <tr>insulated wire</tr>. <form>-ng tunukun</form> <tr>barbed wire</tr>.

<p id=435><form>alambri<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>ALAMBRILYU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=436><form>alambrilyu</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to several ornamental <tr>ferns</tr>, e.g., <bio>Adiantum capillus-veneris</bio>.

<p id=437><form>alambríru</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> the <tr>rigger</tr> in logging. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> be, make s.o. the <tr>cable man</tr> in logging.

<p id=438><form>alampad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12C; ac]</itype> go up <tr>alongside</tr>, be <tr>side by side</tr>. <i>Miampad siya sa ákung sakayan,</i> He tied up alongside of my boat. <i>Nagkaampad mi ug lingkud sa sini,</i> We happened to sit side by side in the movie. <pos>n</pos> being beside. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> one who is alongside of one.

<p id=439><form>alampat</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>intelligence</tr>, <tr>brilliance</tr> of mind. <i>Alampat sa pagbálak,</i> Brilliance in writing poetry.

<p id=440><form>álan</form> <pos>a</pos> having a <tr>bitter</tr> taste similar to that of half-cooked <ix>kamunggay</ix> leaves. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be <tr>bitterish</tr> in taste. <i>Muálan ang kamunggay ug haúnun kun dì pa lútù,</i> <ix>Kamunggay</ix> leaves become somewhat bitter if you fail to cook them well.

<p id=441><form>álang</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) for the <tr>sake</tr> of. <i>Kini álang kanímu,</i> This is for you. <i>Álang kanákù dílì nà ángayng ikasukù,</i> As far as I&apos;m concerned, that&apos;s nothing worth getting angry about.

<p id=442><form>alangáang</form> <pos>n</pos> for weather to be oppressively <tr>hot</tr> and moist with no wind. <i>Alangáang kaáyu; tingáli muulan,</i> It is very hot and muggy; maybe it&apos;s going to rain. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2S]</itype> be <tr>muggy</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2S3]</itype> ache with heat. <i>Mualangáang (maalangáang) ang ímung kamut ug makahikap kag dugà sa síli,</i> Your fingers will hurt if you let hot pepper juice get on them.

<p id=443><form>alang-álang</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> not quite time, unseasonable. <i>Ang-&amacracu;ng na run igikan. Dì na ka kaabut,</i> It&apos;s no use going now. You&apos;ll never make it. <i>Ang-&amacracu;ng iadtu run kay sayu pa,</i> No use going so early. <number>2</number> not quite the right amount. <i>Alang-álang pa ning kwartang ilukat sa prinda,</i> This money is insufficient to pay off the mortgage. <i>Ang-&amacracu;ng ning panaptúna pára karsúnis,</i> This is not enough cloth for a pair of pants. <number>3</number> not up to a certain level. <i>Ang-&amacracu;ng pagkapanday,</i> It was poorly done. <i>Sumbágun ta untà ka, apan ang-&amacracu;ng ka ra nákù,</i> I would love to fight you, but you&apos;re too small for me. <number>4</number> <tr>somewhat</tr>, but not quite. <i>Ang lamì alang-álang nangkà, alang-álang pinya,</i> The taste is somewhat like jackfruit, somewhat like pineapple. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> it would be silly if, it would be the wrong thing to do if. <i>Ang-&amacracu;ng dílì dawátun. Gihátag man,</i> It would be silly not to accept it. It was given to you, wasn&apos;t it? <i>Ang-&amacracu;ng akuy manghúgas nga náa may masúgù,</i> Why should I do the dishes when there&apos;s s.o. I can tell to do them. <number>2</number> of course. <i>&lsquo;Malígù ka?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Ang-&amacracu;ng. Mau bitaw nay átung gianhi,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Are you going to swim?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Of course, that&apos;s what we came here for, isn&apos;t it?&rsquo; <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. poorly, halfway. <i>Ug alang-alángun (alang-alángan, ialang-álang) nà nímug búhat, ay na lang,</i> If you&apos;re going to do a poor job, never mind. <number>2</number> do s.t. at an inopportune time. <i>Dílì pa ku run mualang-álang ug minyù nga walà kuy salapì,</i> I&apos;m not going to go and get married at this time when I don&apos;t have any money. <number>3</number> <itype>[B256N; b4(1)]</itype> arrive a little too late or early for s.t. <i>Mangang-&amacracu;ng kug larga,</i> I&apos;ll leave a bit ahead. <number>4</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> lacking s.t. <i>Naang-ángan ku sa kwarta,</i> I am short of money. <number>5</number> <itype>[ab2]</itype> be put in a difficult situation by s.t. inopportune. <i>Ímu kung alang-alángug pangutána nga náa may láing namátì,</i> You put me in a difficult situation asking that question when s.o. else is listening. <number>6</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> have hesitations about doing s.t. <i>Dílì giyud aku mualang-álang nímug pangutánag dílì pa tinúud,</i> I wouldn&apos;t have reservations about asking you if it weren&apos;t true. <number>7</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> consider s.t. <ix>alang-álang.</ix> <i>Giang-&amacracu;ngan aku sa íyang hitsúra,</i> I consider his looks not up to par. <i>Giang-&amacracu;ngan akug hangyù níya,</i> It&apos;s a bad time for me to ask him. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>ALANG-ÁLANG</sc>, <ix>v</ix>, <ix>a3.</ix></xr> <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> eat a single heavy meal in between mealtimes to make one do for two. <i>Mangalang-álang lang ta kay kúlang tag bugas,</i> Let&apos;s eat two meals in one because we don&apos;t have enough rice. <pos>n</pos> single <pb n=23>meal eaten in place of two.

<p id=444><form>alangíing</form> <pos>a</pos> giving off intense and penetrating heat in the atmosphere. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S]</itype> be very hot. <i>Basta ting-init mag-alangíing ang adlaw sa palis,</i> During summer the sun gets to be stinging hot in the early afternoon.

<p id=445><form>alangílan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. medium- to large-sized tree which produces a multitude of fragrant flowers, esp. in May and June: <bio>Cananga odorata</bio>. The flowers are made into flower necklaces, and a scented oil is extracted from them which is made into perfume.

<p id=446><form>alangísig</form> <xr>= <sc>ALINGÍSI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=447><form>alangitngit</form> <pos>n</pos> woody herb of open waste places; used as a poultice: <bio>Ehretia microphylla</bio>.

<p id=448><form>alangsúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> a medium-sized forest tree: <bio>Alphitonia philippinensis</bio>.

<p id=449><form>alapáhap</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish.

<p id=450><form>alap-alap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN16]</itype> be in <tr>doubt</tr>, uncertain of. <i>Nagpangalap-alap (nag-alap-alap) ku nga muanhi pa siya,</i> I doubt if he is still coming.

<p id=451><form>alap-ap</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fungus skin disease characterized by white splotches on the skin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infected with <ix>alap-ap.</ix> <i>Giap-ap ang íyang pánit,</i> She had <ix>ap-ap</ix> on her skin. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> covered with or infected with <ix>alap-ap.</ix>

<p id=452><form>alarma</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>alarm</tr>, sound notifying danger. <number>2</number> report of danger. <i>May alarma nga náay púga,</i> There was an alarm out that there was a jailbreak. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> give an alarm. <i>Alarmáhan ta sa gwardiya ug muabut ang kuntra,</i> The guard will give us a warning when the enemy arrives. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> report danger. <i>Walà pa ialarma sa pulisíya ang túlis,</i> The police has not been given an alarm about the robbery.&dagger;

<p id=453><form>aláru</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>arrowroot</tr>: <bio>Maranta arundinacea</bio>.

<p id=454><form>*alas<sub>1</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <form>&mdash; <r>[<ix>number</ix>]</r></form> [so-and-so] <tr>o</tr>&apos;clock. <i>Alas dus na ba?</i> Is it two o&apos;clock yet? <i>Alas sayis ang puntaríya sa pusil,</i> The sight of his gun is at six o&apos;clock. <form>Ala úna, &mdash; dus, &mdash; tris</form> (in auction) going once, going twice, gone! <form>túlin pa sa &mdash; kwatru</form> faster than blazes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B5; b4(1)]</itype> be [so-and-so] o&apos;clock. <i>Nialas tris na lang, wà gihápun,</i> It got to be three and he still did not come. <i>Sa nag-alas dus na, nagsúgud na sila,</i> When it was two o&apos;clock, they began. <i>Ug maalas kwatru na, ayaw na lag lakaw,</i> If it gets to be four, don&apos;t bother going. <i>Pagkaala úna na, namatay,</i> By one o&apos;clock he was dead. <i>Nagkaalas dúsi na lang,</i> It was getting toward twelve o&apos;clock. <i>Naalasnuybihan mig mata,</i> We didn&apos;t wake up until nine. (We were overtaken by nine o&apos;clock in waking up.) <i>Alas dusa (ialas dus) ang pagsúgud,</i> Have it start at two. <form>ika-</form> at [so-and-so] o&apos;clock. <i>Sa ikaalas singku ang taknà,</i> At five o&apos;clock. (At the fifth o&apos;clock hour.)

<p id=455><form>alas<sub>2</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>ace</tr>, a card or die marked with a single spot. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B23; a12]</itype> be an ace, draw an ace. <i>Mualas (maalas) gánì ning ákung mahulbut, pildi ka,</i> If I draw an ace, you lose.

<p id=456><form>alasan</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> chestnut-colored <tr>horse</tr> with small white speckles.

<p id=457><form>alas dúsi</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to various <tr>ornamental plants</tr>, the flowers of which tend to open at noon or midnight.

<p id=458><form>alasíman</form> <xr>= <sc>ULASÍMAN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=459><form>alasiwsiw</form> <xr>= <sc>ALISIWSIW</sc>.</xr>

<p id=460><form>alas kwatru</form> <xr>= <sc>MARABILYAS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=461><form>alas utsu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ornamental climbing <tr>cactus</tr> the fragrant flowers of which open around eight in the evening and close within two or three hours: <bio>Hylocereus sp</bio>.

<p id=462><form>alasúus</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>fish</tr>: <bio>Sillago sp</bio>.

<p id=463><form>alat</form> <pos>n</pos> big and tall wide-mouthed <tr>basket</tr> with loose hexagonal mesh weave. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make into an <ix>alat.</ix>

<p id=464><form>álat<sub>1</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>cop</tr> (slang).

<p id=465><form>álat<sub>2</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>salted eggs</tr>.

<p id=466><form>alatan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>grunt</tr>: <bio>Plectorhynchus sp</bio>.

<p id=467><form>aláut</form> (not without <ix>l.</ix> from <ix>dáut</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <tr>unfortunate</tr>, <tr>wretched</tr>. <i>Aláut nga biktima sa bagyu,</i> The unfortunate victims of the typhoon. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB12]</itype> make, become wretched.

<p id=468><form>alaw</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>watch</tr> s.o. from hiding unobserved. <i>Iring nga nag-alaw sa pisù,</i> The cat that is stalking the chick. <i>Alawa ag bátà ug unsay buhátun,</i> Spy on the child and see what he does. <number>2</number> <tr>watch</tr> for, <tr>wait</tr> for. <i>Pag-alaw didtu ug taksi,</i> Watch for a taxi. <number>3</number> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> be after s.t. with a hidden motive. <i>Ang íyang kadátù ray alawun sa mangulitáwu,</i> Her suitors are only after her wealth. <form>alaw-álaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> try to get to see s.o. hard to see by catching him s.w. <i>Dúgay kung gaalaw-álaw ánang pulitikúha arun irikumindar ku,</i> I have been trying for the longest time to run into that politician so he will recommend me.

<p id=469><form>álaw</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <tr>not have</tr> (slang for <ix>walà</ix>). <i>Álaw kuy bugas,</i> I don&apos;t have anything to eat.

<p id=470><form>aláwans</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>allowance</tr>, amount of money given regularly. <number>2</number> <tr>leeway</tr>, extra <tr>space</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <number>1</number> give or receive an <tr>allowance</tr>. <i>Mualáwans akug singku písus,</i> I will get an allowance of five pesos. <i>Mualáwans ku nímug singku,</i> I will give you an allowance of five pesos. <number>2</number> give allowance, leeway. <i>Mag-aláwans kag purgáda arun dì <pb n=24>háyan mamabà,</i> Leave an inch allowance so it won&apos;t come out too short.

<p id=471><form>alawíhaw</form> <xr>= <sc>ALUWÍHAW</sc>.</xr>

<p id=472><form>alawiswis</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> bamboo stem an inch around or less: the top part of a stem or a young stem. <number>2</number> the top part of a palm frond.

<p id=473><form>aláyun</form> <pos>n</pos> group of people who work together on jobs on a more or less permanent basis. The person for whom the job is done has an obligation to repay each worker with an equal amount of time. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2C; b5c4]</itype> work on the <ix>aláyun</ix> basis. <i>Alayúnun (alayúnan) nátù ang pagpananggì,</i> We&apos;ll harvest on the mutual help basis. <i>Alayúnan tika karun, ug impas na,</i> I&apos;ll work for you now, and we&apos;re all square. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; b6(1)]</itype> do s.t. as a favor. <i>Nag-aláyun siya nákug hatud ngadtu,</i> He did me the favor of taking me there. <i>Alayúni siyag panghúgas,</i> Do him the favor of helping him wash the dishes. <i>Ialáyun kug kúhag túbig,</i> Please get me some water. <number>2a</number> <tr>please</tr>. <i>Aláyun, ambi ra nang libru,</i> Please, give me that book. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> one with whom one has an <ix>aláyun</ix> arrangement. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> work obligation one has.

<p id=474><form>alayupiyup</form> <xr>= <sc>ALIYUPYUP</sc>.</xr>

<p id=475><form>alba</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>alb</tr>, a type of priest&apos;s garment. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear an alb, make into an alb. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> dress shaped like an alb. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, make into a dress of this sort.

<p id=476><form>albaháka</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to several herbs with a sweet mint-like aroma used as a condiment, medicinally, and for delousing fowls. <number>1</number> <bio>Ocimum basilicum</bio>. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>KALUGUNGKUGUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=477><form>albangku</form> clear away from the sides of the billiard table. <i>Albangku, mga mirun,</i> Spectators, get out of the way.

<p id=478><form>albáti</form> <xr>= <sc>ALUGBÁTI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=479><form>albínu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>albino</tr>.

<p id=480><form>albularyu</form> <xr>= <sc>ARBULARYU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=481><form>album</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>album</tr>, scrapbook. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put in an album. <i>Albúmun ku ning ákung mga ritrátu,</i> I&apos;ll collect these pictures in an album. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get or obtain an album.

<p id=482><form>algudun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cotton</tr> as manufactured, commercial cotton.

<p id=483><form>alguwasil</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.o. employed as a general office boy-janitor combination in offices in Spanish times. <number>2</number> <tr>constable</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; a]</itype> be an <ix>alguwasil.</ix>

<p id=484><form>alhíbi</form> <pos>n</pos> a large water container with a faucet at the bottom.

<p id=485><form>alhu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pestle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> make into a pestle. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> hit with a pestle. <i>Alhúun tika run,</i> I&apos;ll hit you with a pestle.

<p id=486><form>áli</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>block</tr> a path, prevent passage, be a <tr>barrier</tr>. <i>Ang bahà nakaáli sa ámung pagtabuk,</i> The flood prevented us from crossing to the other side. <i>Gialíhan ku ang íyang dálan,</i> I blocked his way. <i>Kiring kaban iáli sa pultahan,</i> Put this trunk as a barrier behind the door. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>barrier</tr>. <number>2</number> a gill net set as a barrier to catch stunned fish.

<p id=487><form>*alibagbag</form> <form>pa-</form> <corr><pos>v</pos> </corr><itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>avoid answering</tr> or seeming to heed by speaking off the topic, or pretend to be doing s.t. else in order to avoid the embarrassment of a confrontation. <i>Ayaw paalibagbag ug basabása myintras gisultíhan ka nákù,</i> Don&apos;t sit there reading while I am talking to you. <i>Gialibagbágan (gipaalibagbágan) ku níyag tubag kay dì man siya muadmitir nákù,</i> He answered me off the topic to avoid admitting it.

<p id=488><form>alibangbang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>butterfly</tr>. <number>2a</number> butterfly fish: <bio>Chaetodon sp</bio>. <number>2b</number> by extension, angel fish: <bio>Holacanthus sp</bio>. <number>3</number> k.o. seashell. <form>-un</form> butterfly fish.

<p id=489><form>alibángu</form> <pos>a</pos> bothering others by being noisy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> <tr>bother</tr> s.o. by being noisy. <i>Gialibangúhan ku sa ímung pangyawyaw,</i> I find your grumbling bothersome.

<!-- alibay_2 in addenda, page 1142 -->

<p id=490><form>alibay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>excuse</tr> for failing to do s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give an excuse. <i>Ialibay nga namatyan kag lúla,</i> Give the excuse that your grandmother died.

<p id=491><form>alibhat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> head s.o. off. <i>Mualibhat lang ta sa parid,</i> Let&apos;s catch up to the parade by heading it off. <i>Alibháti (alibháta) siya. Didtu ági sa luyu,</i> Head him off by going around the other way.

<p id=492><form>alíbi</form> <xr>= <sc>ALHÍBI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=493><form>alibusbus</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. winged large red house ants that come in swarms, esp. during rainy days, and hover around bright lights.

<p id=494><form>alibwag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB3(1); aPc]</itype> <tr>disperse</tr>, scatter in all directions, scatter s.t. <i>Mialibwag ang báhù sa kasuuksuukan,</i> The smell spread to every corner. <i>Kinsay nag-alibwag sa duldul?</i> Who scattered the kapok all over the place? <i>Alibwágun ang punduk sa tirgas,</i> The tear gas will disperse the crowd.

<p id=495><form>alibyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> alleviation, <tr>improvement</tr> of an affliction. <number>2</number> improvement. <i>Walay alibyu ang ámung kahimtang,</i> Our financial condition is no better. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB; b3c5]</itype> get better, make s.t. get better in health. <i>Ang biks mualibyu (mupaalibyu) sa sip-un,</i> Vicks alleviates a cold. <i>Mialibyu ang ákung ubu,</i> My cold got better.

<p id=496><form>alid-an, alid-i</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ALÍLI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=497><form>alig-alig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. which is not one&apos;s ordinary duty, take s.t. on oneself. <i>Ngánung gialig-aligan man nà nímug táud nga wà pa man mahuman ug pintal?</i> Why <pb n=25>did you go and put it up when we hadn&apos;t finished painting it? <number>2</number> undertake a task which one is not up to doing. <i>Bisag dì kamau mudrayib, mualig-alig nà siyag maníhu,</i> He doesn&apos;t know how to drive, but he takes it on himself to do so.

<p id=498><form>aligasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>allegation</tr>.

<p id=499><form>aligatu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fiery particles</tr> carried off from a <tr>fire</tr> by the updraft. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> give off flaming particles. <i>Piligru ug aligatuhan ang atup nga nípà,</i> It&apos;s dangerous if flying embers hit the roof because it is palm thatch.

<p id=500><form>aligáya</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>take a nap</tr>. <i>Nag-aligáya siya sa dúyan,</i> He is taking his nap in the hammock.

<p id=501><form>aligi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>the yellow fat of crabs</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b4]</itype> <number>1</number> for crabs to have fat in abundant quantities. <i>Kasag nga gialigihan,</i> Crabs with plenty of fat. <number>2</number> for dirt to be present in thick rolls like fat on a crab. <i>Nag-aligi ang buling sa ímung líug,</i> You have deep rolls of dirt on your neck.

<p id=502><form>alig-ig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>separate</tr> coarse and fine grains by <tr>shaking</tr> them on a tray. A jerking motion is made in one direction so that the heavier grains collect at one end of the tray. <i>Alig-íga ang ginaling,</i> Shake out the ground corn. <number>2</number> <tr>rock</tr> vigorously from side to side. <i>Makusug nga línug nga mialig-ig sa Manílà,</i> A strong earthquake that rocked Manila. <i>Pastilan níyang nakaalig-ig sa samput dihang hápit na,</i> My, how she moved her buttocks from side to side when she was about to come. <number>3</number> <tr>shake</tr> up personnel. <i>Kinsay gialig-ig ni Markus?</i> Who did Marcos dismiss (from his cabinet)? <form>-in-ay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shake-up</tr> of personnel. <i>Human sa iliksiyun, dakù giyung inalig-ígay,</i> After the election, there will be a big shake-up. <form>-un(&rarr;), -unun</form> <pos>n</pos> ground cereal to be winnowed.

<p id=503><form>aligri</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lively, gay</tr>. <i>Aligri ang ílang piging,</i> Their party was gay. <i>Aligring ikúyug si Pingping,</i> Pingping would be fun to take along. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> be or become gay or lively. <form>aligrihun</form> <pos>a</pos> of a lively type.

<p id=504><form>aliguríya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>parable, allegory</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> speak by way of allegory.

<p id=505><form>aligutgut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>prayer</tr> imploring the saving of a soul recited or sung in recitation-response style at the end of a novena.

<p id=506><form>aligutgut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rancor</tr>, deep abiding anger. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b3]</itype> feel rancor, bitterness, or hatred. <i>Gialigutgútan níya si Pidru,</i> He feels rancor towards Pedro. <i>Ang ímung pagbutar sa píkas mauy íyang gikaaligutgútan pag-áyu,</i> What embittered him most is that you voted for the other side. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>ALIGUTGUT<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=507><form>alihid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c16]</itype> <tr>lean</tr> to one side. <i>Nag-alihid ang balay sa kadáan,</i> The house is leaning to one side from age. <i>Nagkaalihid ang linaktan sa táwung nagdalag bug-at,</i> The man is walking leaning to one side because of the burden he&apos;s carrying.

<p id=508><form>alíid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; a12]</itype> <tr>stagger</tr> under a heavy load. <i>Nag-aliid ang bátà ug pas-an sa táru,</i> The child is staggering under the weight of the can of water. <i>Nag-aliid siya sa túmang kawad-un,</i> He was staggering under the burden of his poverty.

<p id=509><form>alikabu</form> <xr>= <sc>ABUG<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=510><form>alikási</form> <pos>a</pos> nervously <tr>restless</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be <tr>nervous</tr> and restless. <i>Mualikási (maalikási) kug maduul na ang ting-iksam,</i> I get nervous when exams approach.

<p id=511><form>alikáti</form> <pos>n</pos> long-nosed <tr>pliers</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> do <corr>s.t. </corr>with a long-nosed pliers. <i>Gialikáti ang paglarut sa ákung ngípun,</i> My tooth was extracted using a long-nosed pliers.

<p id=512><form>alikáti sa múrus</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>herb</tr> of waste places, growing to 2&prime;, widely used as a poultice for wounds. It has alternate ovate leaves with dentate margins, decreasing in size toward the ends of the branches and multiple branching, with a branch growing in the axils of the larger leaves. Flowers are in axillary spikes, colored green, with small, tri-segmented fruit in the calyx, bearing tiny rounded seeds.

<p id=513><form>alikúmù</form> (from <ix>kúmù</ix>) <pos>n</pos> k.o. sea <tr>crab</tr> with roundish bulging body, 2&Prime; in length, yellowish green, with fat stubby claws and appendages for paddling. Not usually eaten.

<p id=514><form>alikún</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>fish</tr>.

<p id=515><form>alikway</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> shoots of the <tr>taro</tr> (<ix>gabi</ix>) before they develop leaves. <number>2</number> k.o. vegetable eaten by the Suban-un.

<p id=516><form>alíli</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; ac2]</itype> <tr>swap</tr>, <tr>exchange</tr>. <i>Kinsay mualílig kabáyù sa ákung kábaw?</i> Who will swap a horse for my carabao? <i>Nagkaalíli kami sa ámung pawntinpin,</i> We took each other&apos;s pens by mistake. <i>Alilíhun ta ning síya ug kulumpiyu,</i> Let&apos;s put the chair where the rocking chair is and put the rocking chair here where the chair is.

<p id=517><form>alíling</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>ant</tr>, slightly bigger than the red ant (<ix>umígas</ix>), dark orange, somewhat translucent. It does not bite and is found swarming in all directions over sugar.

<p id=518><form>alílis</form> <xr>= <sc>ALÍLI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=519><form>alilúya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>alleluia</tr>, song in the church. <number>2</number> the name given to the child playing the role of the angel in the pageant performed on Easter Sunday dawn depicting the meeting of Mary and the Lord Jesus (<ix>súgat</ix>). The child is suspended from an arch which is placed in the spot where Mary and Jesus <pb n=26>are to meet after their separate processions from the cathedral. <number>3</number> name of this pageant.

<p id=520><form>alilúyuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>whirlpool</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; b(1)]</itype> form a whirlpool. <i>Mualilúyuk ang subà ug magbahà,</i> The river forms a whirlpool when it floods.

<p id=521><form>álim<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB2S]</itype> <tr>heal</tr>, make s.t. heal. <i>Muálim (maálim) ning ákung samad,</i> My wound will heal. <i>Kining tambála muálim (mupaálim) sa ímung núka,</i> This medicine will heal your sore. <i>Panahun ray makaálim (makapaálim) sa ímung kaguul,</i> Only time will <tr>assuage</tr> your sorrow. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> allow s.t. to heal.

<p id=522><form>álim<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>ÁLUM</sc>.</xr>

<p id=523><form>alíma</form> (from <ix>líma</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>take care</tr> of s.o. by administering to his needs. <i>Alimáhi ang ímung manghud,</i> Take good care of your younger brother. <pos>n</pos> <tr>hand</tr> (dialectal).

<p id=524><form>alimadmad</form> <xr>= <sc>ALIMATMAT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=525><form>aliman</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>German</tr>.

<p id=526><form>alimángu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible <tr>crab</tr> of tidal swamps, black on the back, but lighter on the inside and on claws. It has large meaty claws, is round in shape, thick-shelled, without spikes and occasionally reaches 10&Prime; in diameter. <form>alimanguhun</form> <pos>a</pos> having large lower arms and small biceps like a crab.

<p id=527><form>Alimanya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Germany</tr>.

<p id=528><form>alimása</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>wash</tr> the body, esp. the lower limbs. <i>Akuy mualimása (mag-alimása) sa mga bátà,</i> I&apos;ll wash the children. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> wash oneself.

<p id=529><form>alimásag</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible <tr>crab</tr>.

<p id=530><form>alimatmat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> <number>1</number> regain <tr>consciousness</tr>. <i>Dihà na ku makaalimatmat ug buut sa uspital,</i> I was in the hospital when I regained consciousness. <number>2</number> have earliest <tr>awareness</tr> of life. <i>Sukad ku makaalimatmat ug buut wà pa ku hibunali,</i> I have not been spanked since the earliest time I can remember.

<p id=531><form>alimátuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>leech</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4b4]</itype> be infested with leeches. <form>ka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> covered with leeches. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> place infested with leeches.

<p id=532><form>alimbrilyu</form> <xr>= <sc>ALAMBRILYU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=533><form>alimbúkad</form> (from <ix>bukad</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>expand</tr> in an upward direction, <tr>well</tr> upwards. <i>Mialimbúkad ang asu pagkasúnug sa asíti sa baril,</i> The smoke welled up as the oil in the barrel burned. <number>2</number> for feelings to well up. <i>Mialimbúkad sa íyang kahiladman ang kahínam,</i> A feeling of eager expectations welled up inside him. <number>3</number> pull in the cheeks and stick out the lips slightly in an expression of distaste. <pos>n</pos> an underwater <tr>source</tr> of a lake from which water rushes into the lake.

<p id=534><form>alimgas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tobacco seed</tr>. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> tobacco seed container.

<p id=535><form>alimgat</form> <xr>= <sc>ALINGGAT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=536><form>alimpatakan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the <tr>mind</tr> as the seat of thinking processes. <i>Isilsil pag-áyu sa inyung alimpatakan arun dì giyud ninyu hikalimtan,</i> Imprint it indelibly in your mind so you don&apos;t forget it ever. <number>2</number> <tr>cranium</tr>. <i>Dakdákan ku nang ímung alimpatakan,</i> I&apos;ll knock you on your skull.

<p id=537><form>alimpúlu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>crown</tr>, part of the skull in the back where the hair forms a whorl. <number>2</number> topmost part of a mountain. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>ALIMPÚLUS</sc>.</xr> <form>alimpulúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> place where the crown is or place analogous to it. <i>Nakatungtung siya sa alimpúhan sa dakung batu,</i> He was perched on the topmost part of the rock. <form>kinaalimpuluhan</form> <pos>n</pos> the very spot at the center of the back of the head.

<p id=538><form>alimpúlus</form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>whirlwind</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B346; a4b4]</itype> for there to be a whirlwind. <i>Naukab ang ámung atup nga nípà dihang mialimpús,</i> Our thatched roof was blown away when there was a small whirlwind.

<p id=539><form>alimpuyang</form> <xr>= <sc>LUY-ALUY-A</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>LUY-A</sc>.</xr>

<p id=540><form>alimpuyas</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>plant</tr> similar to <ix>luy-aluy-a,</ix> the rhizomes of which are used medicinally: <bio>Curcuma zedoaria</bio>.

<p id=541><form>alimpuying</form> <xr>= <sc>LUY-ALUY-A</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>LUY-A</sc>.</xr>

<p id=542><form>alimugmug</form> <xr>= <sc>LIMUGMUG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=543><form>alimúkaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> state of <tr>semiconsciousness</tr> just before falling asleep or awakening. <i>Ang íyang gisulti búnga lang sa íyang alimúkaw,</i> What he said was the product of his semiconsciousness. <number>2</number> action of the sort performed by fully conscious persons performed in one&apos;s sleep. <i>Wà ka nákù tuyúag igù. Alimúkaw lang kadtu,</i> I didn&apos;t mean to strike you. I did it in my sleep. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> do s.t. in one&apos;s sleep of the sort one normally does awake. <i>Nanáug siya tungang gabíi. Gialimukáwan diay,</i> He went downstairs in the middle of his sleep.

<p id=544><form>alimúkun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. wild <tr>dove</tr> with white ears and light brown feathers speckled with black: <bio>Phapitreron leucotis</bio>.

<p id=545><form>alimúngaw</form> (from <ix>bungaw</ix>) <xr>= <sc>ALIMÚKAW</sc>.</xr>

<p id=546><form>alimungáwung</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. faintly <tr>similar</tr> to s.t. else in appearance. <i>Alimungáwung ang hitsúra sa plurdilis sa ahítu,</i> The zinnia is faintly like a marigold in appearance. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[BC13; b6]</itype> come to resemble faintly. <i>Mialimungáwung (naalimungáwung) ang bátang sinagup kaníla,</i> The adopted child came to look like them. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> faintly discern a resemblance. <i>Nakaalimungáwung ku nímu kay may-ungmay-ung ka sa ímung igsúun,</i> I recognized you because you look like your brother. <i>Hing-alimungawúngan siya sa bantay <pb n=27>nga mauy nangáwat sa kwarta,</i> The guard faintly recognized him as the one who stole the money.

<p id=547><form>alimúsan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish raised in fishponds: <bio>Paraplotosus albilabris</bio>.

<!-- Confused entry -->

<p id=548><form>alimúut</form> (from <ix>púut</ix>) <pos>a</pos> confining, <tr>oppressive</tr> so as to make people feel uncomfortably hot. <i>Alimúut nang naylung isul-ub,</i> Nylon is <tr>oppressively hot</tr> to wear. <i>Alimúut sa Magalyánis, way hángin,</i> It&apos;s oppressively hot downtown. There&apos;s no wind. <form>&mdash; ug nawung</form> <number>1</number> <tr>sour-faced</tr>. <number>2</number> be so ugly as not to have one redeeming feature in one&apos;s face. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b3]</itype> be oppressively warm. <i>Mualimúut (maalimúut) ang kwartu ug mahápun,</i> It gets hot (might get hot) in the room in the afternoon. <i>Gialimuútan (gialimut-an) ka?</i> Do you feel hot?

<p id=549><form>alimyun</form> <pos>n</pos> sweet smell, <tr>fragrance</tr>. <i>Ang alimyun sa mga búlak,</i> The fragrance of the flowers. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>smell sweet</tr>, give off fragrance. <i>Nangalimyun ang mga dalága nga nagpadúng sa bayli,</i> The girls that were headed for the dance smelled sweet.

<p id=550><form>alindáhaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>drizzle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b4]</itype> drizzle.

<p id=551><form>alindánaw</form> (from <ix>danaw</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>dragonfly</tr>.

<p id=552><form>alindánga</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>hot and sticky</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b4]</itype> become hot and sticky. <i>Hukásun ku ning ákung swítir kay gialindangáhan ku,</i> I&apos;ll take my sweater off because I feel hot and sticky.

<p id=553><form>alindángay</form> <pos>a</pos> slightly <tr>feverish</tr>, uneasy in the body because of a slight fever. <i>Dì ku mutarbáhu run kay mu rag alindángay ang ákung láwas,</i> I won&apos;t work today because my body is somewhat feverish. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a4]</itype> have a slight fever, be restless. <i>Nag-alindángay ang bátà kay gihilantan,</i> The child is restless because he has a fever.

<p id=554><form>alindasay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> uneasy, <tr>restless</tr> in place one is lying. <i>Nag-alindasay ang bátang taas kaáyug hilánat,</i> The child was restless because of his high fever.

<!-- TODO: verify the g after ) below -->

<p id=555><form>alinga</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> give one&apos;s attention to, care for. <i>Walà siya mag-alinga sa daghang táwung nagpaábut kaníya,</i> He paid no attention to the people waiting for him. <i>Alingaha (alingahi)g maáyu ang mga bátà samtang wà ku dinhi,</i> Watch the children carefully while I&apos;m not here.

<p id=556><form>alingabngab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6c1]</itype> for s.t. to be <tr>wide open</tr>. <i>Mualingabngab (maalingabngab) nang ímung samad ug dì tahiun,</i> If you don&apos;t stitch that wound, it will gape. <i>Nag-alingabngab ang ímung pitáka, wà kasirhi,</i> Your bag is wide open. You didn&apos;t close it. <i>Ayaw alingabngaba (ialingabngab) ang ímung bàbà arun dì masudlag lángaw,</i> If you open your mouth wide like that, flies will get in it.

<p id=557><form>alingagngag</form> <pos>n</pos> upper part of throat and back part of oral cavity, including the soft palate. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> the general area where the <ix>alingagngag</ix> is.

<p id=558><form>alingása<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> annoyingly <tr>noisy</tr>. <i>Alingása ang bátà,</i> The child is annoyingly noisy. <i>Alingása ang íyang pandungug,</i> His ears are full of a disturbing din. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a2]</itype> be noisy. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>noise</tr>.

<p id=559><form>alingása<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> feeling hot and humid. <i>Alingása kining sinináang isul-ub,</i> This shirt is hot to wear. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be hot. <i>Ug maalingása (mualingása) ang panahun, mulupad ta sa Bagyu,</i> When it gets hot, we fly to Baguio. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>KA-</sc>.</xr> <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>heat</tr>.

<p id=560><form>alingásu</form> (from <ix>asu</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <tr>smoky</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> get filled with smoke. <i>Ug magsugba ka dinhi, mualingásu (maalingásu) ang kwartu,</i> If you broil food here, the room will get filled with smoke. <pos>n</pos> <tr>smokiness</tr>. <i>Ang alingásu mauy nakalagum sa pintal,</i> Smoke tarnished the paint. <form>alingasúhun</form> <pos>a</pos> of a somewhat smoky sort.

<p id=561><form>*alingawngaw<sub>1</sub></form> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>pretend</tr> not to hear or see or know about s.t. one knows very well about. <i>Mipaalingawngaw siyag basabása labun síging pasiplat,</i> She pretended to be absorbed in her reading, but she kept on peeping out from the corner of her eyes. <i>Mipaalingawngaw ang mangingilad dakù nga wà siya makautang nákù sa maung kantidad,</i> The swindler denied knowing anything about the money he owed me.

<p id=562><form>alingawngaw<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. very small gnats that swarm over leftover foods. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> have <ix>alingawngaw</ix> swarming over it. <i>Gialingawngaw ang kan-un,</i> The food had gnats all over it.

<p id=563><form>alinggánay</form> <xr>= <sc>LINGGÁNAY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=564><form>alinggat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> be aware, take <tr>notice</tr> of s.t. <i>Nakaalinggat ka ba nga niwangniwang na run si Tasya?</i> Have you noticed that Tasia is a little thinner now? <i>Hialinggatan nákù nga wà na ang táwu,</i> I noticed that the man was gone.

<p id=565><form>alingíing</form> <xr>= <sc>ALANGÍING</sc>.</xr>

<p id=566><form>alingísi</form> <pos>a</pos> making a piercing, screeching noise. <i>Alingísi siyag tíngug,</i> She has a piercing voice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> be noisy. <i>Naalingísi ang tíngug sa kutsi sa gibríkan,</i> The car screeched as the brakes were put on.

<p id=567><form>alingísig</form> <xr>= <sc>ALINGÍSI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=568><form>alingisngis</form> <pos>a</pos> making very high-pitched and drawn out piercing noise. <i>Ayaw ug ikágis ang ímung kuku sa pisára kay alingisngis,</i> Don&apos;t run your fingernails over the blackboard because it&apos;s screechy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be high-pitched and screeching. <i>Nag-alingisngis ang sín nga gigúyud,</i> The iron sheeting they <pb n=28>are dragging is making a screeching sound.

<p id=569><form>alingit</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>short-tempered</tr>, <tr>irritable</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; ab3]</itype> be irritable. <i>Pakatulga nang bátà ug udtu arun dílì mualingit (maalingit),</i> Have the child take an afternoon nap so he won&apos;t be irritable later. <i>Mauy ialingit (alingitan) níya ug hilabtan ang íyang gamit,</i> If you touch his things it will make him mad.

<p id=570><form>alingiting</form> <pos>n</pos> intense dry <tr>heat</tr>, greater than <ix>alangíing.</ix> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be exceedingly hot. <i>Ang adlaw mag-alingiting lang, basta kwarisma,</i> The sun is scorching during Lent.

<p id=571><form>alingkawas</form> <xr>= <sc>LINGKAWAS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=572><form>alingugngug</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>noisy</tr> in a constant drumming way. <i>Alingugngug kaáyu ang tíngug sa tambul,</i> The drum made an annoying sound. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be annoyingly noisy. <pos>n</pos> constant <tr>noise</tr> which drums in the ears.

<p id=573><form>alinsúub</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>warm</tr>, <tr>moist</tr> and <tr>stuffy</tr> without wind. <i>Alinsúub ang panahun. Kauwanun tingáli,</i> The weather is hot and stuffy. It&apos;s probably going to rain. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be hot and airless. <i>Nag-alinsúub lang ang barungbárung,</i> The shanty is cramped and poorly ventilated.

<p id=574><form>alintabu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <tr>turn over</tr>, producing a loud turmoil. <i>Nagkaalintabu ang mga balud,</i> The waves churned more and more vigorously. <i>Nag-alintabu sa hilabihang kayugut ang ákung kahiladman,</i> I was in complete turmoil within myself because of my great anger. <i>Alintabuhun (ialintabu) ku ning mga gamit nátù ug dílì ka musugut,</i> I&apos;ll turn this house upside down if you don&apos;t agree. <pos>n</pos> <tr>noise</tr> produced by things turned upside down with a crash.

<p id=575><form>alinupung</form> (from <ix>túpung</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; a]</itype> <number>1</number> for vertical things to be almost the same height, esp. for children to be so close together they are almost the same height. <i>Ug alinupungun ninyu ang inyung anak, magsangkiig mu,</i> If you have your children one after another, you&apos;ll reel under the burden. <number>2</number> coming one after another (figurative). <i>Nag-alinupung nga suliran,</i> Problems that come one after another.

<p id=576><form>alipadnu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible fresh-water <tr>limpet</tr> of dark olive green to grey color, oblong, growing to 1&Prime;. It clings to stones.

<p id=577><form>alipadsay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> for good-sized things <tr>to be scattered</tr>. <i>Ang ímung mga butang nagkaalipadsay lang sa kwartu,</i> Your things are scattered all over the room. <i>Alipadsáyun (ialipadsay) ang mga papílis sa hángin,</i> The papers will be scattered by the wind. <number>2</number> for s.t. to be consumed rapidly as if scattered. <i>Kadalì rang mualipadsay ang kwarta karun,</i> How quickly money vanishes these days. <i>Gialipadsay lag kausa ang mga pagkáung giaray sa lamísa,</i> The food that was heaped on the table vanished in one fell swoop.

<p id=578><form>alipanti</form> <xr>= <sc>ILIPANTI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=579><form>alipasa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; b4]</itype> for a child lying in bed to be <tr>restless</tr> due to discomfort, worry, etc. <i>Ang bútud sa tiyan mauy makaalipasa (makapaalipasa) sa bátà,</i> Gas pains can cause a child to become restless.

<p id=580><form>alipáta, alipátà</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. medium-sized <tr>tree</tr> of the seashore, the ashes of which are used for soap making. Ingredient for a broth to counter <ix>bárang:</ix> <bio>Excoecaria agallocha</bio>.

<p id=581><form>alipatpat</form> <pos>a</pos> for vision to be <tr>blurred</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN]</itype> become <tr>blurred</tr> or <tr>bleary</tr>. <i>Mialipatpat (nangalipatpat) ang ákung panan-aw sa dúgay nákung binása,</i> My vision became blurred from reading too long.

<p id=582><form>alip-ip<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> person&apos;s <tr>back</tr> reaching from the shoulders as far as the waist. <number>2</number> <tr>waist</tr>, part on the side directly beneath the lower rib.

<p id=583><form>alip-ip<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>hide</tr> by making oneself as small as possible behind s.t. <i>Mialip-ip (mipaalip-ip) ang kawatan sa bungbung,</i> The robber pressed himself against the wall so he couldn&apos;t be seen. <number>2</number> <tr>peer</tr> or look furtively from behind s.t. <i>Ang sanlahun mialip-ip (mipaalip-ip) lang ug tan-aw sa luyu sa bintánà,</i> The leper peered furtively from behind the windows.

<p id=584><form>alipúlu</form> <xr>= <sc>ALIMPÚLU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=585><form>alipúlung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> feel <tr>dizzy</tr>. <i>Alipudngan ku ug gutmun ku,</i> I feel dizzy when I&apos;m hungry.

<p id=586><form>alipunga, alipungà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>eczema</tr> caused by allergy. <number>2</number> <tr>athlete&apos;s foot</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> get a <tr>rash</tr> or athlete&apos;s foot. <i>Alipungahun ku ug malígù kug sayu sa buntag,</i> I get a rash when I bathe early in the morning.

<p id=587><form>alipúnga<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> having difficulty in breathing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN; a4b4]</itype> have difficulty in breathing. <i>Nangalipunga ang ákung gininháwa kay gibutdan aku,</i> I had a hard time breathing because of the gas in my stomach.

<p id=588><form>alipúnga<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> noisily <tr>bothersome</tr>. <i>Alipúnga ning batáa, síging hílak,</i> The child is very bothersome. He keeps crying. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN; b6]</itype> be noisily bothersome.

<p id=589><form>aliputu, alipútu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>short tempered</tr> because of s.t. which is weighing on the mind. <i>Alipútu run nà siya kay napildi sa súgal,</i> He is in an <tr>irritable</tr> mood because he lost in gambling. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a2c5]</itype> get to be in a bad mood. <i>Gialipútu na sad ku níya sa íyang mga binúang,</i> He irritated me with his foolishness.

<p id=590><form>alíraw</form> <xr>= <sc>LÍRAW</sc>.</xr>

<p id=591><form>alirdyik</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>allergic</tr>. <number>2</number> tending to react to s.t. nice more than usual (humorous). <i>Alirdyik kus mga gwápa,</i> Good-looking girls turn me <pb n=29>on. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a4b3(1)]</itype> be allergic. <i>Ug mutúu kang alirdyik, maalirdyik ka núun,</i> If you think you&apos;re allergic to s.t. you will be allergic. <i>Gialirdyik kug pasáyan,</i> I&apos;m allergic to shrimps. <i>Unsay ímung kaalirdyíkan?</i> What caused your allergy?&dagger;

<p id=592><form>alírung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB3(1); c]</itype> <tr>gather</tr> around s.t. <i>Nag-alírung ang mga táwu sa sugálan,</i> The people stood around the gambling table. <i>Nag-alírung siya sa silya sa lamísa,</i> He put the chairs around the table. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> people gathered around. <number>2</number> the <tr>surroundings</tr>, the space around. <i>Ang mga gángis lámay nagtingug sa alírung,</i> Only the crickets were chirping in the area.

<p id=593><form>alisbu</form> <pos>n</pos> bad <tr>smell</tr> permeating the air. <i>Ang alisbu sa patayng irù,</i> The <tr>stench</tr> of the dead dog. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN46; b4(1)]</itype> give off a bad smell. <i>Naalisbuhan ku sa báhù sa íhì,</i> The stench of the urine reached me.

<p id=594><form>alisbung</form> <xr>= <sc>ALISBU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=595><form>alisdan, alisdi</form> <xr>= <sc>ILISDAN/-I</sc>.</xr>

<p id=596><form>alisiwsiw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>grasshopper</tr> about 25 to 30 mm. long, abounding in open grasslands, light yellow-green dorsal side and yellowish dirty gray underside, not glossy. Not migratory or destructive to crops.

<p id=597><form>alisngaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>evaporate</tr>, give off steam. <i>Mualisngaw ang alkuhul,</i> The alcohol will evaporate. <i>Ínit pa diay ang túbig kay nag-alisngaw man,</i> The water is still hot, then, because it&apos;s giving off steam. <number>2</number> for anger to vent itself. <i>Mualisngaw na ning ákung kasukù,</i> I&apos;m going to blow up in a minute. <pos>n</pos> steam or evaporation given off. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> give off a smell. <i>Nangalisngaw ang tanglad,</i> The lemon grass gave off a pleasant smell. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> thing given off as steam or evaporation. <number>2</number> shadow, small portion of a character trait which is exuded. <i>Ug daghan may natuntu níya, inalisngaw lang tu sa íyang kamaldítu,</i> He cheated lots of people, but that was just a fraction of his mischief. <i>Kadtung kasábà inalisngaw lang tu sa ákung kasukù,</i> The scolding was just a faint shadow of what I really felt.

<p id=598><form>alistu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1a</number> <tr>energetic</tr>. <i>Alistu siyang mutrabáhu,</i> He works energetically. <number>b</number> <tr>agile</tr>. <i>Alistu siyang milikay,</i> He dodged agily. <number>2</number> <tr>shrewd</tr>, <tr>clever</tr>. <i>Alistu siyang musabut,</i> He understands things readily. <i>Alistu, apuntin, puygu<corr sic=",">!</corr></i> <tr>Ready</tr>, aim, fire! <number>3</number> do s.t. well. <i>Alistu siyang mulútù,</i> She cooks well. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> be energetic, agile. <i>Mualistu (maalistu) ka man lang ug makakità ug kwarta,</i> You only move if you see money. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1]</itype> be clever, smart. <i>Ug makig-úban ka sa mga abtik maalistu ka giyud,</i> If you go around with shrewd people, you&apos;ll become shrewd, too. <i>Alistu ka lang kay itug-an tikang Pápa,</i> Better watch out because I&apos;ll tell Father on you. <number>3</number> <itype>[b4(1)]</itype> be outsmarted. <i>Naglágut ku kay naalistuhan kung Husi,</i> I&apos;m mad because Jose put one over on me.

<p id=599><form>alisuksuk</form> <xr>= <sc>SALUKSUK<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=600><form>alitundan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>banana</tr> with light yellow skin, which grows to six inches. One of the most important commercial bananas, it is eaten uncooked.

<p id=601><form>aliwálang</form> <xr>= <sc>ALÍLING</sc>.</xr>

<p id=602><form>aliwarus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be restless in expectation of s.t. <i>Nag-aliwarus siyang nagpaábut sa íyang trátu,</i> She nervously awaited her sweetheart.

<p id=603><form>aliwárus</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>nuisance</tr>, annoyance caused by noise and motion. <i>Ang daghang pidikab mauy nakaaliwárus (nakapaaliwárus) sa karsáda,</i> The large number of pedicabs are a nuisance in the streets. <i>Maaliwárus lang ang balay kun magdagandágan ang mga bátà,</i> The house will just be in commotion if the children keep running about.

<p id=604><form>alíwas</form> <pos>n</pos> large monkey, <tr>ape</tr>. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> ape-like.

<p id=605><form>aliwasa, aliwása</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S; a4b34]</itype> restless because of discomfort or worry. <i>Nag-aliwasa siya kay nagabin-an ang íyang bátà,</i> She was restless because her child came home late.

<p id=606><form>aliyupyup</form> <pos>n</pos> shrub of clearings: <bio>Pseuderantheum bicolor</bio>. The leaves are used for uterine bleeding and roots and trunk for stomach ache.

<p id=607><form>alkabála</form> <pos>n</pos> fee charged for the use of a space to vend. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> charge a fee for that. <i>Alkabaláhan kag bayinti,</i> You will be charged twenty centavos for a place in the market.

<p id=608><form>alkaldi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mayor</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be mayor.

<p id=609><form>alkampur</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>camphor</tr> wood. <number>2</number> name of a folk dance. <form>-adu, asayti -adu, di-</form> camphorated oil.

<p id=610><form>alkansi</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>losing</tr>, without gain or advantage. <i>Alkansi kaáyu kug singkwintay ibáyad mu,</i> I lose a lot if you pay fifty. <i>Alkansi aku niya sa pagkáun,</i> I lose on his food. <i>Alkansi aku níya sa báhin,</i> I lose out the way it is divided. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>loss</tr>. <i>Dakù silag alkansi sa ílang nigusyu,</i> They incurred a big loss in their business. <number>2</number> <tr>lacking</tr> in amount. <i>Dus mitrus alkansi sa sukud pára sa usa ka páris karsúnis,</i> Two meters is not enough material for a pair of pants. <i>Alkansi ning ímung gihátag sa pagpangumpra,</i> You haven&apos;t given me enough shopping money. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c]</itype> <number>1</number> incur a loss. <i>Alkansíhan aku nímug diyútay,</i> You will take a small loss on me. <number>2</number> cause to take a loss. <i>Alkansíhun aku nímug singkwinta <pb n=30>ray ímung ihátag,</i> You will make me take a loss if you only give me fifty pesos. <number>3</number> <itype>[AP; a]</itype> cause to get insufficient return from an investment. <i>Ug siyay ímung suluguun, mag-alkansi lang siya sa káun,</i> If he is your servant, you lose out on his food. <form>&mdash; sa lutaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB]</itype> cause to have a small amount of freeboard, have less freeboard. <i>Ang karga mualkansi sa lutaw sa sakayan,</i> The cargo lessens the amount of freeboard which the boat has.

<p id=611><form>alkansíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>container</tr> for saving coins, piggy bank. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2c]</itype> make, obtain, put in a piggy bank. <i>Ialkansíya ang kwartang ímung hikit-an,</i> Put the money you found into the piggy bank.

<p id=612><form>alkaydi</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>ALKALDI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=613><form>alkila</form> <xr>= <sc>ARKILA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=614><form>alkitran</form> <pos>n</pos> mixture of <tr>tar</tr> and <tr>creosote</tr> painted on wood to preserve it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a1b]</itype> apply, make into tar of this sort.

<p id=615><form>alkúba</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ceiling</tr>. <i>Amákan ang alkúba sa ílang balay,</i> The ceiling of their house is made of woven bamboo. <number>2</number> space between the ceiling and roof, <tr>attic</tr>. <i>Isang-at sa alkúba ang mga ginámit nga kahun,</i> Put the used boxes in the attic. <number>3</number> <tr>canopy</tr> of a bed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> put a ceiling.

<p id=616><form>alkuhíris</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mosaic disease</tr> that affects abaca and bananas. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> get mosaic disease.

<p id=617><form>alkuhul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>alcohol</tr>. <form>-íra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>alcohol container</tr> with a pouring spout.

<p id=618><form>alkumbra</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>rug</tr>. <number>2</number> k.o. tall ornamental <tr>ginger plant</tr> with soft velvety leaves: <bio>Costus speciosus</bio>.

<p id=619><form>alkuntra</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. put behind s.t. else which is to be hammered in order to absorb the blow, acting as a <tr>counterpoise</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a]</itype> make into a counterpoise. <i>Alkuntráhig pintul dinhing pikása ug paknga ug martilyu sa píkas,</i> Put a piece of wood on this side to absorb the blow and strike it with a hammer on the other side. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> react in opposition to s.t. <i>Ang pagkagastadur sa asáwa gialkuntráhan (gialkuntra) sa katihik sa bána,</i> The husband&apos;s tightfistedness acted as a counterpoise (was used as a counterpoise) to the wife&apos;s spending.

<p id=620><form>almagri</form> <pos>n</pos> powder put on materials to dye them red or brown prior to applying finish. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> apply <ix>almagri</ix> powder. <i>Átung almagríhan ang simintu arun mapula,</i> We&apos;ll dye the cement so that it gets red.

<p id=621><form>almamátir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Alma Mater</tr>.

<p id=622><form>almanáki</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>almanac</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> do by means of an almanac. <i>Ug lisdan kag hunàhúnag ngálan, almanakíhun na lang nátù,</i> If you have a hard time thinking of a name, let&apos;s find one in the almanac. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain an almanac.

<p id=623><form>almasíga</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>almaciga</tr>, a large forest tree producing lumber, <ix>balaw,</ix> and the dammar resin important in trade since prehistoric times: <bio>Agathis philippinensis</bio>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make s.t. of almaciga wood.

<p id=624><form>almasin</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> dry goods <tr>store</tr>. <i>Sapían siya kay dakug almasin,</i> He is rich because he has a big store. <number>2</number> a k.o. thick cloth with large prints, not locally woven, formerly sold in stores. <i>Ang panaptung almasin naúsu sa mga mil nuybi sintus bayinti,</i> The <ix>almasin</ix> cloth was widely used in the twenties.

<p id=625><form>almindras</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>almonds</tr>.

<p id=626><form>almiranti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>admiral</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be an admiral.

<p id=627><form>almiris</form> <pos>n</pos> a small <tr>mortar</tr> used in cooking or pharmaceutical work. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a small mortar.

<p id=628><form>almirul</form> <pos>n</pos> prepared <tr>starch</tr> used for clothing. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> starch clothes. <i>Ímu na bang gialmirulan ang karsúnis?</i> Have you starched the pants yet? <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into starch.

<p id=629><form>almismutyimpu</form> occupying a certain position concurrently. <i>Prisidinti siya, almismutyimpu tisuríru,</i> He&apos;s president and at the same time treasurer.

<p id=630><form>almuháda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>uterus</tr> of female animals.

<p id=631><form>almuhadun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cushion</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a]</itype> make into a cushion.

<p id=632><form>almundigas</form> <pos>n</pos> dish consisting of meat balls with plain sauce. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> make this dish.

<p id=633><form>almunída</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bargain</tr> sale. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> sell at a cheap price. <i>Gialmunidáhan aku ug balay,</i> I was offered a house for sale at a low price.

<p id=634><form>almuránas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hemorrhoids</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be afflicted with hemorrhoids. <i>Kanà kunung hingaug síli lagmit almuranásun,</i> They say people who eat hot peppers tend to get hemorrhoids.

<p id=635><form>alpa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>harp</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> make a harp. <form>paN-</form> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> play the harp.

<p id=636><form>alpabitayis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>alphabetize</tr>. <i>Alpabitayisa kunu ring lista sa mga ngálan,</i> Please alphabetize this list.

<p id=637><form>alpáka</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>alpaca</tr> cloth.

<p id=638><form>alpalpa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>alfalfa</tr>. <form>alpalpahan</form> <pos>n</pos> alfalfa field.

<p id=639><form>alpilir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>safety pin</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> put a safety pin in s.t. <i>Ímu lang alpiliran ang karsúnis kay wà nay butúnis,</i> Just put a safety pin in the trousers because they have no buttons. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> pin oneself up with a safety pin. <i>Mangalpilir ku arun dì mahushus ang ákung sáya,</i> I&apos;ll use a safety pin so my skirt won&apos;t slip down. <form>&mdash; dinágum</form> <xr>= <sc>DINÁGUM</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>DÁGUM</sc>.</xr>

<p id=640><form>alpiril, alpirin</form> <xr>= <sc>ALPILIR</sc>.</xr>

<p id=641><form>alpirisíya</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. children&apos;s disease.

<pb n=31>

<p id=642><form>alpumbra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rug</tr>, <tr>carpet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> put or spread a carpet on.

<p id=643><form>alpunsínu</form> <pos>n</pos> style of haircut where the hair is short at the side, but enough is left on the top to part in the middle (the style worn by King Alfonso of Spain). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> cut the hair in the <ix><corr sic=alpunsinu>alpunsínu</corr></ix> style.

<p id=644><form>alput</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prostitute</tr> (euphemism for <ix>púta</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> become, make into a prostitute.

<p id=645><form>alsa</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>lift</tr> s.t. from underneath. <i>Alsáhun nátù ning lamísa,</i> Let&apos;s lift the table. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>rise</tr> in rebellion. <i>Mialsa ang mga Pilipínu bátuk sa Katsílà,</i> The Filipinos rose against the Spaniards. <number>3</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for dough to rise in baking. <i>Ug mualsa na gánì ang minása,</i> When the dough rises. <number>4</number> <itype>[A6; b4]</itype> <formx>&mdash; ang kabúhì</formx> for the <ix>kabúhì</ix> to rise out of its place from fright. <i>Gialsáhan ku sa kabúhì sa pagbutu,</i> I had a severe case of fright when it exploded. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> action of having lifted. <i>Tulu ka alsa, kutasan na ku,</i> If I do three lifts, I&apos;m out of breath. <number>2</number> <tr>load</tr> that can be carried in a trip. <i>Pila ka alsa úsà matiwas ug hákut?</i> How many loads till it&apos;s all delivered? <form>&mdash; butang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456; c6]</itype> for various medicines to be applied in succession without waiting for results. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. haircut where the top of the head has hair and the sides cropped short. <form>-du &mdash; ug kabúhì</form> <pos>a</pos> easily frightened. <i>Alsádu ra pud nímug kabúhì, kasíkas ra tu sa dáhun,</i> How jittery you are. It was only the rustling of leaves. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be easily frightened. <i>Naalsádu ang ákung kabúhì sukad ku makatunub ug bitin,</i> Ever since I stepped on a snake, I have been jittery. <form>&mdash; ug kamut</form> quick to lift the hand in anger. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be quick to lift the hand in anger. <form>-myintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>uprising</tr>, <tr>revolt</tr>. <i>Ang alsamyintu bátuk sa Katsílà,</i> The uprising against the Spaniards. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>rise up</tr>. <i>Dílì ni madala ug kumpirinsiya, alsamyintúhun lang nátù ni,</i> A conference is no good. We&apos;ll have to revolt in this case.

<p id=646><form>*alta</form> <form>&mdash; prisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> high blood pressure. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a4]</itype> have high blood pressure. <i>Ayawg hingárig káug tambuk kay alta prisyunun (maalta prisyun) ka,</i> Don&apos;t keep eating fat because you will get (might get) high blood pressure. <form>&mdash; susyidad</form> high society. <form>di-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dignitaries</tr>. <i>Ang prisidinti gitagbù sa mga dialta,</i> The president was met by the dignitaries. <pos>a</pos> suitable for high society. <form>di- mar</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>high-class</tr>, <tr>luxurious</tr>.

<p id=647><form>altar</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>altar</tr>.

<p id=648><form>altu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; b(1)]</itype> <tr>halt</tr>. <i>Mialtu siya pagkabatì sa mandar,</i> He halted on hearing the command. <i>Gialtúhan úsag kadiyut ang trabáhu karun sa mína,</i> The work in the mine has come to a stop for the moment.

<p id=649><form>altu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>alto</tr> voice, part, or instrument. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> play or sing the alto part. <i>Altúhi ang átung áwit,</i> You sing the alto to our song.

<p id=650><form>*alu</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <form>aluálu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>tease</tr>. <i>Ug mag-aluálu kas irù, paakan ka,</i> If you tease the dog, you will get bitten. <i>Ayaw alualúha ang bungì,</i> Don&apos;t tease the harelip. <pos>n</pos> act of <tr>teasing</tr>. <form>alualuhan</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of teasing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be fond of teasing. <form>maalualuhun</form> <pos>a</pos> of a teasing nature. <form>aluhánay</form> <pos>n</pos> game of tag where everybody chases everybody else. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c3]</itype> <tr>play tag</tr>.

<p id=651><form>álù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>channel</tr> in tidal flats.

<p id=652><form>alubíhid</form> <xr>= <sc>ALABÍHID</sc>.</xr>

<p id=653><form>alud-ud</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. which has the chewing quality of soft bones: the tender part of a stem, the husk of young coconuts near the bud, bone <tr>cartilage</tr>. <i>Nahíwì ang íyang ilung kay napislat ang alud-ud,</i> His nose got crooked because the cartilage was squashed. <number>2</number> top half of the coconut bud which is soft and edible with a somewhat bitter taste. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having the quality of <ix>alud-ud.</ix>

<p id=654><form>alug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> go down to get water. <i>Mag-alug ang <corr sic="taga búkid">tagabúkid</corr> ug túbig,</i> The mountaineers will be going down to get water.

<p id=655><form>alugbáti</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. vine, the leaves of which are widely used as a vegetable. Wild and cultivated, it has cordate leaves which come in green and purple-tinged varieties, slightly mucilagenous when cooked: <bio>Basilla rubra</bio>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> cook <ix>alugbáti.</ix>

<p id=656><form>alug-ug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>shake</tr> in short jerky motions. <i>Gialug-ug níya sa butilya ang túbig,</i> He sloshed the water around in the bottle.

<p id=657><form>aluhánay</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>*ALU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=658><form>aluhípan</form> <xr>= <sc>ULAHÍPAN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=659><form>alukaba</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>eggshell</tr>.

<p id=660><form>alukabhang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>shell</tr> of eggs, sea shell, cartridge shell. <number>2</number> housing, <tr>skeletal structure</tr> of s.t. <i>Maáyung pagkahimulbul. Alukabhang na lay nahibilin,</i> It was completely stripped down. The only thing that remained of the car was the frame of the body.

<p id=661><form>alúla</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> cylindrical <tr>basket</tr> made of coconut leaves, holding about two bushels, container for <ix>buláhan.</ix> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make an <ix>alúla.</ix> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; bc1]</itype> put s.t. into an <ix>alúla.</ix> <i>Aluláhun (ialúla) nátù ning buwáhan arun itúmud,</i> We will put the lanzones in the <ix>alúla</ix> to bring them to market.

<p id=662><form>alum</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mole</tr>. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> having a mole. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> snappers which have dorsal moles on the side just in front of the tail: <bio>Lutianus sp</bio>. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having lots of moles.

<p id=663><form>álum</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small tree, with itchy leaves which are used as a poultice: <bio>Melanolepis <pb n=32>multiglandulosa</bio>.

<p id=664><form>aluminum</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>aluminum</tr> metal. <form>&mdash; rápir</form> <pos>n</pos> aluminum foil.

<p id=665><form>alumínus</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) [so-and-so] (which is not desirable) is better than for s.t. else to happen. <i>Pangayúun, pangayúun. Alumínus hulaman nga dílì iúlì,</i> If you want it, ask for it. Better than borrowing s.t. without giving it back. <i>Puwis palitan ta ka. Alumínus maghásul ka,</i> All right, I&apos;ll buy you some. Better than you bothering me all the time.

<p id=666><form>alumnus</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> breed of large, meaty pig with a short snout, broad face, and roundish body.

<p id=667><form>alum-um</form> <pos>a</pos> for the sky to be <tr>overcast</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B]</itype> become overcast. <i>Mialum-um ang búwan,</i> The moon became covered with a thin veil of clouds. <number>2</number> <itype>[b7c1]</itype> dim s.t. <i>Alum-úmi (alum-uma, ialum-um) ang síga sa pulawan,</i> Turn the night lamp down. <number>3</number> <itype>[b]</itype> be surpassed, put into the shadow by s.t. better. <i>Gwápa siya apan naalum-uman siya ni Tidang,</i> She is beautiful, but she is overshadowed by Tidang.

<p id=668><form>álun</form> <pos>n</pos> long rolling <tr>wave</tr>, <tr>swell</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; a4]</itype> for there to be big waves. <i>Miálun sa dágat paghuyup sa amíhan,</i> The sea had big waves when the northwind blew. <i>Manday dinhà na mi sa píliw giálun hinúun mi,</i> Just as we reached the shallow waters we were buffeted by big waves.

<p id=669><form>alundris<sub>1</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> sewing <tr>thread</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> thread a needle. <i>Ákung gialundrísan ang makina,</i> I threaded the machine. <number>2</number> <itype>[a1]</itype> make into sewing thread.

<p id=670><form>alundris<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> wild vine with a disagreeable odor, the berries of which are edible: <bio>Passiflora foetida</bio>.

<p id=671><form>álung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> cast a shadow over s.t. <i>Ang taas káhuy nag-álung sa ákung gardin,</i> The tall tree casts a shadow over my garden. <i>Ang íyang panganduy alúngan sa kahadluk,</i> His hopes are overshadowed by fear. <pos>n</pos> place that is overshadowed. <i>Muayun sa áwung ang kapi,</i> Coffee plants do best in the <tr>shade</tr>.

<p id=672><form>álung<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> be attracted to go near s.t. <i>Ang dinagkutan nga kandílà gialúngan sa mga anunugba,</i> The moths were attracted to the lighted candle. <pos>n</pos> fish attracted to the light in fishing that uses lights. <i>Mga tugnus ang mga álung nákù,</i> The fish attracted to my light were sardines. <form>alung-álung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ANP; b5]</itype> secretly keep watch on s.o. in hopes of getting a chance to see him. <i>Ang laláking nangulitáwu níya pirming muawung-áwung (mangawung-áwung, mupaawung-áwung) níya sa dálan,</i> The man who is courting her keeps waiting in the street for a chance to talk with her.

<p id=673><form>alungáing</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jaw</tr>, <tr>mandible</tr>. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having a prominent jawbone.

<p id=674><form>alungaug</form> <pos>a</pos> having a <tr>heavy feeling</tr> in the head from lack of sleep, hangover, blow, etc. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN]</itype> for head to be heavy. <i>Mialungaug (naalungaug, nangalungaug) ang ákung úlu sa íyang kusug nga sumbag,</i> I got a <tr>headache</tr> after she smacked me one.

<p id=675><form>alungnan</form> <xr>= <sc>UNLAN</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ULUN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=676><form>álup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> <number>1</number> for light, sense of sight to become <tr>dim</tr>. <i>Nag-álup man nang ímung kaláyu,</i> Your fire is low. <i>Nagkaálup na ang íyang panan-aw,</i> His sight is getting dim now. <number>2</number> for sounds to dim. <i>Sa nagkalayù siya, <corr sic=nagkaalup>nagkaálup</corr> pud ang íyang tíngug,</i> As she got further away, her voice grew fainter. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dim</tr>. <i>Alup ang sugà,</i> The light is dim.

<p id=677><form>alupaup</form> <xr>= <sc>ÁLUP</sc>, <ix>1</ix>.</xr>

<p id=678><form>alupì</form> (from <ix>lupi</ix>) <pos>n</pos> k.o. tidbit made from grated young corn, optionally with milk or coconut milk, wrapped in corn husks and boiled. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make into an <ix>alupì.</ix>

<p id=679><form>alup-up, alupuup</form> <xr>= <sc>ÁLUP</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p id=680><form>*álus</form> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>stretch</tr> one&apos;s patience, control oneself when provoked or distressed. <i>Dì ku makapaálus sa mga táwung gágu,</i> I can&apos;t tolerate morons. <i>Paalúsa (paalúsi) lang nang ímung bána ug masukù kay daghan mag prublíma,</i> Just be patient with your husband when he gets angry because he is beset with many problems.

<p id=681><form>alusíman</form> <xr>= <sc>ULASÍMAN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=682><form>alut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC2; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>shave</tr> the head. <number>2</number> <tr>cut</tr> hair. <i>Aluti ku,</i> Cut my hair. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b7]</itype> eat a portion of food intended for s.o. else. <i>Ubang míd muawut sa litsi sa bátà,</i> There are maids that help themselves to the baby&apos;s milk. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>shaved</tr> bald. <number>2</number> <tr>haircut</tr>. <i>Wà kay alut,</i> You need a haircut. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> get a haircut, have s.o. get a haircut. <i>Magpaalut ku,</i> I&apos;ll get a haircut. <i>Paalutan ku si Pidru,</i> I&apos;ll have Pedro get a haircut.

<p id=683><form>aluwíhaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>tree</tr> of second growth forest bearing small, depressed, globular yellow fruit, edible but acidic.

<p id=684><form>aluy<sub>1</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <form>&mdash; <ix>subjunctive passive verb</ix></form> [so-and-so] almost happened. <i>Aluy siya hiligsi,</i> He was almost run over.

<p id=685><form>aluy<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large <tr>mackerel</tr> or <tr>tuna</tr>.

<p id=686><form>áluy</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> money (slang).

<p id=687><form>aluyan</form> <xr>= <sc>AYAYAN</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>AYAY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=688><form>alúyuk</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> part of the skull where the hair forms a whorl. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> having a whorl on the head. <i>Gwápu si Pidru kay aluyúkan sa buna,</i> Pedro is handsome because he has a whorl on the front of his <pb n=33>head. <form>kina-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> topmost or innermost part of s.t. <i>Ang mga Magahat túa magpuyù sa kinaaluyukan sa lasang,</i> The Magahats live in the very center of the forest. <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ÚYUK</sc>.</xr>

<p id=689><form>alyádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ally</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>employee</tr> (humorous). <i>Alyádu siya nákù sa upisína,</i> He&apos;s an employee of mine in the office. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; b5]</itype> ally with, to become an ally with. <i>Maáyung alyadúhun (alyadúhan) ang Pilipínas,</i> It is good to make an ally of (ally oneself with) the Philippines. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> have an employee.

<p id=690><form>alyádus</form> <xr>= <sc>ALYÁDU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=691><form>alyansa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>alliance</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2; b(1)]</itype> have an alliance. <i>Ang Amirika gialyansáhan sa Pilipínas,</i> The Philippines had an alliance with America.

<p id=692><form>alyas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>alias</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; c]</itype> give, have an alias. <i>Alyásan ka ug Rúhas,</i> You&apos;ll be given the name Roxas as an alias.

<p id=693><form>alyin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>aliens</tr> (euphemism for Chinese).

<p id=694><form>*ama</form> <form>&mdash; námù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>the Lord&apos;s Prayer</tr>. <ix>short form:</ix> <formx>manámù.</formx> <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> go to s.o. as if he were one&apos;s father to ask for help. <i>Kinsay inyung gipangama (gipangamahan) sa pagkasúd sa inyung bátà sa trabáhu?</i> Who did you approach to get a job for your son? <form>amaáma</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stepfather</tr>. <form>amaáma sa buti</form> <pos>n</pos> the first single eruption of smallpox before spreading. <form>amahan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>father</tr>. <form>&mdash; námù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>the Lord&apos;s Prayer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> act as, have a father. <i>Dimálas nga nakaamahan kag mangtas,</i> It is unfortunate that you have a beast for a father. <form>pangamahan</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> act as a father. <i>Siya na lang ang nangamahan sa mga bátang ilu,</i> He was the only one left to act as a father to the orphaned children. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>sponsor</tr>. <i>Ang balaudun gipangamahan ni Briyúnis,</i> The bill was sponsored by Briones. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>PANGAMA</sc>.</xr> <form>amáun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>godfather</tr> in any ceremony.

<p id=695><form>amá</form> (from <ix>ama</ix>) <ix>expression uttered when frightened:</ix> <tr>help</tr>! <i>Amá! Náay sawa!</i> Help! There&apos;s a snake!

<p id=696><form>ámag</form> <xr>= <sc>ALÁMAG</sc>, <ix>v, n1</ix>.</xr>

<p id=697><form>amaga</form> <pos>n</pos> <corr>k.o. </corr>forest tree: <bio>Diospyros sp</bio>.

<p id=698><form>amag-amag</form> (from <ix>alámag</ix>) <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish that stays near the shore and glows.

<p id=699><form>amagan</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ALÁMAG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=700><form>amagus</form> <pos>n</pos> small, black, fresh-water <tr>shrimp</tr> that has a small white stripe on the back. <pos>a</pos> <tr>black-complexioned</tr>.

<p id=701><form>amágus</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>shrub</tr> bearing juicy dark red berries, 1 cm. in diameter with a nauseous taste: <bio>Homonoia riparia</bio>.

<p id=702><form>amahan</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>*AMA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=703><form>amahung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. bivalve of sea, greenish brown in color, oblong, 2&Prime; in length, with orange meat. Found clinging to rocks. Popularly eaten preserved in salt.

<p id=704><form>amákan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bamboo matting</tr> woven with a k.o. twill weave, commonly used for walling. The weft is passed over two and under two warp pieces. The successive weft is passed over two and under two warp pieces again, but such that the second weft passes over one and under one of the warp pieces that the first weft had passed over, and over one and under one of the warp pieces that the first weft had passed under. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> weave <ix>amákan.</ix> <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. woven like <ix>amákan</ix>.

<p id=705><form>am-am</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <number>1</number> be open-mouthed from having eaten s.t. spicy. <i>Naam-am (nahaam-am) ang ákung bàbà sa síling kulikut,</i> I opened my mouth wide when I ate the hot peppers. <number>2</number> feel stung by words of derogation which are true. <i>Nahaam-am (naam-am) ku pag-ingun níya nga tapulan kaáyu ku,</i> I got stung by her words that I was very lazy. <form>hi-/ha-</form> <xr>= <sc>AM-AM</sc>.</xr>

<p id=706><form>am-ám</form> <xr>= <sc>ALAM-ÁLAM</sc>.</xr>

<p id=707><form>amamahung</form> <xr>= <sc>AMAHUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=708><form>amamakul</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible <tr>mushroom</tr> that grows on decayed banana stalks. It has a slender stem, thin skin, and is dark grey in color.

<p id=709><form>amamaliw</form> (from <ix>baliw</ix>) <pos>n</pos> s.o. incestuous who gets struck by a thunderbolt as divine punishment. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become an <ix>amamaliw.</ix>

<p id=710><form>amamangkas</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. thick-bodied and thick-shelled, edible, fresh-water <tr>crab</tr> growing to 3&Prime;, found in rivers and rice paddies. They are so called because they climb on water lilies and ride them (<ix>angkas</ix>) to the sea.

<p id=711><form>amamangluy</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>insect</tr> similar to the katydid. It makes a chirping sound in the evening.

<p id=712><form>amamangpang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>fish</tr> of shallow waters.

<p id=713><form>amamaylan</form> <xr>= <sc>BAYLAN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=714><form>amang</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>mute</tr>. <i>Unsáun pagtubag ni Pidru ug amang siya?</i> How can Pedro answer if he is mute? <number>2</number> <tr>silent</tr>. <i>Ang bungbung ray amang nga saksi sa ílang gibúhat,</i> The walls were the mute witnesses to their deeds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B123(1)]</itype> become mute, struck speechless. <i>Naamang si Pidru sa pagkadungug sa balità,</i> Peter was struck speechless upon hearing the news. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pantomime</tr>, in sign language.

<p id=715><form>amang-amang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> have the nerve to do s.t. which an ordinary person wouldn&apos;t dare do. <i>Mu ra nay ímung abilidad, unyà mag-amang-amang kag pangulitáwu sa anak sa ímung manidyir?</i> You are a nobody, but you dare propose to your manager&apos;s daughter?

<pb n=34>

<p id=716><form>amangtan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>fish</tr> of shallow waters.

<p id=717><form>*amanti</form> <form>prinsipi &mdash;</form> Prince Charming.

<p id=718><form>amánus</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>equal</tr>, even stevens. <i>Pildi kug diyis, pildi sad kag diyis, dì amánus na ta,</i> I lost ten pesos and you lost ten pesos, so that makes us even. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1C; c1]</itype> make things come out even. <i>Amanúsun (iamánus) ku lang ang ímung útang sa útang ni Máma kanímu,</i> You owe me the same amount my mother owes you, so I&apos;ll call it even. <number>2</number> <itype>[C; c1]</itype> call it quits, declare a tie. <i>Amanúsun (iamánus) ta ning átung tsis,</i> Let&apos;s call our chess game quits.

<p id=719><form>amapúlun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>blood clots</tr> in the womb after delivery. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> have blood clots in the womb after delivery. <i>Giamapúnan ku mau nga misakit ang ákung tiyan,</i> I had blood clots in my womb so I had stomach pains.

<p id=720><form>amapúng</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wild vine</tr> with round leaves and bell-shaped white axillary flowers. The leaves are cooked as a vegetable.

<p id=721><form>amargúsu</form> <xr>= <sc>PALIYA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=722><form>amarilyu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>yellow</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> be, color s.t. yellow. <i>Ug dulaw ipulug, maamarilyu ang buluk,</i> If you dye it with <corr sic=tumeric>turmeric</corr>, it will come out yellow.

<p id=723><form>amaspas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sawfish</tr>.

<p id=724><form>amasúna</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>amazon</tr>.

<p id=725><form>amat</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bad</tr>, <tr>ugly</tr>, poor in quality. <i>Amat ang klási ning panaptúna,</i> This cloth is of poor quality. <i>Amat siyag batásan,</i> She has bad ways about her. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> be poor in quality, bad, ugly. <i>Ayawg amata nà pagbúhat,</i> Don&apos;t do it untidily.

<p id=726><form>ámat</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sweet potato sprout</tr>, esp. those which come from potatoes missed in the harvest. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> dig out the <corr sic="left-over">leftover</corr> sweet potatoes that have sprouted. <i>Nangámat silag kamúting ílang isugba,</i> They looked for leftover sweet potatoes to broil.

<p id=727><form>amátung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>method of catching crabs</tr> by using shredded coconut as bait. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> catch land crabs by strewing coconut around.

<p id=728><form>amatyur</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>singing contest</tr> for amateurs. <i>Muapil ka sa amatyur sa diway-arsi?</i> Will you take part in the singing contest over DYRC? <number>2</number> <tr>amateur</tr> singer, athlete, etc. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> hold an amateur contest.

<p id=729><form>amáun</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>AMA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=730><form>amaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>feeble-minded</tr>. <i>Ang amaw maglisud ug sabut sa mga túgun,</i> The feeble-minded person has a hard time understanding instructions. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become feeble-minded. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> of a feeble-minded sort.

<p id=731><form>ámay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>marrow</tr> of the bones. <number>2</number> outermost layer of the timber next to the bark. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> make s.t. out of this material.

<p id=732><form>amáyung</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>gloomy</tr>, lightly <tr>overcast</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be or become gloomy, lightly overcast. <i>Muamáyung gánì hipúsa ang binulad nga humay,</i> If it gets overcast, gather the rice grains.

<p id=733><form>ambà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> <tr>low</tr>, <tr>moo</tr>. <i>Nag-ambà ang báka,</i> The cow is lowing.

<p id=734><form>ambáhan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> go s.w. in a <tr>large group</tr>. <i>Nag-ambáhan ang mga táwung nanagbù sa bag-ung kardinal,</i> The people trooped in to greet the new cardinal. <pos>n</pos> large moving group.

<p id=735><form>ambak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>jump</tr> down to a lower place. <i>Ang túbig nga nag-ambak sa línaw gíkan sa humayan,</i> The water that falls into the pool comes from the ricefield. <i>Giambakan ku sa ungguy,</i> The monkey jumped down on me. <i>Iambak nang písì didtu,</i> Throw that rope down there. <form>ambak-ambak</form><corr><sub>1</sub></corr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>jump</tr> up and down.&dagger;

<p id=736><form>ambak<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>headhunters</tr> in Negros of former times who killed strangers to bury with their dead.

<p id=737><form>ambak-ambak</form><corr><sub>2</sub></corr> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>fish</tr>.

<p id=738><form>ambalang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible <tr>seaweed</tr> found in tidal flats. It is green, soft, and has short straight branches similar to corals.

<p id=739><form>ambáng</form> <xr>= <sc>AMBALANG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=740><form>ambangul</form> <xr>= <sc>UMBANGUL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=741><form>ambas</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>equal</tr> in some way. <i>Ambas si Pidru ug Husi ug abilidad,</i> Pedro and Jose are equal in ability. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BC3; b]</itype> be <tr>equal</tr> in quality or ability. <i>Muambas ang tíngug mu sa kang Husi,</i> Your voice is just like Jose&apos;s. <i>Dílì kaambásan kining pintúra,</i> This paint job cannot be matched.&dagger;

<p id=742><form>ambaw</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. small <tr>mouse</tr>.

<p id=743><form>ambi</form> <number>1</number> <tr>give</tr> it to me. <i>Ambi ra gud ang butilya,</i> Let me have the bottle. <number>2</number> particle used in making a request or asking permission. <i>Ambi, tugtúga kunu tung &lsquo;Sa Kabukíran&rsquo;,</i> Here, play &lsquo;In the Mountains&rsquo;. <i>Ambi, pasimhúta kunu ta,</i> Here, let me take a whiff. <number>3</number> here, let&apos;s give it a try. <i>Ambi, átung basáhun áring pahináha. Día tingáli,</i> Here, let me take a look at this page. It&apos;s probably here. <number>4</number> particle expressing a concession for the sake of argument. <i>Ambi, ug walà pa ka dinhi, dì tà ka hikit-an,</i> All right, if you were not here, nobody could have seen you, right?

<p id=744><form>ambid, ambig</form> <xr>= <sc>AMGID</sc>.</xr>

<p id=745><form>ambihas, ambíhas</form> <pos>a</pos> two things <tr>parallel</tr> or <tr>face to face</tr> but one slightly behind or to the side. <i>Ambíhas ang duha ka gawang,</i> The two doors are opposite but not face to face. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B56; a12]</itype> for things to be parallel but not face to face or in line. <i>Ug muambíhas ang paglátid muhíwì ang bungbung,</i> If the measurements are out of line, <pb n=35>the wall will turn out crooked. <i>Ambihása pagbutang ang duha ka silya arun makakità ang maglingkud sa luyu,</i> Stagger the two chairs so that whoever is at the back can see. <number>2</number> <itype>[C]</itype> pass each other while travelling in opposite directions along the parallel routes. <i>Ang duha ka trín nagkaambíhas,</i> The two trains passed each other.

<p id=746><form>ambilay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> carry s.t. with a strap slung over the shoulder. <i>Nag-ambilay siya sa íyang kamira,</i> He is carrying his camera slung over his shoulder. <i>Iambilay nang ripli,</i> Carry your rifle slung over your shoulder.

<p id=747><form>ambir</form> <xr>= <sc>ABIR</sc>.</xr>

<p id=748><form>ambisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ambition</tr>, aspiration. <i>Mu ray íyang ambisiyun ang pagkamaistru,</i> Being a teacher is his only ambition. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1N]</itype> <tr>aspire</tr>. <i>Nag-ambisiyun (nangambisiyun) siyag palit ug awtu,</i> He has ambitions of buying a car.&dagger;

<p id=749><form>ambisyúsu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>ambitious</tr>. <i>Kining búang nga ambisyúsu kaáyu nangulitáwu sa prinsísa,</i> This ambitious fool is courting the princess. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become ambitious.

<p id=750><form>ambit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2b7]</itype> get a <tr>share</tr>. <i>Kiri rang usa ka kílu ákung ambítun,</i> I&apos;ll take only this one kilogram as my share. <i>Ambítan tag duha ka gantang ning ímung humay,</i> I&apos;ll take six quarts as my portion of your rice. <i>Ambíti kug gamay,</i> Let me have a small share. <form>&mdash; sa kasubù, kalípay</form> <tr>share</tr> in one&apos;s sorrow, happiness. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> get in on <tr>gossip</tr>. <i>Diin na pud ka makaambit ánang tabía?</i> Where did you hear that gossip?

<p id=751><form>ambù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; acP]</itype> <tr>overlook</tr>, look from a high point, tower over. <i>Ambúa tung táwu sa sílung,</i> Look down at the man downstairs. <i>Ang gamayng balay giambúan sa dakung balay,</i> The large house towered over the small one.

<p id=752><form>ambug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[<sic>Ab2</sic>; ac]</itype> go, bring down from the mountains to the lowlands. <i>Unsay ímung ambúgun?</i> What are you going down to get? <i>Iambug ning kamúti arun ibaligyà,</i> Bring these sweet potatoes down to sell them. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> looking over. <i>Ang káhuy nag-ambug sa ngilit sa pangpang,</i> The tree is overlooking the edge of the cliff. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a]</itype> build s.t. so it overlooks. <i>Gipaambug ku ang ámung payag sa ngilit sa pangpang,</i> I built my hut looking over the edge of the cliff.

<p id=753><form>ambúhut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> belch forth smoke. <i>Nag-ambúhut ang asu,</i> Smoke is billowing up. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> blow smoke from cigarette. <i>Gipaambuhútan níya ang ákung nawung,</i> He blew smoke into my face. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>whale</tr>.

<p id=754><form>ambulansiya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ambulance</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> go by ambulance. <i>Ambulansiyáhun nátù ang angul,</i> Let&apos;s take the injured person in an ambulance. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into an ambulance.

<p id=755><form>*ambung<sub>1</sub></form> <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>beautiful</tr>, <tr>handsome</tr>. <i>Ambúngan kaáyu ka ánang sinináa,</i> You are very handsome in that shirt. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become beautiful, handsome. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>beauty</tr>, handsomeness. <i>Ang kaambung ni Maríya walay ingun,</i> Mary&apos;s beauty is unequalled.

<p id=756><form>*ambung<sub>2</sub></form> <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> giving the illusion of bigness or bulk. <i>Ambúngan kang tan-áwun ánang sinináa, piru wà ka muángay,</i> You look impressively big in that dress, but you don&apos;t look good in it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> look impressively big and bulky. <i>Nagkaambungan ang labadúra nga ákung gihurnu,</i> The batter that I am baking is beginning to rise.

<p id=757><form>ambus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; b(1)]</itype> <tr>ambush</tr>, <tr>waylay</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> go meet a girl at her place of work or study to accompany her home. <i>Nía na pud si Pidru nangambus sa íyang giulitawhan,</i> Here comes Pedro to meet his girl friend and take her home. <number>3</number> join a group with food or other provisions to avail oneself of them (colloquial). <i>Nangambus lang ku sa ílang bálun,</i> I just joined them and got some of their picnic food. <i>Makaambus ku sa ímung hábul?</i> Can I use part of your blanket?

<p id=758><form>ambut</form> <tr>I don&apos;t know</tr>. <i>Ambut ug kinsa nang bayhána,</i> I don&apos;t know who that woman is. <form>&mdash; <r>[<ix>gen.</ix>]</r></form> it&apos;s up to [gen.]. <i>Ambut nímug pilay ihátag,</i> It&apos;s up to you how much we should give. <form>&mdash; sa lángaw, lagung, kágang</form> I don&apos;t know and I don&apos;t care (it&apos;s up to the fly, crab). <i>Ambut sa lángaw ug muanhi,</i> I don&apos;t know if he&apos;s coming, and I don&apos;t care. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> say &lsquo;I don&apos;t know&rsquo;. <i>Ug pangutan-un, mangambut lang,</i> If you ask him, he just says he doesn&apos;t know.

<p id=759><form>ambuy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a nickname of Pablo. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> a <tr>slow-witted</tr> person. <i>Ambuy ka man diay, ngánung ímu nang gikaun?</i> What did you eat that for, you fool? <number>2</number> <tr>penniless</tr>. <i>Ayaw nà sugta, ambuy nà,</i> Don&apos;t marry him. He doesn&apos;t have a penny. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> be, become slow-witted, make a fool of s.o. <i>Ang gugma mauy nakaambuy (nakapaambuy) sa ákung anak,</i> Love has dulled my son&apos;s wits. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; a1]</itype> be short of cash, penniless.

<p id=760><form>ambuy<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a style of men&apos;s sport shirt the lower end of which extends below the level of the buttocks and with two tapering slits on the sides, close-fitting around the waist. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> wear this sort of shirt. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> tailor into this sort of shirt.

<p id=761><form>amgid</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>similar</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[BC; ac1c3]</itype> be similar. <pb n=36><i>Miamgid (naamgid) ang istatuwa sa mudílu,</i> The statue grew to be more and more like the model. <i>Ngánung nagkaamgid ang inyung tubag?</i> Why were your answers similar? <i>Iamgid (amgíra) lang ang ímung sinulat sa ákù,</i> Make your composition like mine. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> <tr>imitate</tr>. <i>Ang mga Insik maáyung muamgid sa mga búhat sa Hapun,</i> The Chinese imitate the Japanese products well. <i>Giamgiran (giamgíran) sa arkitiktu ang dibúhu sa katidral,</i> The architect imitated the sketch of the cathedral. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>compare</tr>. <i>Amgíra sila kung háin ang maanyag,</i> Compare them to judge which one is most beautiful. <i>Ang íyang kaanyag ikaamgid sa bitúun,</i> Her beauty can be compared to the stars. <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s double. <i>Ákung kalúha nang ákung amgid,</i> The fellow that looks just like me is my twin brother. <form>ig-, ka-</form> <xr>= <sc>AMGID</sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr>

<p id=762><form>amgu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> be <tr>aware</tr> of s.t. <i>Mauy ákung naamguhan nga dinhay miabli sa bintánà,</i> All I was aware of was that s.o. opened the window. <form>paghi-, pagka-</form> upon reaching consciousness. <i>Paghiamgu (pagkaamgu) níya, dihà na siya sa uspital,</i> When he regained consciousness, he was in the hospital.

<p id=763><form>amíga</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> close <tr>friend</tr> (female). <number>2</number> <tr>girl friend</tr> (circumlocution to avoid saying <ix>trátu</ix> &lsquo;fiancée&rsquo;). <form>miga</form> (vocative) <tr>friend</tr>.

<p id=764><form>amígas</form> <xr>= <sc>HULMÍGAS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=765><form>amígu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> close <tr>friend</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>boy friend</tr> (circumlocution). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C; a12]</itype> be <tr>friends</tr>. <i>Mag-amígu ta,</i> Let&apos;s be friends! <i>Amigúha siya kay makatábang nátù,</i> Befriend him, because he can help us. <number>2</number> <itype>[A123S]</itype> get as a friend. <i>Nakaamigu kug tagaadwána,</i> I managed to make friends with s.o. in the customs. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> become friends. <i>Ayaw pangamígug buguy,</i> Do not become friends with those no-goods. <form>migu</form> (vocative) <tr>friend</tr>. <i>Ása ka, migu?</i> Where are you going, friend?

<p id=766><form>amíhan</form> <pos>n</pos> wind from the north. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> blow from the north. <i>Kun Nubimbri mangamíhan,</i> The northwind blows in November. <pos>n</pos> northeast monsoon time. <i>Uktubri hangtud sa Disyimbri mauy pangamíhan,</i> It&apos;s the northeast monsoon from October to December. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>north</tr>, <tr>northern</tr>. <i>Milálin sila sa Amihanang Lusun,</i> They moved to Northern Luzon.

<p id=767><form>amimihid, amimihig</form> (from <ix>bihig</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>fiddler crab</tr>, k.o. small crab of tidal flats with one large red claw bigger than the other which moves in a fiddling-like motion.

<p id=768><form>amimislun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>kidney</tr> of animals.

<p id=769><form>amimitas</form> (from <ix>bítas</ix>) <pos>n</pos> k.o. large biting black and red <tr>ants</tr> with long pincers, found in rotten wood.

<p id=770><form>amin</form> amen. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> kiss the hand or take a hand to the forehead. <i>Amini si Tiyù mu,</i> Kiss your uncle&apos;s hand. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; b(1)]</itype> <tr>give in</tr>, <tr>concede</tr>, <tr>surrender</tr>. <i>Human sa ámung panagbúngul miamin siya kanákù,</i> After we had not been on speaking terms, he gave in to me. <i>Ang mayur lang kunuy íyang aminan,</i> He says he will surrender only to the mayor. <form>amin-ámin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>food</tr> prepared for the last day of the novena (slang). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b]</itype> prepare some food for the guests on the last day of a novena. <i>Mutambung ta sa katapúsan ug mag-amin-ámin sila,</i> We will attend the last day of the novena if they prepare s.t. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> have s.o. kiss the hand. <i>Paaminun tikaw áring kinúmù!</i> I&apos;ll let you kiss my fist (i.e. smack you one).&dagger;

<p id=771><form>amindar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>amend</tr>. <i>Muamindar sa baláud ang Kungrísu,</i> Congress will amend the law. <i>Nag-amindar ang hunta sa mga lagdà niíni,</i> The board is amending its policies. <number>2</number> make amends for. <i>Nakaamindar giyud siyas íyang mga salà,</i> He was able to make amends for his offenses. <number>3</number> restore good feelings. <i>Giamindar níya ang nagúbà nílang panaghigalaay,</i> He patched their broken friendship up.

<p id=772><form>Amirika</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>America</tr>.

<p id=773><form>Amirikána</form> <ix>short forms:</ix> <formx>Amirkána, Mirkána</formx>. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> American woman. <number>2</number> sport or suit jacket. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, make into, get a jacket. <i>Mag-amirkána ka ba sa bayli?</i> Will you wear a jacket to the dance?

<p id=774><form>amirikanayis</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>Americanized</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become Americanized. <i>Nagkaamirikanayis ang ininglisan ni Prid,</i> Fred&apos;s way of speaking English is becoming Americanized.

<p id=775><form>Amirikánu</form> <ix>short forms:</ix> <formx>Amirkánu, Mirkánu</formx>. <pos>n</pos> <tr>American</tr>. <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> speak English.

<p id=776><form>amirul</form> <xr>= <sc>ALMIRUL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=777><form>amistad</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>amnesty</tr>.

<p id=778><form>amitu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>amice</tr>.

<p id=779><form>ampa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC2; b6]</itype> want to have just as much work and not a bit more than the others. <i>Ang mga suluguun dì paalkansi. Gustu giyung makig-ampa sa trabáhu,</i> Helpers insist on a fair deal. They argue about who has the most work. <i>Unsang trabahúa nang inyung giampáhan?</i> What work are you bickering about? <form>ampaampa</form> <xr>= <sc>AMPA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=780><form>ampad</form> <xr>= <sc>ALAMPAD</sc>.</xr>

<p id=781><form>ampáhan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. good-sized carangoid <tr>fish</tr> that fetches a high price.

<p id=782><form>ampaláya</form> <xr>= <sc>PALIYA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=783><form>ampapángig</form> <xr>= <sc>APAPÁNGIG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=784><form>ampara</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>interrupt a wedding ceremony</tr> by objecting. <i>Wà makaampara sa kasal ang puyùpúyù,</i> The common-law wife <pb n=37>couldn&apos;t interrupt the wedding.

<p id=785><form>ampaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>delicacy</tr> consisting of puffed rice coated with caramel and stuck into bricks. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> make <ix>ampaw.</ix>

<p id=786><form>ampay</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>favorite</tr>. <i>Ampay ku ang mangga,</i> Mangoes are my favorite. <number>2</number> much to one&apos;s liking. <i>Ampay kaáyu níya nga tawgun siya ug lúlu,</i> He likes it very much if they call him &lsquo;granddad&rsquo;.

<p id=787><form>ampáyir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>umpire</tr>. <i>Si Pidru bay ampáyir sa buksing?</i> Is Pedro the umpire in boxing? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> be the umpire. <i>Ampayíri ring dúlà,</i> Umpire this game.

<p id=788><form>amping</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>treat s.t. with care</tr>, be careful with s.t. <i>Mag-amping ka arun dílì ka masámad,</i> Be careful so you don&apos;t get hurt. <i>Ampíngi nang makinilya,</i> Be careful with that typewriter. <form>ma-un, ma-in-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>careful</tr>. <i>Maampíngun (mainampíngun) siyang nanáug sa dakung káhuy,</i> He was careful in going down the big tree.&dagger;

<p id=789><form>ampityatru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>amphitheater</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> make an amphitheater. <form>-in-</form> <pos><corr sic=a>n</corr></pos> an <tr>amphitheater</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456; a12]</itype> be constructed into an <tr>amphitheater</tr>.

<p id=790><form>ampiyun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>opium</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> obtain opium, make opium. <i>Ang lísu mauy ampiyunun,</i> They make opium from the seeds. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>smoke opium</tr>. <i>Kasagáran sa mangampiyun Insik,</i> It&apos;s usually Chinese who smoke opium. <form>-íru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>opium addict</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be, become an opium addict.

<p id=791><form>ampiyun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a small tree that bears large yellow flowers and large black pods reaching 40 cm. The pulp found in the pod is used to cure stomach pains: <bio>Cassia sp</bio>.

<p id=792><form>ampli</form> <pos>n</pos> short for <ix>amplipáyir.</ix>

<p id=793><form>amplipáyir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>amplifier</tr>, <tr>public address system</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> use a public address system. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> possessing, having a public address system.

<p id=794><form>ampù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>pray</tr>, <tr>worship</tr>. <i>Dílì mu ampúan ang mga diyusdíyus,</i> Don&apos;t worship false gods. <i>Birhin Maríya, <corr sic=ig-ampu>ig-ampù</corr> mu kami,</i> Virgin Mary, pray for us. <i>Giampù ku ang ímung kalampúsan,</i> I pray for your success. <number>2</number> <tr>adore</tr>. <i>Giampúan ku ang ímung kaanyag,</i> I worship your beauty. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>surrender</tr>, turn oneself in to the authorities. <i>Mamatay ku úsà ku muampù,</i> I&apos;ll die before I will turn myself in. <number>3a</number> admit one was wrong or ask for forgiveness in order to make up. <i>Dì ku muampù nímu kay wà kuy salà,</i> I won&apos;t take steps to make up with you because I didn&apos;t do anything wrong. <form>-l-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>altar</tr>, place one worships. <number>2</number> thing worshipped. <form>ma-un, ma-in-un, ma-l-un</form> <pos>a</pos> prayerful. <form>mag-r-, mag-l-</form> <pos>n</pos> one who prays on behalf of another. <i>Ang mga santus mauy mag-alampù (mag-aampù),</i> The saints are the intercessors.

<p id=795><form>ampúngul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>head of octopus or squid</tr> (including the tentacles of the squid).

<p id=796><form>amu</form> <xr>= <sc>MAU</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p id=797><form>ámu</form> <ix>vocative short form:</ix> <formx>mu</formx> <pos>n</pos> <tr>master</tr>, <tr>employer</tr>. <i>Makagáwì ba ta sa ímung tilipunu, mu?</i> May I use your phone, boss? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123S]</itype> happen to have a master, employer. <i>Lisud ning makaamu tag istriktu,</i> It&apos;s difficult if you happen to have a strict employer. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> have s.o. as an employer. <i>Nakapangámu na ku ug Katsílà,</i> I have already experienced having a Spaniard as employer. <form>maistru &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> one who oversees the preparation of s.t., e.g. the head chef on a boat or the quality controller in a factory.

<p id=798><form>amù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>monkey</tr>, <tr>ape</tr>. <i>Pubri pa sa amù,</i> Poorer than a monkey (which has what looks like two one-centavo coins in its buttocks). <form>inúlug &mdash;</form> waxing gibbous moon. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> get broke (get to be like a monkey that has only two centavos) (colloquial). <pos>a</pos> <tr>broke</tr>. <form>-ay(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Mr. Monkey</tr>. <i>Si Amúay nangáwat sa ságing ni Baúhay,</i> Mr. Monkey stole Mr. Turtle&apos;s bananas. <form>-l-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> place infested with monkeys.&dagger;

<p id=799><form>ámù</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>KAMI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=800><form>amul</form> <pos>a</pos> for a blade to be very <tr>dull</tr>. <i>Amul ang sundang,</i> The machete is dull. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> become dull. <form>-an, -un</form> <pos>a</pos> of dull kind.

<p id=801><form>amúma</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> take care of s.o. and guide him. <i>Giamúma (giamumáhan) siya sa inaína sáma sa kaugalíngung anak,</i> Her stepmother took care of her like her own child.

<p id=802><form>*amumun</form> <form>&mdash; lumban sa dágat</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sundials</tr>, k.o. sea shell.

<p id=803><form>amumúng</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> lose one&apos;s way under spell of evil spirit. <i>Kun amumúngun ka baliha lang ang ímung sinínà arun makatultul kag bálik,</i> If you lose your way, put your clothes on inside out, and you&apos;ll find your way back.

<p id=804><form>amumunggut</form> <xr>= <sc>TIBALAS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=805><form>amumungpung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible top <tr>shell</tr> reaching an inch, pyramid-shaped.

<p id=806><form>amumuntag</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>octopus</tr> which tends to come out when the moon rises.

<p id=807><form>amung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> drag s.t. to perdition, bring s.t. to ruin together with it. <i>Ang mga latang kamátis makaamung sa uban,</i> The rotten tomatoes can ruin the others that are packed together with them. <i>Ayaw ku iamung (amunga) sa inyung kabúang,</i> Do not involve me in your foolishness. <i>Sa pinusílay naamung ang inusinting bátà,</i> During the gunfight an innocent child was hit in the crossfire. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <number>1</number> exert bad influence. <number>2</number> try <pb n=38>s.t. on a long shot. <i>Nangamung siyag pangulitáwu, básig sugtun,</i> He tried his luck at courting her in hopes of succeeding. <form>amung-ámung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> inflict malicious, needless harm. <i>Ang mga tulisan nag-amung-ámung pa giyud níya,</i> The bandits raped her as well. <i>Giamung-amungan tingáli ang masitíra sa irù kay nangabúak man,</i> The dogs probably messed up the flower pots, because they are broken. <number>2</number> <tr>tease</tr> maliciously. <i>Giamung-amúngan níla ang irù paghikut ug láta,</i> They teased the dog by tying a can to it. <form>amung-amungan, maamung-amungun</form> <pos>a</pos> maliciously destructive.

<p id=808><form>amunistal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>register</tr> for marriage in the church. <pos>n</pos> <tr>payment</tr> for church services in marriage. <i>Mahal ang amunistal sa kasal nga ispisyal,</i> The payment for the church services in a special marriage is dear.

<p id=809><form>amur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>liking</tr>. <i>Wà giyud kuy amur sa dayuk,</i> I cannot bring myself to like salted fish innards. <i>Gitugkan siyag amur kang Birtu,</i> She developed a liking for Bert. <form>&mdash; prupiyu</form> <tr>amor propio</tr>.

<p id=810><form>amurádu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. red, thick, <tr>sweet banana</tr>, eaten raw. It is starchier than the yellow bananas usually sold commercially in the States.

<p id=811><form>amural</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> speak one&apos;s love to. <i>Giamural níya si Maríya, piru wà sugta,</i> He proposed to Maria, but she turned him down. <number>2</number> speak out one&apos;s purpose asking for s.t. <i>Nag-amural kung Tiyù pára sa ákung karsúnis,</i> I am asking my uncle for money to buy a pair of pants.

<p id=812><form>amur sikrítu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bleeding heart</tr>, k.o. ornamental vine with heart-shaped flowers: <bio>Clerodendrum thomponae</bio>.

<p id=813><form>amursíku</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>crab grass</tr> with long towering stems bearing barbed spikelets which adhere to the clothes: <bio>Andropogon aciculatus</bio>. <form>ka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be full of amorseco spikes. <i>Nagkaamursíku ang ákung sinínà,</i> My dress has amorseco all over it.

<p id=814><form>amurtisasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>amortization</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> be <tr>amortized</tr>. <i>Ang ákung útang nag-amurtisasiyun ug dusyintus matag búlan,</i> The amortization on my debt is two hundred every month. <number>2</number> <itype>[ac]</itype> <tr>pay off</tr> an amortization. <i><sic>Amurtisasyunan</sic> ku ang útang ug katungà,</i> I&apos;ll amortize half of my debt.

<p id=815><form>amurúsu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>delinquency</tr> in paying off an obligation. <i>Upat ka búwan ang ákung amurúsu sa bangku,</i> I&apos;m four months delinquent in my payments to the bank. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be delinquent in paying off an obligation.

<p id=816><form>ámut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>contribution</tr>. <i>Pilay ámut sa salusálù káda usa?</i> How much is each person&apos;s contribution to the party? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>contribute</tr>. <i>Daghan siyag ikaámut sa kauswágan sa násud,</i> He has much to contribute to the development of the country. <number>2</number> contribute to increase the intensity or quality. <i>Ang kaígang nakaámut sa íyang kapungut,</i> The heat contributed to making his anger worse. <form>-l-an, -l-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>contribution</tr>. <i>Pagkadaghag alamútan (alamutan) sa iskuylahan, makapubri!</i> You can go broke with all the contributions you have to make in school.

<p id=817><form>amúti</form> <xr>= <sc>KAMÚTI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=818><form>ámuy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>icon</tr>. <number>2</number> the name of <tr>God</tr> used in speaking to small children. <i>Ayaw pangáway kay masukù ang ámuy,</i> Don&apos;t quarrel because God will get angry.

<p id=819><form>ámuy<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> term of address for very old men of respectability. <i>Kanà si Ámuy Militun kapitan sa panahun sa Katsílà,</i> Amoy Meliton was a village head during the Spanish times. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> call s.o. Amoy.

<p id=820><form>amyun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN]</itype> <tr>emit</tr> a sweet fragrance. <i>Miamyun (nangamyun) ang kahumut sa mga búlak,</i> The flowers emitted a sweet fragrance. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sweet smell</tr>.

<p id=821><form>-an<sub>1</sub></form> local passive verb affix, future. (<ix>past</ix> <bx>gi-an</bx>; <ix>subjunctive</ix> <bx>-i</bx>. <ix>Potential forms: past</ix> <bx>na-an</bx>; <ix>future</ix> <bx>ma-an</bx> or, alternatively, <bx>ka-an</bx>; <ix>subjunctive</ix> <bx>ma-i</bx> or, alternatively, <bx>ka-i</bx>.) Not all verbs occur with this affix, and those that do may occur with only one or two or all of the meanings. <number>1</number> [do] for, at, on, in. <i>Palitan ku siyag kík,</i> I will buy him cake (or buy cake from him). <i>Gipalitan ku siya,</i> I bought some for (from) him. <i>Wà ku siya paliti,</i> I didn&apos;t buy any for (from) him. <i>Mapalitan (kapalitan) ku siya,</i> I can buy some for (from) him. <i>Napalitan ku siya,</i> I managed to buy some for (from) him. <i>Wà ku siya mapaliti (kapaliti),</i> I couldn&apos;t buy any for (from) him. <number>1a</number> <ix>with noun bases:</ix> give, provide s.o. [noun]. <i>Sirúhan ka nákù,</i> I will give you a zero. <i>Sapatúsan ku ang bátà,</i> I will put shoes on the child. <number>2</number> [do] directly to s.o. or s.t. <i>Hagkan ku ikaw,</i> I will kiss you. <i>Bantayan ninyu ang prísu,</i> Watch the prisoner. <number>2a</number> [do] to part of s.t. <i>Kuháan ku ang ímung kík ug gamay,</i> I will take a little of your cake. <i>Kunhúran ku ang prisyu,</i> I will take a little off the price. <number>3</number> <ix>with verbs from adjectives:</ix> consider s.t. as. <i>Lisdan siya sa átung sinultihan,</i> He will find our language difficult. <i>Gipilahan ka lang uruy niánà?</i> Do you consider that a small amount? <number>4</number> have [verb] happen to one. <i>Naulanan aku,</i> I was caught in the rain. <i>Labdan ka sa úlu,</i> You will get a headache. (It will happen to you that your head will ache.) <number>5</number> <pb n=39>[do] because of, due to. <i>Unsay gihilákan mu?</i> What is it you are crying about? <i>Dílì nà ángayng kabalak-an,</i> That is not worth getting worried over. <number>6</number> do in [such-and-such a manner]. <i>Usaan nà nákug alsa,</i> I will lift that with one (hand). <i>Datadatáhan ku nag báyad,</i> I will pay for that in installments. <number>7</number> work off a debt, pay for by [do]ing. <i>Mahímù nímung trabahúan ang ímung útang nákù,</i> You may work off your debt to me. <i>Buk-an kug lubi kining bugas,</i> I&apos;ll pay for this rice by splitting coconuts.

<p id=822><form>-an<sub>2</sub></form> suffix forming verb bases to which the prefixes <ix>mag-, tig-</ix> and <ix>pag-</ix> may be added. The verb with these affixes always has stress on the final syllable and means &lsquo;[do] s.t. at a certain place habitually&rsquo;. <i>Mag-anhian siya dinhig maduminggu,</i> He comes here on Sundays. <i>Siyay tig-anhian dinhi,</i> He comes here often. <i>Sa ímung pag-adtuan didtu, nakailaíla kag usa ka Mang Tiryu?</i> In the times you&apos;ve been going to that place, did you ever meet a certain Mang Terio?

<p id=823><form>-an<sub>3</sub></form> noun forming affix. <number>1</number> forming nouns which refer to a place where s.t. is found, done, held, located. <i>Humayan,</i> Rice field. <i>Tubaan,</i> Place where toddy is sold. <i>Baskitbulan,</i> Place basketball is played. <i>Habagatan,</i> West (place from which the <ix>habágat</ix> &lsquo;west wind&rsquo; blows). <i>Bairan,</i> Sharpener (thing on which one sharpens). <i>Tindáhan,</i> Store (place one sells). <number>2</number> forming nouns which refer to a person possessed of a certain power. Nouns of this sort always have long penults. <i>Tambálan,</i> Folk doctor. <i>Hilútan,</i> Doctor specializing in massage. <i>Barángan,</i> A sorcerer with magic insects at his disposal.

<p id=824><form>-an<sub>4</sub></form> adjective forming affix. <number>1</number> forming adjectives which mean &lsquo;characterized by being [so-and-so]&rsquo;. Words of this sort have the stress on the final syllable. <i>Langasan,</i> Of a noisy type. <i>Talawan,</i> Cowardly. <i>Gahian,</i> Of a hard sort. <number>2</number> added to nouns to form adjectives which mean &lsquo;having [so-and-so]&rsquo;. <i>Utúkan,</i> Brainy. <i>Kwartáhan,</i> Moneyed.

<p id=825><form>-an(&rarr;)</form> short for <bx>hi-an(&rarr;)</bx>.

<p id=826><form>-an-</form> infix optionally added to all forms with the prefixes <ix>nag-, mag-, pag-,</ix> indicating that affixed forms refer to more than one person. <i>Nanagsábut sila,</i> They made (plurally) an agreement. <i>Duha ka managsúun,</i> Two brothers. <i>Ang ílang panagsábut,</i> Their (plural) agreement with each other.

<p id=827><form>an&amacrgra;</form> <number>1</number> expression of surprise. <number>a</number> at s.t. pleasant. <i>An&amacrgra;, kanindut sa ímung ariyus,</i> Oh what beautiful earrings you have! <number>b</number> at s.t. which causes worry. <i>An&amacrgra;! Nabuak,</i> Oh-Oh! It broke. <number>2</number> expression chiding s.o. <i>An&amacrgra;! Nagpabuyag man ka!</i> My! You&apos;re making a nuisance of yourself.

<p id=828><form>ánà</form> <xr>= <sc>NIÁNÀ</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>KANÀ</sc>.</xr>

<!-- Sub-entry out of order -->

<p id=829><form>anáa</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <formx>náa</formx>. <number>1</number> be <tr>there</tr> (near you). <i>Náa ba dihà ang yáwi?</i> Do you have (is there) the key? <number>1a</number> be employed at, work at. <i>Náa siya sa Atlas,</i> He works for Atlas. <i>Náa ra siya sa báy,</i> He is always at home. <number>2</number> there is. <i>Náay suwat pára nímu,</i> There is a letter for you. <number>3a</number> <formx>&mdash; <r><ix>dat.</ix></r></formx> [dat.] <tr>has</tr>. <i>Náa kaníya ang yáwi,</i> He has the key. <number>3b</number> it depends upon [dat.]. <i>Náa ra nímug muadtu ta,</i> It&apos;s up to you if we should go. <number>3c</number> be menstruating. <i>Dílì mudúul ang bána ug náa sa asáwa,</i> A husband cannot have intercourse with his wife when she is menstruating. <number>4</number> <formx>unsa may &mdash; niánà, sa <r>[<ix>noun</ix>]</r>?</formx> what does that, [noun] have to do with it? <i>Unsa ba guy náa sa idad?</i> And what does age have to do with it? <form>pagka-</form> <pos>n</pos> the state of being there. <i>Ang íyang pagkaanáa sa balay,</i> His presence in the house. <form>paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> strive to have s.t. <i>Ímu kung pakaanaáhun bisan wà kuy nahut,</i> You try to get s.t. from me even though I haven&apos;t anything. <form>anaáhun</form> <pos>a</pos> well-to-do.

<p id=830><form>ánab</form> (from <ix>bána</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>husband</tr> (slang).

<p id=831><form>anabu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. shrub or small tree which produces strong bark fiber of commercial importance: <bio>Abroma augusta</bio>.

<p id=832><form>anabyung</form> <xr>= <sc>HINAGDUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=833><form>ánad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B23(1); b(1)]</itype> take to, become fond of. <i>Pakúgus ang bátà nga nakaánad na nímu,</i> A child that has become fond of you will want you to carry him. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2S; b8]</itype> get accustomed, get in the habit of doing s.t. <i>Muánad (maánad) siyag panghilabut sa ákung butang,</i> He will (might) get used to touching my things. <i>Naandan na níya ang pamakak,</i> She is accustomed to lying. <i>Ang naandan nga paági,</i> The usual way. <number>2a</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> treat s.o. too familiarly. <i>Hiandan ka lang; ábi níla maáyu ka man,</i> They&apos;re just abusing you; they think you&apos;re nice. <i>Naandan ka níya ug kumidiya,</i> He has gotten in the habit of joking with you (when he should not have). <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>accustomed to</tr>, familiar with s.t. <i>Anad kaáyu ku ug byáhi,</i> I am accustomed to travelling. <number>2</number> <tr>tame</tr>. <i>Anad ang langgam,</i> The bird is tame. <i>Kaanad nga batáa bísan kinsa makakúgus níya,</i> That child is not afraid of people. Anybody can hold him. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become accustomed. <i>Ug maanad ka na ánang trabahúa, dì ka na lisdan,</i> When you get used to the work, you won&apos;t find it hard. <form>anaran</form> <pos>a</pos> having a special appeal to animals, children, etc. so that they feel immediately at home.

<pb n=40>

<p id=834><form>ánag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12b(1)]</itype> <tr>broil crops</tr> to eat. <i>Anága ang mais nga húmuk,</i> Broil the soft corn. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> broiled crop. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> young corn. <i>Gitanuk níla ang anagun,</i> They <corr sic=boiled>broiled</corr> the young corn. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3]</itype> for corn to be at an edible but not yet full-grown stage. <i>Nag-anagun na ang mais. Hápit na ang sanggì,</i> The corn is growing ears. Harvest time is near. <form>anagunan</form> <pos>n</pos> field of corn with young ears.

<p id=835><form>anagási</form> <xr>= <sc>ALAGÁSI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=836><form>anagu, anágu</form> <pos>n</pos> hazy, <tr>unclear image</tr>. <i>Ang anágu sa dálan gibantayan pag-áyu sa draybir,</i> The driver paid close attention to the blurred outline of the road. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S]</itype> appear hazily. <i>Nag-anagu ang balay sa bungtud tungud sa gábun,</i> The house on the hill was hazy because of the mist.

<p id=837><form>anahà</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small ant with a light tan color and with a black spot on the body and which takes to sugar. It inflicts a mild bite. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125; a4]</itype> be infested with <ix>anahà</ix> ants. <i>Sus, nagkaanahà (gianahà) ang asúkar!</i> Heavens! The sugar is swarming with ants.

<p id=838><form>anáhaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. palm with fan-shaped leaves: <bio>Livistona rotundifolia</bio>. The leaves are used for mats, hats, etc. Potted <ix>anáhaw</ix> are widely used for ornamental purposes. <form>&mdash; lagwis</form> <xr>= <sc>ANÁHAW</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; mubù</form> ornamental palm similar in appearance to <ix>anáhaw:</ix> <bio>Licuala spinosa</bio>.

<p id=839><form>anak</form> <pos>n</pos> son, daughter. <form>&mdash; sa búhat</form> <number>1</number> <tr>laborer</tr>. <number>2</number> accustomed to hard work. <i>Way báli kanà, kay anak man aku sa búhat,</i> I don&apos;t mind that, because I&apos;m used to hard work. <number>3</number> <tr>poor people</tr>. <i>Lisud ang panginabúhì sa mga anak sa búhat,</i> Life for the poor is very difficult nowadays. <form>&mdash; sa bunyag</form> <tr>godson</tr> or daughter at baptism. <form>&mdash; sa gawas</form> illegitimate child. <form>&mdash; sa húlaw</form> short person (son of the dry, lean times). <form>&mdash; sa kágang</form> <ix>exclamation of discomfiture:</ix> My! <i>Anak sa kágang! Ngánu nga naílad ka man!</i> My heavens! Why did you let them cheat you! <form>&mdash; sa sápì</form> child that has been adopted by purchase. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; cN]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>give birth</tr>. <i>Dì na muanak (manganak) nà si Kurdapya kay gúlang na,</i> Cordapia will not have any more children because she&apos;s old. <i>Nag-anak siyag kalúha,</i> She had twins. <i>Ang banig nga gianakan (giangkan, gipanganakan),</i> The mat she gave birth on. <i>Diin ka ianak (ipanganak)?</i> Where were you born? <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> happen to have for a child. <i>Nakaanak si Pidru ug abilidaran,</i> Pedro had a genius for a son. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <ix>in prayers:</ix> Son of God. <i>Sa ngálan sa Amahan, sa Ának, sa Ispiritu Santu ...<corr>,</corr></i> In the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.... <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> assist in childbirth, cause s.t. to be born. <i>Mananabang ang nagpaanak kanákù,</i> A folk-midwife assisted me in childbirth. <i>Paangka siya sa matirniti,</i> Let her have her baby in the clinic. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> make <tr>pregnant</tr>. <i>Ang mutsatsa gipaangkan sa kutsíru,</i> The rig driver got the maid pregnant. <form>palaangkanan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>delivery table</tr>. <form>pinaangkan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>illegitimate child</tr>. <number>2</number> one who gave birth out of wedlock. (Cf. <xr><bx>paangkan</bx> <ix>v 1,</ix></xr> below.) <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>ANAK</sc>, <ix>v</ix>. <bx>2</bx></xr> <itype>[A]</itype> sponsor in a baptism. <i>Aku ang nanganak ni Bíbi sa bunyag,</i> I was Baby&apos;s godfather in her baptism. <form>paN-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pebble</tr> in game of <ix>pungga.</ix> <form>pinanganak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>godson</tr> or daughter. <form>anak-ának</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>adopted child</tr>. <i>Anak-ának ra man nà si Kadyu kay walay bátà ang magtiáyun,</i> Cadio is just an adopted child because the couple is childless. <number>2</number> in a child&apos;s game, the pretend child. <form>angkan</form> <pos>a</pos> having given birth. <i>Yàyà ug láwas ni si Kurdapya mu rag angkan,</i> Cordapia&apos;s body is flabby like a woman that has just given birth. <i>Angkan na siyang dakù pagkaminyù níla,</i> It was well known that she had had a child before they got married. <form>paangkan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> make s.o. pregnant. <i>Kinsa may nagpaangkan sa labandíra?</i> Who made the laundry woman pregnant? <form>pinaangkan</form> <pos>n</pos> one who gave birth to an illegitimate child. <form>angkánun</form> <pos>a</pos> for people to be prolific in childbirth. <i>Angkánun (palaának) kaáyu si Maríya. Manganak káda túig,</i> Maria is prolific. She gives birth every year. <form>alangkan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>delivery room</tr>. <form>hinangkan, hingangkan</form> <pos>n</pos> hen that has raised a brood. <form>ig-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>relative</tr> of any sort. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; c1]</itype> be <tr>related</tr>. <i>Naig-ának siya sa mga Blangku kay naasáwa man níya ang anak,</i> He became related to the Blancos because he married the daughter. <form>ig-alának</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> child in the womb. <number>2</number> in a condition about to give birth. <i>Ig-alának na kaáyu ang íyang tiyan,</i> Her stomach looks as though she&apos;s about to give birth. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>godson</tr>, daughter in any ceremony. <i>Inanak ku siya sa kasal,</i> He is my godson because I sponsored his wedding. <number>2</number> child born. <i>Bag-ung inanak,</i> Newly born child. <form>mag-alának, taliának, umaának</form> <pos>n</pos> about to give birth. <form>-un(&larr;)</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>INANAK</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>PAG-UMANGKUN</sc>.</xr> <form>pala-(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for people or animals to be <tr>prolific</tr> in childbirth. <i>Palaának ang ákung anay,</i> My pig is very prolific. <number>2</number> prolific in output. <xr><ix>see also</ix> <sc>PAG-UMANGKUN</sc></xr>, <xr><sc>MANTIÁNAK</sc></xr>, <xr><sc>TAGUANGKAN</sc>.</xr>&dagger;

<p id=840><form>anam</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> take care of s.t. as fast or before the next comes around. <i>Anamun (ianam) ku nig hákut sa táas,</i> I will take these upstairs as fast as they arrive. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> become gradually. <i>Samtang sila nag-ínum, <pb n=41>nag-anam kapula ang íyang nawung,</i> As they were drinking, his face gradually got redder and redder. <form>pa-</form> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>waste time</tr>. <i>Dì ku paanam sa úras,</i> I won&apos;t waste time.

<p id=841><form>-anan<sub>1</sub></form> affix added to verbs to form nouns which have meanings analogous to the meanings of the local passive verbs. Cf. <xr><sc>-AN<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr> <number>1</number> place or person for whom s.t. is done. <i>Palitánan sa bugas,</i> Place one buys rice. <i>Lingkuránan,</i> Seat. <i>Hatagánan sa limus,</i> Persons to whom the alms are given. <number>2</number> thing to which s.t. is to be done. <i>Labhanan,</i> Wash to be done. <i>Handumánan,</i> Keepsake (thing which one thinks back on).

<p id=842><form>-anan<sub>2</sub>(&rarr;)</form> alternant of <ix>-an<sub>2</sub></ix> used with roots that have a short penultimate vowel that is dropped on suffixation. <i>Maghagkanan sa tiil sa birhin,</i> They kiss the feet of the Virgin.

<p id=843><form>an-an</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small tree of thickets: <bio>Buchanania arborescens</bio>.

<p id=844><form>ananaklaw</form> (from <ix>saklaw</ix>) <pos>n</pos> k.o. tiny house spider that jumps on its prey.

<p id=845><form>ananakyud</form> (from <ix>sakyud</ix>) <pos>n</pos> k.o. bird of the seashore that moves its buttocks up and down.

<p id=846><form>ananamsi</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small timber tree.

<p id=847><form>anananggal</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <ix>unglù</ix> who, when under his supernatural spell, detaches the portion of his body above the waist from the lower portion and flies away with trailing intestines in search of his prey, leaving the lower portion. This detachment occurs only at night, and the <ix>anananggal</ix> dies if the sun strikes any portion of the separated body. He can also be killed by putting salt on the lower portion. <xr><ix>see also</ix> <sc>TANGGAL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=848><form>ananangkil</form> (from <ix>sangkil</ix>) <pos>n</pos> k.o. small hawk with black and brown speckles on a light brown and white background.

<p id=849><form>anapug</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. soft shale. <number>2</number> soft coral rock. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> place where there is shale or coral rock. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> full of shale, coral rock.

<p id=850><form>ánas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <tr>landslide</tr>. <i>Muánas (maánas) gánì kanang búkid, malubung giyud mung búhì,</i> If there is a landslide on that mountain, you&apos;ll be buried alive. <i>Kun mukusug ang ulan, iánas kanang ímung baul,</i> If it rains hard, your field will be washed down.

<p id=851><form>ánaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> determine truth by careful deliberation. <i>Anáwa ang tahù úsà ipublikar,</i> Verify the report before publishing it.

<p id=852><form>ánaw<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> area of the surface of the sea which has a different texture from the surrounding area, usually visible when the sea is calm.

<p id=853><form>anawnsir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>announcer</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>dispatcher</tr> of buses and jeeps (slang). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> be, make into an announcer.

<p id=854><form>anay<sub>1</sub></form> (from <ix>ina</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sow</tr>. <number>2</number> woman that is a mother. <i>Dílì ka ángay nga mag-istiwardis kay anay ka na,</i> You are not fit to be a stewardess because you are a mother now. <form>-un, -un(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> pig raised to bear a litter. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> raise to be a sow. <i>Anayúnun ni nátung baktin,</i> Let&apos;s use this piglet for a sow. <form>-l-un(&larr;), -unun(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> for a woman that is nursing to be thin like a sow that has been nursing her litter.

<p id=855><form>anay<sub>2</sub></form> (from <ix>ina</ix>) exclamation uttered in fear. <i>Anay! Náay íhu!</i> Help! Sharks!

<p id=856><form>ánay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>termite</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4b4]</itype> be infested with termites. <i>Gianáyan (giánay) ang balay,</i> The house was infested with termites.

<p id=857><form>ánay<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>ÚNÀ</sc> (dialectal).</xr> <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>first born</tr>. <i>Mu ni si Bingbing ámung pangánay,</i> This is Bingbing, our eldest child. <number>2</number> one who bears a child for the first time. <i>Pangánay ka ra ba ayaw paghárig katúlug,</i> This is your first time to bear a child. Don&apos;t sleep too much.

<p id=858><form>-anay</form> alternant of <ix>-ay<sub>1</sub>.</ix>

<p id=859><form>anay-anay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small <tr>fish</tr> of shallow water belonging to the family <bio>Blennidae</bio>.

<p id=860><form>anda<sub>1</sub></form> give me. <i>Anda ug súpas bi kay gigútum ku,</i> Give me some cookies because I&apos;m hungry.

<p id=861><form>anda<sub>2</sub></form> be gone! <tr>leave</tr>! (Biblical usage). <i>Anda, <sic>Samuel</sic> sa paglakat,</i> Be gone, Samuel. Be on your way.

<p id=862><form>andadur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>walker</tr> on rollers for a baby to learn to walk on. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> obtain, make into, use a walker. <i>Makalakaw na siya apan mag-andadur,</i> He can walk, but only with a walker.

<p id=863><form>*andak</form> <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>boast</tr> that one can do s.t. <i>Nagpangandak siya nga musúkul siya nímu bísan anus-a,</i> He was boasting that he would stand up to you any time. <pos>n</pos> <tr>boasting</tr> that one can do s.t. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>boastful</tr> about things one can do. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be boastful. <i>Nagkaandakan siya samtang nagkasuhitu sa pag-áyu sa makina,</i> He got so he claimed he could do more and more as he grew better at fixing engines. <form>mapaN-un, maN-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>over-confident</tr>. <i>Mapangandákung tingúhà,</i> Over-ambitious in one&apos;s aims.

<p id=864><form>andam</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>prepared</tr>. <i>Andam ka na sa pagtubag?</i> Are you prepared to answer? <i>Andam na ang tanan,</i> Everything is ready. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>prepare</tr> s.t. <i>Kinsay muandam sa pagkáun?</i> Who will prepare the food? <i>Mag-andam ka sa kamatáyun,</i> Prepare for death. <pos>n</pos> <tr>preparation</tr> for a banquet. <i>Dílì dakù ang andam níla sa kumbira,</i> They did not make big preparations for the banquet. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>prepare</tr>. <number>2</number> get ready for, be on guard. <pb n=42><i>Pangandam sa banhig,</i> Be ready for an attack. <pos>n</pos> <tr>preparation</tr>. <form>mapaN-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>watchful</tr>.

<p id=865><form>andamyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gangplank</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> make into, put a gangplank to s.t.

<p id=866><form>andána</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>storey</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>deck</tr> of a multi-decked ship. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> construct a house in storeys.

<p id=867><form>andar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for s.t. mechanical to <tr>run</tr>. <i>Dílì muandar ang awtu,</i> The car won&apos;t start. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> for a peculiar trait to show itself. <i>Miandar na pug íyang pagkahinugs&umacracu;g,</i> His fondness for teasing is making its appearance again. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b2]</itype> <tr>make trouble</tr>. <i>Giandaran níya ang tindíra,</i> He made trouble for the salesgirl. <pos>n</pos> the way an engine runs. <i>Maáyu ug andar ang ákung makina,</i> My machine runs well. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of making trouble.

<p id=868><form>andarul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. chair for an infant suspended from a springpole or from springs in which the baby can bounce around. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>ANDADUR</sc>.</xr>

<p id=869><form>andas</form> <pos>n</pos> a stretcher-like contraption used to carry a corpse. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> make into, carry in a stretcher-like contraption. <i>Andásun níla ang minatay,</i> They will carry the body in a <tr>stretcher</tr>.

<p id=870><form>*andaw</form> <form>tuli &mdash;</form> <tr><corr sic=circumcized>circumcised</corr></tr> naturally from birth, born with the glans penis exposed.

<p id=871><form>andáyag</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>medicine</tr> of snake feces, herbs, bark for stomach complaints.

<p id=872><form>andáyun</form> <xr>= <sc>UNDAYUN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=873><form>anding</form> <pos>n</pos> title for an older female to whom one is related.

<!-- Ordering of subentries under 4 -->

<p id=874><form>andir</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> short for <bx>andir dibúnal, bakyà, sáya</bx> be <tr>dominated</tr>, <tr>subjugated</tr> to one&apos;s wife. <number>2</number> subordinate to. <i>Andir ku ni Kapitan Santus,</i> Captain Santos is my superior. <number>3</number> be a student of. <i>Andir ku ni Lúpis sa mat,</i> I studied math with Lopez. <number>4</number> under the net in tennis, volleyball, etc. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>dominate</tr>. <i>Dì giyud ku maandir,</i> I will not be <tr>henpecked</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> get to be under s.o., student of s.o. <number>3</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> for the ball to be under the net. <number>4</number> <ix>in phrases:</ix> <bx>&mdash; dibakyà, búnal, sáya</bx> <xr>= <sc>ANDIR</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr> <form>&mdash; ditíbul</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. given under the table. <i>Ug way andir ditíbul dì mulusut ang ímung papílis,</i> Your papers won&apos;t get through without s.t. given under the table. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>bribe</tr>. <form>&mdash; grawun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>underground</tr> place, <tr>cellar</tr>. <i>Dúnay andir grawun ámung balay,</i> Our house has a cellar. <form>&mdash; gul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the area directly beneath the goal in basketball. <number>2</number> being directly beneath the basket. <i>Ayawg syát ug way andir gul,</i> Don&apos;t shoot if there is no one in the area under the basket. <number>3</number> a shot from directly beneath the basket. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> man the area beneath the basket. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> make a shot from directly beneath the basket. <i>Inigpása nákù nímu iandir gul dáyun,</i> When I pass you the ball, shoot from directly beneath the basket. <form>&mdash; ids</form> <tr>underage</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be underage. <form>&mdash; kúbir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>undercover agent</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be an undercover agent. <form>&mdash; pas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>underpass</tr>. <form>&mdash; tayim</form> <tr>undertime</tr> in job. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b]</itype> do undertime.&dagger;

<p id=875><form>andu, andù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> expect to realize s.t. out of s.t. <i>Mag-andu kag hángin ánang pangitáa,</i> You will get exactly nothing from that sort of livelihood. <i>Unsay maandu mu ánang pagpúnay ug katúlug?</i> What do you expect to get out of sleeping all the time? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>sum up</tr>, make an account of. <i>Nag-andu siya sa mga butang nga wà gánì níya mahímu,</i> She is counting up things for credit to get credit for them, when she hasn&apos;t even done them. <i>Ayaw kug paningli, kay ug andúhun nátù ag ákung nagastu nímu, dì ka kabayad,</i> Do not try to collect what I owe you, because if we sum up all that I spent on you, you could never pay. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b4(1)]</itype> lay open one&apos;s cards. <i>Kun makaandu na ka, dì ka na makapunù,</i> When you have already laid your cards on the table, you cannot add any more cards. <number>3a</number> <formx>pag- (inig-) pa</formx> but actually, when it came (comes) to the test (when the cards were laid on the table). <i>Sígi siyang hangyù. Pag-andù pa, dì diay gustu,</i> He kept begging, but when I finally agreed to it, he didn&apos;t want to. <i>Padatùdátù siya. Pag-andù pa, pubri kaáyu,</i> He pretended to be rich. But when it came to the test, he turned out to be poor. <pos>n</pos> <bx>way &mdash;</bx> <tr>not certain</tr>. <i>Wà pay andu ug maghíkay ba mi sa pyista,</i> We&apos;re undecided as yet whether to prepare for the fiesta. <form>andúhay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>confrontation</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> have a confrontation. <i>Mag-andúhay ta arun mahúsay ang tanan,</i> Let&apos;s have it out to settle everything. <form>anduhúnun</form> <pos>n</pos> matter to be decided. <i>Anduhúnun pa ning ákung pagpaiskuyla nímug midisína,</i> I&apos;m not sure whether we will send you to medical school.

<p id=876><form>andù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tall wild <tr>tuber</tr> the corm of which is eaten in times of famine: <bio>Amorphophallus campanulatus</bio>.

<p id=877><form>andù<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>ANGDÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=878><form>andúhaw</form> <xr>= <sc>AGUMÁA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=879><form>andúhay</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ANDU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=880><form>ang</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>ng</bx> <number>1</number> subject marker. <i>Nawálà ang libru,</i> The book is lost. <number>2</number> marker for definite predicate. <i>Ang íyang libru mauy nawálà,</i> It was his book that was lost. <number>3</number> following a form meaning including, together with. <i>Sitinta ang ábang, apil ang túbig,</i> The rent is seventy pesos including the water. <number>4</number> <ix>preceding forms referring to quantity or measurement:</ix> each. <i>Ang ábang, sitinta ang <pb n=43>búlan,</i> The rent is seventy a month.

<p id=881><form>ánga<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the fry of some kinds of goby.

<p id=882><form>ánga<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>ÁNGAL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=883><form>angáang</form> <xr>= <sc>ALANGÁANG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=884><form>ángal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b3]</itype> find s.t. to complain about. <i>Unsa may angálan nímu sa trabáhu ug sayun man gáling?</i> What is there to complain about when the job is so easy? <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> given to complaints.&dagger;

<p id=885><form>angalaskálas</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. green crab with splotches of dirty yellow between, 2&frac12;&Prime;&ndash;3&Prime; in diameter, commonly found on wharves.

<p id=886><form>angan-ángan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> <tr>delay</tr> awhile. <i>Muangan-ángan ku ug pila ka minútu,</i> I will wait for a few minutes more. <i>Angan-angána (angan-angáni, iangan-ángan) ang ímung paglarga,</i> Put off your departure.

<p id=887><form>ang-ang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>steps</tr> of stairs, ladder. <number>2</number> <tr>grade</tr> or year of a course. <i>Náa pa siya sa ikaduhang ang-ang sa abugasíya,</i> He is still in the second year of his law course. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; a1]</itype> put steps into, make into steps. <i>Ang-ángan lang nímug tulu ang hagdan,</i> Just put three steps in the stairs. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>ANG-ANG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=888><form>angat<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>teeth marks</tr>. <i>Angat sa pinaakan sa hálas,</i> Teeth marks of a snake.

<!-- Angat seems to appear alone after all, so why starred? -->

<p id=889><form>*angat<sub>2</sub></form> <form>&mdash; sa</form> as [such-and-such] approaches. <i>Ínit ang kampanya angat sa iliksyun,</i> The campaign went into high gear as elections approached. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B145]</itype> for an event to approach. <i>Nag-angat na ang pista,</i> Fiesta time is approaching.

<p id=890><form>ángat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>go, bring up</tr> a hill or place in the hills. <i>Angátun sa mga turista ang bulkan sa Mayun,</i> The tourists are going to climb Mount Mayon. <i>Iángat ni nátù sa b&umacracu;d,</i> We will bring this up the hill. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> tool for mountain-climbing. <form>angatun</form> <pos>a</pos> steep to climb.

<p id=891><form>ángay</form> <tr>ought</tr> to. <i>Ángay kang magtuun arun makapasar ka,</i> You ought to study if you want to pass. <i>Dì nà ángay nímu ikabaláka,</i> You should not worry about that. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> fitting, <tr>proper</tr>, right time or situation. <i>Ángay ni nímung kulúra,</i> This color suits you. <number>2</number> evenly cut, equally spaced. <i>Ángayng pagkaputul ang mga pánid,</i> The pages are evenly cut. <i>Ángayng pagkatisuk ang mga pásuk,</i> The stakes are evenly spaced. <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[B3S6; b8]</itype> be appropriate. <i>Miángay ang ímung ilung sa ímung nawung,</i> Your nose goes well with your face. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A23S]</itype> like s.t., consider s.t. suitable to one&apos;s taste. <i>Dílì ku muángay ánang tubà nga initlugan,</i> I don&apos;t like toddy mixed with eggs. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make s.t. equal, even. <i>Angáya ang káyu,</i> Make the flame even. <number>2b</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> tune a musical instrument. <i>Angáyun ta ning pyánu,</i> Let&apos;s tune this piano. <number>2c</number> <itype>[C; a12]</itype> treat each other equally, do s.t. equally to several people. <i>Mag-ángay mig káun sa ámù. Way pinihig,</i> We all eat the same food at home. Nobody gets anything special. <i>Angáyun ta mug dukduk sa úlu,</i> I will knock you all on your heads. <number>2d</number> <itype>[C; b]</itype> be in agreement. <i>Nag-ángay ang ílang mga disisyun,</i> They were in agreement in their decisions. <form>(&rarr;) walay &mdash;(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>unbecoming</tr>, <tr>ugly</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be unbecoming, ugly. <i>Mawalà kay angay ug itum isul-ub,</i> It will not become you if you wear black. <form>pa-, pahi-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>put, place carefully in order</tr>. <i>Gipaángay (gipahiángay) níya ang búlak sa bukag,</i> He placed the flowers carefully in the basket. <number>2</number> <tr>furnish</tr>. <i>Gipaangáyan mig pridyidir,</i> We were furnished a refrigerator. <form>pa-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> make s.t. <tr>even</tr>. <i>Paangayi ang linung-ag,</i> Let the food get cooked evenly. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> for a person to be becoming, proper. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> get to be becoming. <i>Nagkaangayan ka sa ímung úban,</i> Your grey hairs become you more and more. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>just, equal treatment</tr>. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>just</tr>, <tr>equal</tr>. <i>Maangáyung pagbáhin sa kabílin,</i> A just division of the inheritance. <form>maki-un</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to be on equal terms with everyone.

<p id=892><form>angdù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>consent</tr>. <i>Dílì siya muandù ánang paagíha kay lángan,</i> He won&apos;t consent to doing it that way because it&apos;s too slow. <i>Andúun ka lang ug dílì siya mubúhat sa gisúgù,</i> He will just say yes to you and then won&apos;t do what you told him to. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> readily giving one&apos;s consent.

<p id=893><form>anggà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>nickname</tr>. <i>Si Bituy ang ákung anggà,</i> My nickname is Bitoy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give a nickname. <i>Gianggáan siya ug pakà,</i> They nicknamed him &lsquo;frog&rsquo;.

<p id=894><form>anggal</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> birds that have their full feathers but cannot fly yet. <number>2</number> for children to be nearly grown up. <i>Ayaw paghulat nga hungitun ka sa ímung inahan, anggal ka na,</i> Don&apos;t wait for your mother to feed you. You&apos;re grown-up now. <pos>a</pos> grown-up and still unable to speak properly.

<p id=895><form>anggid</form> <xr>= <sc>AMGID</sc>.</xr>

<p id=896><form>angguy</form> <pos>n</pos> <ix>familiar term of address for boy or man much younger than speaker:</ix> <tr>sonny</tr>, <tr>lad</tr>. <i>Purbída, angguy, lisud nà kung masukù,</i> If he gets angry, lad, he is hard to control. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> call s.o. <ix>angguy.</ix>

<p id=897><form>anghal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become <tr>ajar</tr>. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b5]</itype> keep s.t. ajar. <i>Paanghála (paanghali) ang pultahan arun makítà sila,</i> Keep the door ajar so we can see them.

<p id=898><form>anghaw</form> <xr>= <sc>ANGHAL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=899><form>anghil</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>angel</tr>. <number>2</number> short for <ix>&mdash; magbalantay.</ix> <pb n=44><i>Gibyáan siya sa íyang anghil,</i> Her guardian angel left her. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b2]</itype> save s.o. like a guardian angel. <i>Ang paghut sa irù nakaanghil kay nakamata ku,</i> The dog&apos;s barking saved me in the nick of time because I woke up. <form>&mdash; magbalantay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>guardian angel</tr>.

<p id=900><form>anghilika</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. flowering <tr>herb</tr>, cultivated and wild, which has large succulent, ovoid, undulating leaves from which new plants sprout: <bio>Bryophyllum pinnatum</bio>.

<p id=901><form>anghinghu</form> <xr>= <sc>AHINGHU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=902><form>anghit</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>smell bad</tr> like the body, rancid meat, milk, goats, cows. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> get to smell bad. <i>Muanghit ang rípridyirítur ug butangan ug karni sa kanding,</i> The refrigerator will smell if you put goat meat into it. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>foul smell</tr>. <i>Ang kaanghit sa litsi dílì kaáyu ísug,</i> Milk does not have a terribly strong smell.

<p id=903><form>angíing</form> <xr>= <sc>ALANGÍING</sc>.</xr>

<p id=904><form>angílan</form> <xr>= <sc>ALANGÍLAN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=905><form>ángin</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> bring s.t. to <tr>ruin</tr> together with it. <i>Ang ínum nakaángin sa ákung pagtuun,</i> Drinking brought my studies to ruination. <i>Daghang kinabúhing naángin pagkahúlug sa trák,</i> Many people lost their lives when the bus fell.

<p id=906><form>angitngit</form> <xr>= <sc>ALANGITNGIT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=907><form>angka</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B4]</itype> for s.t. to get <tr>loose</tr>, <tr>give way</tr>. <i>Muangka dáyun ang tikud sa sapátus,</i> The heels of the shoes will come off right away. <i>Miangka ang silya tungud sa íyang kabug-at,</i> The chair gave way because she was too heavy. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> <tr>remove</tr> s.t. to leave a gap. <i>Ayaw iangka (angkáha) ang tabun sa kaldíru,</i> Do not lift the cover off the pot. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23; b3]</itype> <tr>quit</tr> doing s.t., a job. <i>Muangka ka na nga wà pay úras?</i> You&apos;re quitting now, when it hasn&apos;t even been an hour? <i>Hápit na mamatay, piru wà gihápun muangka ang ugis,</i> The white cock was nearly dead, but he didn&apos;t desist.&dagger;

<p id=908><form>angkab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab7]</itype> take a big <tr>bite</tr>. <i>Angkábun (angkában) ku ug kausa ning ímung mansánas,</i> May I take one big bite from your apple? <pos>n</pos> <tr>bite</tr>, result of the bite. <i>Dakug angkab ang irù,</i> The dog has a big bite.

<p id=909><form>angkas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>ride</tr> mounted on s.t. <i>Bátang nag-angkas ug kábaw,</i> A child mounted on a water buffalo. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> <tr>ride</tr> double on a cycle or horse. <i>Nag-angkas sila sa mutur,</i> They rode one behind the other on the motorcycle. <i>Iangkas ta ka sa bisiklíta,</i> I&apos;ll take you on the back of my bicycle. <form>-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>carrier</tr> at the back part of the bicycle.

<p id=910><form>angkat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> take s.t. for resale on credit. <i>Angkátun sà run nákù ang isdà kay walà kuy puhúnan,</i> I&apos;ll take the fish on credit this time because I have no capital. <pos>n</pos> amount for which s.t. is taken on credit. <i>Dì ni ikabaligyà ug tris kay kwatru ang angkat áni,</i> I can&apos;t let you have it for three because I had to pay four for it. <form>maN-l-, maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> one who obtains things for sale on credit.

<p id=911><form>angkla</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>anchor</tr>. <number>2</number> anchor-type contraption used for fishing for squid. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> obtain, make into an anchor.

<p id=912><form>angkub</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>covering</tr> over the opening of a small boat, the analogue of a deck on large boats. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; b5]</itype> make, put a cover for a boat. <i>Ílang angkubun (angkuban) ang sakayan ug playwud,</i> They will make a plywood cover for the boat. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; ac]</itype> <tr>fill</tr> s.t. in to cover up a deficiency. <i>Angkúba ra ang lab-ang sa ímung pinintálan,</i> Fill in the spots you missed painting. <i>Angkúbi ang kúwang sa ákung twisyun,</i> Make up the balance of my tuition fees. <i>Iangkub kining usa ka gantang humay arun mahustung usa ka bákid,</i> Add this one ganta of rice to make it one cavan. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for boats to be covered, having an <ix>angkub.</ix> <number>2</number> <tr>complete</tr>, nothing lacking. <i>Angkub ang ímung paghátag kanámù sa diriksiyun,</i> You gave complete directions.

<p id=913><form>angkun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> claim as one&apos;s own, <tr>admit</tr> authorship of an act. <i>Dì siya muangkun nga siyay may salà,</i> He will not admit that he is wrong. <i>Kinsay nag-angkun nga iyáha ning libru?</i> Who is claiming that this book is his? <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> <tr>acquire</tr>, <tr>get</tr> as one&apos;s portion, share or luck. <i>Mau niy pálad ákung naangkun,</i> This is my lot in life. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> be in a certain situation. <i>Dílì siya gustung muangkun sa kinabúhing pinubri,</i> He does not want to lead the life of a poor man. <number>3</number> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> take as one&apos;s share of contributions or responsibility. <i>Akuy muangkun sa ilimnun,</i> I&apos;ll take care of the drinks. <i>Angkúnun ku ang panghúgas sa plátu,</i> I&apos;ll take care of washing the plates. <pos>n</pos> share claimed, turn being claimed. <i>Ákung angkun ning lutíha,</i> This lot is my share. <i>Ákung angkun sa pag-adurnu sa simbahan ugmà,</i> It&apos;s my turn to decorate the church tomorrow. <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> one who lays claim to things that are not his. <form>hiN-, -íru</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of claiming as one&apos;s own.

<p id=914><form>anglit</form> <pos>n</pos> small earthen <tr>pot</tr>. <i>Anglit ray lung-ági kay duha ra ta,</i> Just cook in the small earthen pot because there is only two of us. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> get, make into a small earthen pot.

<p id=915><form>angsu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>smelling</tr> of urine. <i>Angsu ang ílang kasilyas,</i> Their toilet smells. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN; b6]</itype> become smelly. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>foulness</tr>. <form>angsúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. small ash-grey <tr>shark</tr> that has an odor <pb n=45>like urine. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>ALANGSÚHAN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=916><form>angsud</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>having body odor</tr>. <i>Kalígù na kay angsud ka na kaáyu,</i> Take a bath. You have awful b.o. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>ANGSU</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN]</itype> have b.o.

<p id=917><form>angtad</form> <pos>a</pos> be in <tr>line of sight</tr>. <i>Angtad ra sa bintánà ang tíbi,</i> You can watch TV through the window. <i>Maigù giyud nà siya kay angtad kaáyu siya sa ákung punting,</i> I can hit him because he is in my line of fire. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be where one can see it. <i>Naangtad (miangtad) sa ákung mga mata ang ugdu sa íyang dughan,</i> Her bulging breasts were right in my line of sight. <i>Ug ímung ibutang ang sámin dinhi muangtad (maangtad) sa sílaw sa adlaw,</i> If you put the mirror here, the sun&apos;s rays will be reflected directly off of it. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> put s.t. in the line of sight. <i>Ang nawung bayà sa nagpaangtad, mu ra ug gwápa,</i> Some nerve of her to make herself the center of attention, as if she were beautiful.

<p id=918><form>angtud</form> <pos>a</pos> having the smell of burnt hair, cloth, or flesh without fat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN; b6]</itype> smell of burnt hair. <i>Náay nangangtud kay nagsúnug siya sa balhíbu,</i> S.t. smells bad because he is burning feathers. <form>angturun</form> <pos>a</pos> smelling somewhat of burnt feathers.

<p id=919><form>anguangu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be <tr>senile</tr>. <i>Gianguangu ka na,</i> You&apos;re getting senile. <form>anguanguhun</form> <pos>a</pos> somewhat senile.

<p id=920><form>angul, ángul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be <tr>injured</tr> to the point of incapacity. <i>Tulu ang naángul sa aksidinti,</i> Three people were injured in the accident. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> injured and incapacitated persons or animals. <i>Ang mga angul giíhaw,</i> The injured animals were slaughtered. <i>Angul nga bitiránu,</i> Incapacitated veteran. <form>angul-angul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> satisfy only partly. <i>Angul-angulun man ku nímu sa diyútay nga pagkáun,</i> I won&apos;t get full with just a little food.

<p id=921><form>angulunkulun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large black hornet, the dwelling of which looks like a clay pot (<ix>kúlun</ix>).

<p id=922><form>angus</form> <xr>= <sc>ANGSU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=923><form>angut, ángut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> disfigured by pockmarks or large scars. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> be disfigured by thick pockmarks or large scars.

<p id=924><form>ángut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>last</tr> long. <i>Makaángut kahà nang nagpinal hangtud matígum ang tanang anak?</i> Can the dying man last until all his children get here? <i>Iángut (angúta) ang ginamus hangtud tápus búlan,</i> Make the salted fish last until the end of the month. <number>2</number> <tr>persevere</tr>, have strength to endure. <i>Dì na ku makaángut ug saka sa hagdan,</i> I don&apos;t have the strength to climb the stairs.

<p id=925><form>anhà</form> <tr>there</tr>, far from the first person, near the second person; or near s.t. remote in time but just referred to. <i>Anhà ibutang ang mga mangga,</i> Put the mangoes down near you. <i>Anhà ra bítaw nà,</i> You&apos;ll get it (lit. it will be there) in good time. <form>&mdash; pa</form> that&apos;s the only time [so-and-so] will happen. <i>Anhà pa ku makaawtu ug makadaug ku sa swipstik,</i> I could get a car only if I were to win the sweepstakes. <form>&mdash; ku</form> I bet on. <i>Anhà ku sa putì,</i> I will bet on the white cock. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b3c]</itype> go there. <i>Muanhà ku dihà,</i> I will go there. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a2]</itype> go get s.t. <i>Kinsa may nag-anhà nímu dihà gahápun?</i> Who went to get you yesterday? <i>Anháun ku nà rung hápun,</i> I will go to your place for it this afternoon. <form>anhaan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> habitually go s.w. <form>hi-/ha-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b8]</itype> happen to go, be brought. <i>Nahaanhà sa inyu ang librung ipaari untà nákù,</i> The book which was supposed to be sent to me, wound up in your place. <form>kaanhaun</form> <pos>a</pos> feel like going s.w.

<p id=926><form>anhi</form> <number>1</number> <tr>here</tr>, in this place. <i>Anhi ibutang ang síya,</i> Put the chair here. <number>2</number> let&apos;s get to [such-and-such] a matter. <i>Karun anhi kita báhin sa túbig nga gawíun sa panimalay,</i> Now let&apos;s get to the matter of water for household use. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b3c]</itype> come, bring here. <i>Muanhi ka ba ugmà?</i> Will you come here tomorrow? <i>Ianhi nà dinhi,</i> Bring it here. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a2]</itype> come to get s.t. <i>Nag-anhi ku sa libru,</i> I came for the book. <i>Anhíun ta ka rung hápun,</i> I&apos;ll come here to get you this afternoon. <form>anhian</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> habitually go s.w. <form>hi-/ha-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b8]</itype> happen to come, be brought here. <i>Nahianhi lang mi dinhi sa ámung libutlíbut,</i> In our wandering, we wound up here. <form>kaanhiun</form> <pos>a</pos> feel like coming here.

<p id=927><form>anhin, anhing</form> the <tr>late</tr>. <i>Si anhing Uy,</i> The late Uy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; a12]</itype> be, become <tr>dead</tr>, <tr>kill</tr>. <i>Anhíngun ta ka run ug magbinúang ka nákù,</i> I will kill you if you make a fool of me.

<p id=928><form>anhuy</form> <pos>a</pos> smell of boiled starchy foods which have been burnt. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN; a2]</itype> for boiled starchy foods to smell burnt. <i>Ang kamúti maanhuy ug pahubsan,</i> The sweet potatoes will get a burnt odor if you let the water boil away.

<p id=929><form>áni</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>harvest</tr> (usually rice, but by extension, other crops). <number>2</number> get benefit from s.t. <i>Way maáni sa ímung pagsúgal,</i> You can get no benefit from your gambling. <pos>n</pos> harvest. <i>Dakù mig áni nga humay rung tuíga,</i> We had a big rice harvest this year. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> harvested rice or millet.

<p id=930><form>anía</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>nía</bx> <tr>is here</tr>, where you and I are. <i>Anía si Pidru sa Sibu,</i> Pedro is here in Cebu. <i>Aníay dus písus,</i> Here is two pesos. <i>Mau kanay nía sa ákung hunàhúnà,</i> That is <pb n=46>what is (here) in my mind. <form>&mdash; kanákù</form> <number>1</number> I have. <number>2</number> I&apos;m menstruating.

<p id=931><form>aniag</form> <xr>= <sc>TANIAG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=932><form>ánib<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>chapter</tr> in a book. <number>2</number> a span of time in one&apos;s life. <i>Ang panahun sa gúbat mauy usa ka maitum nga ánib sa ákung kinabúhì,</i> The war period was a dark chapter in my life.

<p id=933><form>*ánib<sub>2</sub></form> <form>ka-</form> <tr>allies</tr>. <i>Ang mga huk kaánib sa mga kumunista,</i> The Huks are allies of the Communists. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2; c]</itype> be allies.

<p id=934><form>aníbal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>syrup</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> make, have syrup.

<p id=935><form>anibirsaryu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>anniversary</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> celebrate one&apos;s anniversary. <i>Anibirsaryúhan giyud níla ang pitsa sa kasal,</i> They will celebrate their wedding anniversary.

<p id=936><form>aníbung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fishtail palm</tr>: <bio>Caryota spp</bio>. It is found in forests and used as flooring.

<p id=937><form>anig-ig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> for a stream to flow <tr>slowly</tr> and <tr>gently</tr>. <i>Nag-anig-ig ang sapà kay taudtaud na mang way ulan,</i> The brook is flowing slowly and gently because it has not rained for some time.

<p id=938><form>aníhag</form> (from <ix>síhag</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>peer</tr> or <tr>look</tr> through s.t. transparent. <i>Dihay mianihag (nag-anihag) sa bildung takup,</i> S.o. peered through the glass shutter. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> be clearly visible through s.t. transparent. <i>Muanihag ang mga isdà kun tin-aw ang túbig,</i> You can see the fish clearly when the water is clear. <i>Maanihag ang íyang láwas sa nipis nga sinínà,</i> Her body showed through her flimsy dress. <number>3</number> <itype>[B]</itype> become clear or transparent. <i>Muanihag (maanihag) ang bildu kun trapúhan,</i> The glass will become transparent if you wipe it. <number>4</number> <itype>[B4N]</itype> become <tr>bright</tr> and <tr>clear</tr>. <i>Mianihag (nanganihag) na ang kadaúgan sa kandidátu,</i> The candidate&apos;s victory is already clear. <i>Nagkaanihag na ang lángit,</i> The sky is getting clearer. <pos>n</pos> <tr>crystal ball</tr>.

<p id=939><form>anii</form> <pos>n</pos> shade <tr>tree</tr>: <bio>Erythrina fusca</bio>.

<p id=940><form>anikad</form> <xr>= <sc>ANINIKAD</sc>.</xr>

<p id=941><form>anílaw</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to trees of the genera <bio>Columbia</bio> and <bio>Grewia</bio>. The <ix>anílaw</ix> are small trees or shrubs found in second growth forests.

<p id=942><form>anilyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>game</tr> in which a number of one-inch rattan or metal rings with ribbons are suspended at a height within reach of a player riding a bicycle. The contestants speed towards them holding a dart, trying to hook a ring with it. <number>2</number> the ring used in such a game. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> play <ix>anilyu</ix>.

<p id=943><form>animal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vile</tr>, <tr>brutal</tr> person. <i>Buhíi ku, animal!</i> Let me go, you beast! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become a vile person.

<p id=944><form>animar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>encourage</tr>. <i>Ikaw giyuy nag-animar níla sa binúang,</i> You encouraged them to be naughty. <i>Akù siyang gianimar (gianimahan) sa pagpaninda,</i> I encouraged her to open a small store.

<p id=945><form>animas</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for a person to be <tr>emaciated</tr> and <tr>ugly</tr> in appearance. <i>Pagkasakit níya sa tísis, daut siya kaáyu daw animas,</i> When he got sick with TB he became thin, like a skeleton. <number>2</number> <ix>term of reproach:</ix> You <tr>beast</tr>! <i>Paháwà dihà animása ka!</i> Get out of there, you beast, you! <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> say a prayer for the dead when the church bells ring at eight o&apos;clock in the evening.

<p id=946><form>animasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>animation</tr>.

<p id=947><form>anímik, animiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>anemic</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become anemic.

<p id=948><form>animu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>consciousness</tr>, <tr>awareness</tr>. <i>Nawad-an siya sa animu,</i> She lost consciousness. <i>Walà intáwuy animu ang bána sa gibúhat sa asáwa,</i> The husband has no idea of what his wife is doing.

<p id=949><form>animya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>anemia</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> get anemia. <i>Káun ug atay arun dílì ka animyáhun,</i> Eat liver so you won&apos;t get anemia.

<p id=950><form>anínag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN; b6]</itype> <tr>become visible</tr>. <i>Mianínag ang usa ka hanap nga pahíyum sa íyang mga ngábil,</i> A faint smile appeared on her lips. <i>Wà pa manganínag ang adlaw,</i> The sun had not yet appeared. <i>Ang íyang nawung naaninágan sa ispat,</i> Her face appeared in the rays of the flashlight.

<p id=951><form>anínaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>observe</tr> carefully. <i>Gianínaw níya kun natúlug na ba ang tanan únà manáug,</i> She looked carefully to see, listened carefully to hear, if everybody was asleep before going out. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> come to sense s.t. <i>Samtang natagpilaw siya, nakaanínaw siyag kasíkas sa píkas lawak,</i> As he was dozing off to sleep, he noticed a rustling sound in the next room. <i>Naanínaw ku nga buntag na diay,</i> I became aware that it was already morning. <pos>n</pos> <tr>observation</tr>. <i>Sa ákung anínaw wà siyay gustu nímu,</i> I notice that she doesn&apos;t like you.

<!-- Sub-entry out of order -->

<p id=952><form>anindut</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>nindut</bx> <pos>a</pos> <tr>nice</tr>, <tr>beautiful</tr>. <i>Nindut ímung bistídu,</i> You have a beautiful dress on. <i>Kanindut sa pagkáun,</i> What nice food! <form>&mdash; nímu à</form> sarcastic expression of disapproval. <i>Nindut nímu à, ímung gilingkúran ang ákung kálù!</i> How nice of you to sit on my hat! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB; a2]</itype> become, make s.t. beautiful. <i>Kinsay munindut (mupanindut) sa intabládu?</i> Who will beautify the stage? <i>Nindúta ang ímung diskursu,</i> Make your talk fancy. <form>ma-</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>nice</tr>, <tr>beautiful</tr>.

<p id=953><form>aninikad</form> (from <ix>síkad</ix>) <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible small <tr>conch</tr> which moves forward with a kicking-like <pb n=47>motion.

<p id=954><form>aniningsing</form> (from <ix>singsing</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>ring finger</tr>.

<p id=955><form>aniníput</form> (from <ix>kíput</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>firefly</tr>. <i>Makaiksplikar ka ngánung musíga ang aniníput?</i> Can you explain why the firefly lights up? <form>kità ug &mdash;</form> <tr>see stars</tr>. <i>Suntuk nga nakapakakità nákug aniníput,</i> A blow that made me see stars. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> see stars. <i>Nanganiníput ákung panan-aw sa nasumbagan ku níya,</i> I saw stars (lit. fireflies formed in my sight) when he struck me.

<p id=956><form>anínu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shadow</tr>. <form>dakù ug &mdash;</form> <tr>important, prominent person</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> cast a shadow on. <i>Muanínu ang káhuy sa tanáman,</i> The tree will cast a shadow on the garden. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> reflect a certain feeling, for a feeling to reflect itself. <i>Nanganínu ang kamatáyun sa íyang panagway (sa kamatáyun ang íyang panagway),</i> Her face showed that she was a dying woman.

<p id=957><form>anipay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>vine</tr> producing oval pods covered with irritating hairs: <bio>Mucuna nigricans</bio>.

<p id=958><form>anis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fennel</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6]</itype> cook s.t. with fennel. <form>-ádu</form> <pos>n</pos> flavored with fennel. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> flavor s.t. with fennel.

<p id=959><form>ánis, ánist</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>honest</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>in earnest</tr>. <i>Ánis ka, way klási?</i> You&apos;re not kidding me, are you? There&apos;s no classes today? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be honest. <i>Maánist man lang nà siya ug arayan ug bunal,</i> He is honest only when they show him the whip. <form>anisay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> play without a referee, agreeing to call the points honestly. <i>Mag-anisay lang ta kay wà may muripiri,</i> We&apos;ll just play honestly since there&apos;s no referee. <pos>n</pos> playing without referee.

<p id=960><form>anis-is</form> <pos>a</pos> immaculately <tr>white</tr> and <tr>smooth</tr>. <i>Anis-is nga pamánit,</i> Smooth, fair complexion. <i>Anis-is ang lángit,</i> The sky is smooth and white. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become, make smooth and white. <i>Muanis-is ang bisting putig labhag Tayid,</i> White clothing becomes immaculate if you wash it with Tide.

<p id=961><form>anislag</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>shrub</tr> or small tree used for firewood: <bio>Securinaga flexuosa</bio>.&dagger;

<p id=962><form>anistisya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>anesthesia</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>anesthetize</tr>. <i>Parabir ka upirahan, anistisyáhun úsà ka,</i> Before you are operated, you will be anesthetized.

<p id=963><form>ánit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>leather</tr>. <i>Ang bag nga ánit mas lig-un kay sa plastik,</i> A bag made of leather is much stronger than one of plastic. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> remove the skin, peels.&dagger;

<p id=964><form>anítu</form> <pos>n</pos> supernatural beings which do not show themselves and do good to people. <i>Ang mga anítu mag-uban kanímu sa inyung pánaw,</i> May the good spirits accompany you in your trip!

<p id=965><form>aníyu</form> <pos>n</pos> the short rope passed through the nose of a carabao to which the tether rope is joined. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put an <ix>aníyu,</ix> use as an <ix>aníyu.</ix>

<p id=966><form>anlit</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>ANGLIT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=967><form>ansir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>answer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> answer a letter, question, problem. <i>Ansíran ku na ba nang sulat?</i> Shall I answer that letter? <i>Unsay ákung iansir?</i> What answer shall I give?

<p id=968><form>*ansiyánu</form> <pos>n</pos> <form>&mdash; sa simbahan</form> <tr>church elder</tr>.

<p id=969><form>ansu</form> <xr>= <sc>ANGSU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=970><form>ansuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; b4]</itype> get <tr>infected</tr>. <i>Ang húgaw nga túbig mauy nakaansuy (nakapaansuy) sa íyang samad,</i> The dirty water caused his wound to get infected. <i>Ansúyan ang samad,</i> The wound will get infected.&dagger;

<p id=971><form>antad</form> <xr>= <sc>ANGTAD</sc>.</xr>

<p id=972><form>antagunismu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>antagonism</tr>. <i>Ang antagunismu tálì sa duha ka tríbu,</i> The antagonism between the two tribes.

<p id=973><form>antáhay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; b1]</itype> <tr>hesitate</tr>, have second thoughts about doing s.t. <i>Ang maldítung anak dì muantáhay sa súkul bisag ginikánan,</i> The naughty child doesn&apos;t hesitate to talk back to his own parents. <i>Wà nà nákù antaháyig palit,</i> I had no hesitations about buying that.

<p id=974><form>antak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b36]</itype> <tr>stamp</tr> one&apos;s foot. <i>Ayaw kug antáki sa tiil,</i> Don&apos;t stamp your foot at me. <i>Ayaw ug antáki ang kartun,</i> Don&apos;t stamp on the cardboard box.

<p id=975><form>antaw</form> <pos>a</pos> for things at a distance to be <tr>visible</tr>. <i>Ang Buhul antaw sa Talísay,</i> Bohol is visible from Talisay. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be <tr>visible</tr>. <i>Sa unáhan ang íyang balay nag-antaw,</i> His house is visible in the distance. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> be at a distance. <i>Gipaantáwan níla ang namúhì ug dinamíta,</i> They kept their distance from the dynamiters. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> look at s.t. from a distant, detached point of view. <i>Magpaantaw lang siya sa mga katarúngan ug dílì muapil sa lantúgì,</i> He just takes a detached view of the reasons and doesn&apos;t get into the argument. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> be <tr>aloof</tr>. <i>Sa mga tígum si Lúlit magpaantaw ug dílì muapil sa kulukabildu,</i> At parties Lolette would keep to herself and not join in any of the conversations.

<p id=976><form>anti<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. erect branched <tr>weed</tr>, the leaves of which have a peppery taste and are used as a vegetable: <bio>Solanum nigrum</bio>.

<p id=977><form>anti-<sub>2</sub></form> <tr>anti-</tr>. <i>Anti-Amirikánu,</i> Anti-American.

<p id=978><form>anti<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>aunt</tr>, parent&apos;s or grandparent&apos;s sisters or their female cousins of any degree. <number>2</number> title given to such a relation.

<p id=979><form>antibayutiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>antibiotic</tr>.

<p id=980><form>antígu</form> <pos>a</pos> know how to. <i>Dì ku antígung mupasipála,</i> I don&apos;t know how to harm others. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B123; b8]</itype> know how to do s.t. <i>Makaantígu <pb n=48>ka ba nga mukuskus ug sista?</i> Do you know how to play the guitar? <i>Unsay ímung naantiguhan sa tantu nímung tuuntúun?</i> What have you learned to do after studying so much? <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> requiring skill or know-how. <i>Ang pagdala ug awtu sa syudad inantigu,</i> It takes skill to drive a car in the city.

<p id=981><form>antíhay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>dodge</tr> a blow. <i>Wà níya iantíhay ang íyang kamut, mau nga naigù,</i> He did not get his hand out of the way in time, so it was hit. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>avoid</tr> a fight because of cowardice. <i>Ikaw na lay ákung antiháyan?</i> Do you think I would avoid a fight with you?

<p id=982><form>antikristu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>anti-Christ</tr>.

<p id=983><form>antimánu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> do s.t. <tr>early</tr> before s.t. else happens. <i>Muantimánu kug lakaw arun dílì hiabtan sa ulan,</i> I will leave early before I get caught in the rain. <i>Antimanúhun (antimanúhan) ta sila ug sulti arun dílì hiunhan,</i> Let&apos;s tell them early before s.o. else does. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A3P; a12]</itype> kill s.t. with a single blow. <i>Wà nímu maantimánug patay ang bábuy,</i> You didn&apos;t kill the pig at the first blow. <number>2b</number> <itype>[A3P; b5c1]</itype> do s.t. <tr>immediately</tr> with finality. <i>Iantimánu (antimanúhun, antimanúhan) giyud ang pagbalíbad arun dílì na magbalikbálik,</i> You should refuse him with finality then and there so that he will not keep coming back. <pos>a</pos> for a killing to be done with one blow.

<p id=984><form>antína</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>antenna</tr>, <tr>aerial</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put, make into an antenna.

<p id=985><form>anting-anting</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>charm</tr>, <tr>amulet</tr>. <i>Naghábak siya ug anting-anting arun dì siya madutlan sa bála,</i> He is wearing an amulet so that bullets cannot penetrate him. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> wear, have, make into an amulet. <i>Gianting-antíngan ang igtalarì,</i> The cock had a charm tied to it.

<p id=986><form>antipára</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>eyeglasses</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>diving goggles</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> make into, wear eyeglasses or diving goggles.

<p id=987><form>antipas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mask</tr> covering the eyes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; ac]</itype> wear, obtain, make into a mask. <i>Walà giyud mailhi ang kawatan kay nag-antipas man,</i> They could not recognize the thief because he was wearing a mask.

<p id=988><form>antipatiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>antagonistic</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a]</itype> be, make s.o. antagonistic. <i>Ayawg adtu sa íla kay giantipatikuhan ka sa íyang ginikánan,</i> Don&apos;t go to their house because her parents are antagonistic to you.

<p id=989><form>antipúlu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. toilet with a long hole dug as the receptacle for waste.

<p id=990><form>antipun</form> <xr>= <sc>AWRÚRA<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=991><form>antipúna</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>prayer</tr> in a novena or rosary, read by the leader.

<p id=992><form>antirábis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>anti-rabies</tr> vaccine.

<p id=993><form>antis</form> before doing s.t. <i>Antis nímu lung-ága nà, hugási úsà,</i> Wash it before you cook it.

<p id=994><form>antisiptiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>antiseptic</tr>.

<p id=995><form>antisípu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>advance</tr> payment. <i>Díay singku nga sabtun antisípu sa ímung kabáyù,</i> Here is five pesos as down payment for your horse. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give down payment.

<p id=996><form>antitirhi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>genital organs</tr> (derogatory). <i>Pagtárug lingkud arun dílì makítà ang ímung antitirhi,</i> Sit properly so you don&apos;t display your genitalia to the whole world.

<p id=997><form>antiúhus, antiyúhus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>eyeglasses</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN2; a]</itype> wear, make into, get eyeglasses. <i>Kadtung nag-antiyúhus si Pidru,</i> The one wearing eyeglasses is Pedro.&dagger;

<p id=998><form>ant&umacrgra;</form> <xr>= <sc>ANTÚLU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=999><form>antúan</form> <pos>n</pos> medium-sized <tr>tree</tr> of second growth forests: <bio>Pittosporum pentandrum</bio>.

<p id=1000><form>antúbung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large, branching <tr>coral</tr>.

<p id=1001><form>antud</form> <pos>a</pos> <xr>= <sc>ANGTUD</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1002><form>antug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>toss</tr> the coin in a coin-tossing game (<ix>hantak</ix>). <i>Ayaw ug antúgi ning batúha,</i> Don&apos;t toss coins on this stone. <number>2</number> <tr>slam</tr> s.t. down as a coin is slammed down. <i>Iantug ta ka run,</i> I&apos;ll throw you on the ground (said to a child one is holding in his arms). <number>3</number> <tr>shoot</tr> the ball in a basketball game. <i>Inigkagunit níyag búla muantug dáyun,</i> The moment he gets hold of the ball, he shoots it right away. <pos>n</pos> turn to toss the coin. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> place on which coins are thrown in <ix>hantak.</ix> <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> coins used in <ix>hantak.</ix>

<p id=1003><form>antug<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> rather <tr>heavy</tr> to lift. <i>Antug ra kanang malíta nímu,</i> That suitcase is too heavy for you. <i>Antug nga káhuy,</i> Dense and heavy wood. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> become heavy.

<p id=1004><form>antúhuy</form> <xr>= <sc>ANHUY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1005><form>antúlang</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> k.o. big bivalve, the empty shells of which are used for decorative purposes.

<p id=1006><form>antulánga</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hibiscus</tr>. <form>&mdash; nga lut-ud</form> <pos>n</pos> double or triple petaled hibiscus. <form>&mdash; nga asul</form> <pos>n</pos> a blue hibiscus, cultivated as an ornamental: <bio>Hibiscus syriacus</bio>.

<p id=1007><form>antulíhaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small yellow-colored <tr>bird</tr>. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having the yellowish color of this bird.

<p id=1008><form>antúlù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> <tr>pause</tr> in surprise, be taken aback. <i>Miant&umacrgra; (naant&umacrgra;) siya sa pultahan pagkadungug sa singgit sa sulud,</i> He paused in surprise at the door when he heard the cry within.

<p id=1009><form>antus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>endure</tr>, <tr>stand</tr>. <i>Mag-antus arun masantus,</i> Endure if you are to become a saint. <i>Makaantus ka ba sa kabahù sa lápuk?</i> Can you stand the stench of the mud? <pb n=49><i>Antúsun ku na lang ang íyang mga pagtámay kanákù,</i> I will just endure his words of disparagement. <number>2</number> <tr>suffer</tr>. <i>Nag-antus siyag dúgay úsà mamatay,</i> She suffered for a long time before she died. <form>-l-un</form> <pos>a</pos> needing endurance, perseverance. <i>Alantúsun kaáyu ning batáa kay mahilak,</i> This child needs patient handling because he is very sensitive. <form>ma-in-un, ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>patient</tr>, persevering. <i>Ang mainantúsun nga kinaíya ni Husi mauy makapalampus níya,</i> Jose&apos;s patient nature will make him succeed.

<p id=1010><form>antutu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; b6]</itype> pour forth smoke in quantities. <i>Dakù giyung hikáya kay nag-antutu ang kusína,</i> It must be a big feast because their kitchen has been belching forth smoke.

<p id=1011><form>antuwánga</form> <xr>= <sc>ANTULÁNGA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1012><form>anu</form> <xr>= <sc>UNSA</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p id=1013><form>ánud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; c1]</itype> for the current to carry s.t. off. <i>Ang bahà nag-ánud (nagpaánud) sa ílang balay,</i> The flood washed their house away. <i>Walà siya anúra (iánud) sa lawud,</i> He wasn&apos;t carried off into the deep. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> things carried away by floodwater. <number>2</number> a person who just drifted s.w. or into s.t. <i>Usa lang siya ka anud sa pulitika,</i> He is s.o. who just drifted into politics. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>PA-(&rarr;)</sc>.</xr> <form>pati-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> allow oneself to go with the current, but with control. <i>Kun kapúyun siya sa paglinánguy mupatiánud lang siya sa sulug,</i> When she becomes tired of swimming, she just lets herself drift in the current. <i>Patianúrun (ipatiánud) námù sa luyu sa sakayan ang bugkus sa káhuy,</i> We will let the bundle of wood be carried along behind the boat. <form>pa-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>drift net</tr> which is left to float in the sea and catches fish by the gills. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cloud</tr>. <form>kapanganúran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>clouds</tr>. <form>panganúrun</form> <pos>n</pos> spirits of children that have died unbaptized that are believed to be wafted in the skies.

<p id=1014><form>anugas</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small tree which is a violent contact poison: <bio>Semecarpus cuneiformis</bio>.

<p id=1015><form>anúgun</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>núgun</bx> (from <ix>hinúgun</ix>) what a pity, it is a waste. <i>Anúgun sa ímung nawung,</i> I expected more of you. (Lit. Your nice face is just being wasted.) <i>Anúgun nga walà siya dinhi,</i> What a pity he&apos;s not here! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> consider s.t. a waste. <i>Naanúgun na lang ang kwarta,</i> The money just went to waste. <i>Gianugnan ku sa mga patátas nga gipanglábay,</i> I considered it a waste that the potatoes should be thrown away. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> feel bad about s.t. wasted. <i>Nanganúgun ku sa kwartang giusíkan,</i> I feel bad about the money that went to waste.

<p id=1016><form>anugut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>torch</tr> made from dried coconut blossom sheaths.

<p id=1017><form>anúhus</form> <xr>= <sc>ANÚUS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1018><form>*anuk, *ánuk</form> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b(1)]</itype> keep cooked food over the embers so that it will be evenly cooked. <i>Ayaw haúna inighubas, paanuki úsà,</i> Don&apos;t remove the pot when the water evaporates. Let it stay over the fire.

<p id=1019><form>anular</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>annul</tr>, <tr>void</tr>. <i>Anulahun ang kuntrátu kay walay pirma,</i> The contract will be annulled because it has no signature.

<p id=1020><form>anumalíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>anomaly</tr>, usually said euphemistically of fraudulent transactions.

<p id=1021><form>-anun</form> adjective forming affix added to roots which are nouns and which usually occur in the alternant <ix>-nun,</ix> with the a of the penult dropped. <number>1</number> having the characteristics of [noun]. <i>Hariánun nga balay,</i> A palatial (lit. kingly) house. <i>Yawan-ung hunàhúnà,</i> Devilish thoughts. <number>2</number> being from [such-and-such] a place or like s.t. from that place. <i>Dagatnun nga mga binúhat,</i> Creatures of the sea. <i>Bul-ánun,</i> One from Bohol. <i>Bukidnun,</i> A mountaineer.

<p id=1022><form>an-un</form> <xr>= <sc>UNSÁUN</sc> (dialectal).</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>UNSA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1023><form>anúnang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> name given to <tr>sharks</tr> that look like sawfishes and guitarfishes.

<p id=1024><form>anúnang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small tree with a yellow-white fruit like a cherry, round and with a single pit: <bio>Cordia dichotoma</bio>. The fruit is mucilaginous and is used for paste. A sticky sap in the inner portion of the bark is scraped off for poultices.

<p id=1025><form>anúnas</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. heart-shaped fruit similar to <ix>átis</ix>: <bio>Anona reticulata</bio>.

<p id=1026><form>anunimus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>anonymous</tr> person. <i>Anunimus ang nagpadala sa sulat,</i> The person who sent the letter remained anonymous.

<p id=1027><form>anunsiyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>announcement</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>announce</tr>. <i>Ianunsiyu sa radyu,</i> Announce it over the radio.

<p id=1028><form>anunugba</form> (from <ix>sugba</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>moth</tr> that gathers around a light at night. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be, become a moth.

<p id=1029><form>anunugbu</form> (from <ix>sugbu</ix>) <pos>n</pos> k.o. brown edible fresh-water crab reaching 3&Prime; in diameter, usually used as bait in <ix>bantak</ix> fishing.

<p id=1030><form>anupug</form> <xr>= <sc>ANAPUG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1031><form>anup-up</form> <xr>= <sc>ALUP</sc>.</xr>

<!-- Sub-entry out of order -->

<p id=1032><form>ánur</form> <pos>a</pos> an <tr>honor student</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1236]</itype> make the honor roll. <i>Nakaánur (naánur) ku kas-a,</i> I made the honor roll once. <form>&mdash; rul</form> <tr>honor roll</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>ÁNUR</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1033><form>anus-a</form> <tr>when</tr>? (future). <i>Anus-a nímu dad-a?</i> When will you bring it? <i>Anus-a pa gud ku mutúu!</i> I certainly would not believe that! (Lit. When would I ever believe that?)

<p id=1034><form>anut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>second growth</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B13(1)6; b4]</itype> become a second-growth forest. <i>Ang kaíngin <pb n=50>kaniadtu hápit na pud maanut,</i> What was once a clearing is now practically a jungle again.

<p id=1035><form>anutasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> annotation.

<p id=1036><form>anúus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>soot</tr>. <form>anak sa &mdash;</form> a very dark-complexioned person. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; b(1)]</itype> give off soot. <i>Ug muanúus ang sugà, pagamyi ang pabílu,</i> If the lamp gives off soot, shorten the wick.

<p id=1037><form>anuwal</form> <pos>n</pos> a school <tr>yearbook</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> publish, get a yearbook.

<p id=1038><form>anyag</form> <pos>a</pos> for s.t. in nature or women <tr>to be beautiful</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2; b5]</itype> become, make beautiful. <i>Naanyag si Maríya human siya mamulbus,</i> Maria became beautiful after she powdered herself. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>beauty</tr>. <i>Ang kaanyag sa palíbut,</i> The beauty of the surroundings. <form>ma-</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>beautiful</tr>.

<p id=1039><form>anyil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bluing</tr> for wash. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> put bluing in wash.&dagger;

<!-- Sub entry of of order -->

<p id=1040><form>anyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a certain <tr>year</tr>. <i>Unsang anyúha ka matáwu?</i> What year were you born? <number>2</number> [such-and-such] a grade, year in school. <i>Ang ákung bátà sigundu anyu na sa hayskul,</i> My son is already a sophomore in high school. <form>&mdash; nuybu</form> New Year. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN]</itype> celebrate New Year&apos;s. <i>Manganyu nuybu (mag-anyu nuybu) ku dinhi,</i> I will celebrate New Year&apos;s here. <number>2</number> <itype>[B256]</itype> get to be New Year&apos;s<corr>.</corr>

<p id=1041><form>anyus</form> following a number of Spanish origin: [so-and-so] many <tr>years</tr>. <i>Bayinti anyus na ku dinhi,</i> I have been here for twenty years.

<p id=1042><form>apa</form> <xr>= <sc>APLA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1043><form>ápa</form> <pos>n</pos> thin pastry of the sort used as ice cream cones or wrappers of egg rolls. <number>1a</number> <tr>ice cream cone</tr>. <number>1b</number> by extension, <tr>crackers</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> make, make into thin pastry.

<p id=1044><form>apáhap</form> <xr>= <sc>ALAPÁHAP</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1045><form>apáli</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. oval-shaped, smooth-textured <tr>yam</tr>, cultivated and growing wild: <bio>Dioscorea esculenta</bio>.

<p id=1046><form>apan<sub>1</sub></form> <tr>but</tr>, on the contrary. <pos>n</pos> <tr>defect</tr> in a person. <i>Táwu nga walay apan,</i> A person without defect. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> constitute the defect in s.o. or s.t. <i>Maáyu ang lawlaw. Ang nakaapan bukugun,</i> Salted sardines are good; the only thing wrong with them is that they are boney. <form>apan-ápan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> keep saying &lsquo;but&rsquo; to avoid doing s.t. <i>Lakaw na, way apan-ápan,</i> Get going, no but&apos;s about it. <i>Mag-apan-ápan siyag sugúun,</i> He keeps saying &lsquo;but&rsquo; when you tell him to do s.t.

<p id=1047><form>apan<sub>2</sub>, apan-apan<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>ALISIWSIW</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1048><form>apan-apan<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> dish prepared from the young stems of <ix>kangkung</ix> cut into strips, cooked with spices and vinegar. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> prepare <ix>apan-apan.</ix>

<p id=1049><form>ap-andawun</form> <pos>n</pos> the situation in a game of mahjong where to obtain mahjong (go out) the player needs to complete only a single straight (sequences of three pieces in numerical order) such that either the lower number of the higher number will complete the sequence. E.g., if a player is complete for mahjong except for one straight for which he has only the pieces five and six, he needs either seven or four to make the straight complete and get mahjong, and thus he is in the <ix>ap-andawun</ix> situation.

<p id=1050><form>ap-ap</form> <xr>= <sc>ALAP-AP</sc>.</xr>

<!-- Sub-entry has two meanings? -->

<p id=1051><form>apapángig</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jaws</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> hit in the jaw. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> have prominent jaws. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1246]</itype> get a prominent jaw.

<p id=1052><form>aparadur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wardrobe</tr>, <tr>cupboard</tr>. <i>Ibutang ang sud-an sa aparadur,</i> Put the food in the cupboard. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into cupboard, wardrobe.

<p id=1053><form>aparátu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>apparatus</tr>.

<p id=1054><form>aparisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>apparition</tr>.

<p id=1055><form>apartmin, apartmint</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>apartment</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> get, make, make into apartments.

<p id=1056><form>ápas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a12b2]</itype> follow and catch up with. <i>Muápas níya ang íyang asáwa sa Rúma,</i> His wife will join him in Rome. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> go after s.o. to bring him home. <i>Apása siya sa iskuyláhan,</i> Go get him at school. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> go as high as [such-and-such] an amount in buying s.t. <i>Dílì ku muápas (muapas) ug bayinti sa ímung bábuy,</i> I will not go as high as twenty for your pig. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> amount offered in bargaining after an original offer was made. <i>Kwatru ni. Dì mahímug tris. Pilay ímung ápas?</i> This costs four pesos. Three is not enough. How high will you offer? <number>2</number> s.t. uttered to s.o. leaving as a reminder. <i>Ápas pahinumdum,</i> A reminder as he is leaving. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; sumpay</formx> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sequel</tr>. <i>Ang &lsquo;Fili&rsquo; ni Risal ápas sumpay sa íyang &lsquo;Noli&rsquo;,</i> Rizal&apos;s &lsquo;Fili&rsquo; is a sequel to his &lsquo;Noli&rsquo;. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>ÁPAS, 3</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b(1)]</itype> <tr>catch up</tr>, <tr>overtake</tr>. <i>Dì ku makaapas nímu sa lumbà,</i> I can not overtake you in a foot race. <i>Hiapsan ku sa ulan,</i> I will be caught in the rain. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> get meaning of. <i>Dílì nákù maapas ang íyang gisulti,</i> I cannot get what he&apos;s talking about. <number>4</number> <itype>[A12; a2]</itype> <tr>keep up</tr> with work. <i>Dílì siya makaapas ug utaw sa ákung paglaba,</i> He cannot keep ironing as fast as I wash. <i>Apasun ku ning trabáhu,</i> I will keep up with the work. <number>5</number> <tr>effect</tr> s.t. <i>Dílì maapas sa tambal,</i> The medicine cannot help. <number>6</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> be after s.t. <i>Nag-apas ka lang sa íyang sápì,</i> You&apos;re only after her money. <form>apas-apas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> keep doing one after another. <i>Nag-apas-apas ug abut ang mga bisíta,</i> The <pb n=51>visitors kept coming, one after another. <form>apas-ápas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>run</tr> after. <i>Giapas-ápas siya sa íyang trátu,</i> Her boyfriend ran after her. <form>pa-</form> <xr>= <sc>PAAGPAS</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>AGPAS</sc>.</xr> <form>apsunun, alapsunun</form> <pos>a</pos> requiring instant attention. <i>Ayaw kug langána kay apsunun ning trabáhu,</i> Don&apos;t delay me because this work needs instant attention.

<!-- Order of sub-entry -->

<p id=1057><form>apat</form> [so-and-so] would be, would have been better. <i>Apat magtuun ka kay sa magdúlà,</i> You&apos;d do better to study than to play. <i>Apat pag ímung gipalit ug baktin,</i> You would have done better to buy a pig with the money. <form>&mdash; kay</form> the situation was fine except s.t. happened to make it bad. <i>Apat kay wà tà tu maghilak, ímung gihilabtan,</i> He wasn&apos;t crying. What did you have to mess with him for? <i>Apat kay dì ku muuban, gipugus. Naapil ku sa kasábà,</i> I didn&apos;t want to go with you, but you forced me. Now I got in trouble along with you. <pos>n</pos> action of saying &lsquo;<ix>apat</ix>&rsquo;. <i>Walay apat nga mag-una,</i> The <ix>apat</ix> (&lsquo;it would have been better&rsquo;) always comes afterwards.

<p id=1058><form>ápaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B23(1); b(1)]</itype> for the surface level of water to rise above s.t. <i>Wà maápaw ang túbig sa bugas,</i> The water was not enough to submerge the rice. <i>Muápaw ang bahà sa taytáyan ug mukusug ang ulan,</i> The flood will rise above the bridge if there is a downpour. <i>Giapáwan sa sabaw ang sálad,</i> The salad was submerged in the sauce.

<p id=1059><form>apay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>salad</tr> made of sweet potato tops. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> prepare a salad of sweet potato tops.

<p id=1060><form>apay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>pale-complexioned</tr>. <i>Apay siya kay anímik,</i> He is pale because he is anemic. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2N; b3]</itype> become pale. <i>Miapay (naapay) siya sa kahadluk,</i> She grew pale in fright.

<p id=1061><form>apáyud</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fan</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> fan s.t. <i>Ikay muapáyud sa kaláyu,</i> You fan the fire. <i>Apayúri ra ang mga bisíta,</i> Fan the visitors. <number>2</number> make into a fan. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> fan oneself. <i>Nangapáyud siya kay giinítan,</i> She fanned herself because she felt hot.

<p id=1062><form>apdu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>gall</tr>, <tr>bile</tr>. <number>2</number> s.t. bitter to endure. <i>Apdu sa kamatuúran,</i> The bitter truth. <i>ispísu ug &mdash;</i> <tr>brave</tr>.

<p id=1063><form>ápid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> arrange things of approximately the same size in a neat <tr>stack</tr>. <i>Akuy muápid sa mga pinalantsa arun dì malum-it,</i> I will stack the ironed clothes neatly so that they do not get crumpled. <form>apid-apid</form> <number>1</number> be stacked. <number>2</number> numerous. <i>Apid-apid na ang íyang útang,</i> He has debts to the ceiling. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>stack</tr>. <number>2</number> be numerous. <i>Giapid-apid man gud níya ang íyang trátu,</i> He has numerous sweethearts (lit. stacked them up).

<p id=1064><form>apidábit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>affidavit</tr>.

<p id=1065><form>apíki</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>inadequate</tr> in space. <i>Apíki ang gamayng balay pára kanámung tanan,</i> A small house is inadequate for all of us. <number>2</number> be in a <tr>tight</tr> financial position. <number>3</number> having little time. <i>Apíki ang panahung itiwas sa trabáhu,</i> There wasn&apos;t enough time to finish the job. <number>4</number> <tr>homely</tr> to the point that one is hard put to find any redeeming feature. <i>Apíkig nawung tanan íyang mga bátà,</i> His children are all homely. <number>5</number> too near s.t. <i>Apíki sa karsáda ang balay,</i> The house is too near the street. <number>6</number> <tr>near</tr>. <i>Apíki sa simbahan ang ámù,</i> We live near the church. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; b(1)]</itype> get to be <tr>short of</tr> space, money, time. <i>Ang pyánu nakaapíki (nakapaapíki) sa sála,</i> The piano took up too much space in the living room. <i>Hing-apikihan ku sa kwarta karun,</i> I happen to be short of money now. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> press s.o. by not giving him time or room for maneuver. <i>Ayaw ku apikíha, dì lagi ku,</i> Don&apos;t try to force me. I told you I won&apos;t. <i>Dílì sila mubáyad ug dílì apikíhun,</i> They won&apos;t pay if you don&apos;t press them. <i>Naapikhan ku sa ahinti, mipalit na lang ku,</i> The agent cornered me, so I just bought one.

<p id=1066><form>apikta</form> <xr>= <sc>APIKT&Acaron;R</sc>.</xr>&dagger;

<p id=1067><form>apikt&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>affect</tr>. <i>Dílì ku apiktahan (apiktaran) ug usa lang ka básu nga ram,</i> One glass of rum isn&apos;t enough to affect me.

<p id=1068><form>apil</form> <pos>a</pos> be <tr>included</tr>. <i>Ang ábang sitinta apil ang sugà,</i> The rent is seventy including light. <form>walay &mdash; <r>[<ix>subject</ix>]</r></form> [subject] is not included. <i>Wà kay apil sa dúlà,</i> You are not included in the game. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> <tr>include</tr>, <tr>put</tr> s.t. with s.t. else. <i>Kinsay nag-apil sa ákung bulpin didtu sa sagbut?</i> Who threw my ballpoint pen out with the trash? <i>Apilun (iapil) ku ni ug lútù karung gabíi,</i> I will include this in our dinner tonight. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26; b6]</itype> <tr>participate</tr>, <tr>take part</tr> in. <i>Muapil ka sa ámung dúlà?</i> Will you take part in our game? <i>Maapil ka unyà sa kasábà,</i> You might get scolded as well. <form>apil-apil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> include oneself when one shouldn&apos;t. <i>Dílì ka muapil-apil ug isturya sa mga tigúlang,</i> You must not insinuate yourself in the grown-ups&apos; conversation. <form>manggiapil-apilun</form> <pos>a</pos> given to including oneself in conversations. <form>maN-r-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>participants</tr>.

<p id=1069><form>apilar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>appeal</tr> to a higher court. <i>Iapilar nátù ang kásu ug mapildi ta,</i> We will appeal our case if we lose. <form>apilasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>appeal</tr> to a higher court. <form>Kurti diapilasyúnis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Court of Appeals</tr>.

<p id=1070><form>apílu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>take sides</tr> with s.o. <i>Ngánung muapílu ka man níya nga sayup man níya?</i> Why do you take his side when he is <pb n=52>at fault?

<p id=1071><form>apilyídu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>surname</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> have, give [such-and-such] a surname. <i>Unáhun pagtawag ang nag-apilyídug Abad,</i> Those who are named Abad will be called first. <i>Giapilyidúhan siyag Krus gikúhà gíkan sa nagkúgus sa bunyag,</i> He was surnamed Cruz, after his sponsor in baptism.

<p id=1072><form>apindiks</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>appendix</tr> in the body.&dagger;

<p id=1073><form>apindisaytis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>appendicitis</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> cause, be afflicted with appendicitis.

<p id=1074><form>áping</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>cheek</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>surface</tr> (metaphorical). <i>Ang sakayan mitadlas sa áping sa dágat,</i> The boat traversed the surface of the sea. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> for the cheeks to fill out. <i>Uy katambuk na ni Lári. Nangáping na,</i> Larry has gained weight. His cheeks have filled out. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> the cheeks.

<p id=1075><form>apínig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>side with</tr>. <i>Apinígan nátù si Magsaysay karung iliksiyun,</i> We&apos;ll support Magsaysay this coming election.

<p id=1076><form>apir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>social affair</tr>.

<p id=1077><form>ápir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <ix>short for</ix> <bx>ápir baks</bx> <tr>upper box</tr> in a theater, boxing ring. <number>2</number> <ix>short for</ix> <bx>ápir kat</bx> upper cut in boxing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> hit with an <tr>upper cut</tr>. <i>Pagbantay kun muápir si Balug,</i> Watch out when Balug hits you with an upper cut.

<p id=1078><form>ápir baks</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>upper box</tr> of a theater or boxing ring.

<p id=1079><form>ápir kat</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr><corr sic="upper cut">uppercut</corr></tr> in boxing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> hit with an uppercut. <i>Ápir katun bítaw siya ug sagunsun, plat lagi,</i> He was hit repeatedly with an uppercut, and so he fell flat.

<p id=1080><form>apirmatíbu</form> <pos>a</pos> affirmative.

<p id=1081><form>apisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>craze</tr> for s.t. <i>May apisiyun siya sa dyás,</i> She is crazy about jazz. <number>2</number> have a <tr>knack</tr> for doing s.t. <i>Wà kuy apisiyun sa panggansilyu,</i> I have no great ability at crocheting. <form>-áda, -ádu</form> <pos>n</pos> having a <tr>passion</tr> for s.t. <i>Apisyunádu siya sa baksing,</i> He is a boxing fan. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> develop a passion for s.t. <i>Naapisyunáda siya sa bayli human makatilaw kas-a,</i> She became passionate over dancing after she tried it once.

<p id=1082><form>apítung</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to three species of primary forest trees, source of timber and <ix>balaw</ix> resin: <bio>Dipterocarpus spp</bio>.

<p id=1083><form>apla</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>APLUD</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> having a flat, insipid taste like <ix>tahuri</ix> beans. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> become <ix>apla</ix> in taste.

<p id=1084><form>aplay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>apply</tr> for a job. <i>Giaplayan ba nímu ang trabáhu?</i> Did you apply for the job? <number>1a</number> try one&apos;s hand at courting a girl (humorous). <i>Ug wà pa kay trátu, muaplay ku,</i> If you have no boy friend, I&apos;d like to apply. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> apply cosmetics. <i>Dì ka ba muaplay (mangaplay) ug mik-ap?</i> Aren&apos;t you going to put make-up on?

<p id=1085><form>áp lay</form> <tr>upsy-daisy</tr>. <i>Íyang giaswat ang bátà ug miingun &lsquo;áp lay&rsquo;,</i> He lifted the child and said &lsquo;upsy-daisy&rsquo;.

<p id=1086><form>aplikasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>application</tr>.

<p id=1087><form>aplud</form> <pos>a</pos> having an insipid to slightly bitter taste with an astringent effect, such as unripe bananas. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> get to have an <ix>aplud</ix> taste and texture. <i>Ang tungug mauy makaaplud (makapaaplud) sa tubà,</i> Mangrove bark is what gives the palm toddy its astringent taste.

<p id=1088><form>Aprika</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Africa</tr>. <form>-na</form> <pos>n</pos> African woman. <form>-nu</form> <pos>n</pos> African man.

<p id=1089><form>aprindis, aprintis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>apprentice</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B136; a2]</itype> be, make into an apprentice.

<p id=1090><form>apríta</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> <number>1</number> force s.o. to do s.t. by pressuring him. <i>Hing-apritahan siya pagpatug-an,</i> He was pressured into revealing the information. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>hurry</tr> up, rush doing s.t. <i>Mag-apríta tag lakaw kay umuúlan,</i> Let&apos;s walk fast because it&apos;s about to rain. <form>-du</form> <pos>a</pos> pesteringly insistent.

<p id=1091><form>apritáda</form> (from <ix>prítu</ix>) <pos>n</pos> dish made of sauteed meat, peppers, peas, and potatoes or bananas. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b2]</itype> make <ix>apritáda.</ix>

<p id=1092><form>aprubar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>approve</tr> a request.<i> Aprubahan ku lang ning hangyù,</i> I&apos;ll just approve this request. <form>aprubádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> approved. <number>2</number> be in favor of s.t. <i>Háin may ímung gustu? Aprubádu ka íning planúha?</i> Which do you like? Are you in favor of this plan? <number>3</number> proven to be good. <i>Ang Linimintu Sluwan aprubádu nga maáyu sa panakit sa kalawásan,</i> Sloan&apos;s liniment is proven the best for body pains. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> get to be approved. <i>Ug maaprubádu ang ákung lún,</i> If my loan is approved.

<p id=1093><form>aptan</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ATUP</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1094><form>apu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>grandchild</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> have grandchildren. <i>Unsang idára ka nangapu?</i> At what age did you have grandchildren? <form>apuhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>grandparent</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa sungkud, túhud, matag bagul</form><corr sic=","></corr> Great, great-great, great-great-great grandchild, respectively.

<p id=1095><form>ápù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB2S; c1P]</itype> pierce into or go into a hole as far as it will go, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Siyay miápù (mipaápù) sa lansang,</i> He drove the nail all the way in. <i>Nag-apù ang gasulinadur ug kusug ang dágan,</i> The accelerator was all the way down and it went fast. <i>Nagkaapù na ang táwu sa lungag nga íyang gikubkub,</i> The man is getting hidden beneath the hole he is digging. <pos>a</pos> gone all the way into a hole.

<p id=1096><form>apud</form> <xr>= <sc>APLUD</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1097><form>ápud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5c]</itype> <tr>give each</tr>. <i>Apúrun (apúran) <pb n=53>ta mu ug tagurha ka libru,</i> I will give each of you two books. <number>2</number> <itype>[B15]</itype> to have [so-and-so-many] each. <i>Nag-ápud silag pusil,</i> They each have a rifle. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> be enough for each to have a share. <i>Kining prútas dílì makaápud kanátù,</i> These fruits are not enough for all of us. <form>maN-</form> <pos>n</pos> cost one centavo each. <i>Ang dulsi mangápud,</i> The candies are one centavo each. <form>pang-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>distribution</tr>. <i>Gipadayúnan ang pang-ápud sa humstid,</i> They continued giving out homestead sites. <form>apud-apud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> <tr>distribute</tr>, <tr>divide</tr> among. <i>Ang pusta giapud-apud sa daghang táwu,</i> The bet was divided up among many people.

<p id=1098><form>ápug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lime</tr> made from burnt seashells. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make lime. <i>Mag-ápug ta pára mam-un,</i> Let&apos;s make lime for our betel chewing. <form>-l-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> lime container for tobacco or betel chewers. <number>2</number> lime factory.

<p id=1099><form>ápug<sub>2</sub></form> &lsquo;no win&rsquo; in a kind of lottery where a black piece of paper, indicating no win, may be drawn. <i>Walà pay nakadaug, pulus ápug ang nahulbutan,</i> No one has won because all the numbers drawn turned out to be <ix>ápug.</ix> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256; a12]</itype> turn out to be <ix>ápug.</ix> <number>2</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> for a business to <tr>fail</tr>. <i>Nagkaapug ang íyang nigusyu tungud sa íyang pagkasugarul,</i> His business is failing because of his gambling.

<p id=1100><form>ápul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>coagulated blood</tr>. <i>Dinhay daghang ápul namilit sa sundang,</i> A lot of coagulated blood was sticking to the bolo. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); b6]</itype> for blood to coagulate. <i>Dílì makaápul (maápul) ang dugù kay atimanun ug trápu sa nars,</i> The blood cannot coagulate because the nurse keeps wiping it away.

<p id=1101><form>ápul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>apple</tr>.

<p id=1102><form>apung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> keep <tr>watch</tr>, <tr>wake</tr> over s.t. <i>Miapung siya sa masakitun,</i> She kept watch over the patient. <i>Nag-apung ang purman sa nagtrabáhu,</i> The foreman was watching the workers. <i>Giapungan níla ang minatay,</i> They kept wake over the body. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> stand around looking at s.t. <i>Nag-apung siya ni Maríyang wà mutíngug níya,</i> He was standing by, watching Maria, but she didn&apos;t say anything. <number>3</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> be s.w. without doing anything, hang around a place. <i>Nía ka na sad mag-apung sa tubaan,</i> Here you are again, hanging around the toddy stand.

<p id=1103><form>ápung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> for fish to <tr>gather</tr> in a mass. <i>Sugà nga giapúngan sa mga bulinaw,</i> Light that the anchovies were attracted to. <pos>n</pos> mass of fish.

<p id=1104><form>apuntadur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prompter</tr> in a drama. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be the prompter.

<p id=1105><form>apuntasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prompting</tr> in a drama.

<p id=1106><form>apunti</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>record</tr>, list s.t. down. <i>Akuy muapunti sa ímung gikúhà,</i> I&apos;ll write down the amount you borrowed.

<p id=1107><form>*apuntin</form> <form>Alistu, &mdash;, puygu</form><corr sic=","></corr> Ready, <tr>aim</tr>, fire!

<p id=1108><form>apúpa</form> <pos>a</pos> in the <tr>path</tr> of s.t. that comes from a general direction: rain, wind, smell, etc. <i>Ang Sibu apúpa sa bagyu,</i> Cebu is in the path of the storm. <i>Apúpa ang ákung gilingkúran sa báhù,</i> The place I&apos;m sitting is right in the path of the smell. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> get into the path of. <number>2</number> <itype>[cP]</itype> put in the path of. <i>Ayaw iapúpa (ipaapúpa) ang bátà dihà. Banlásan námù ang salug,</i> Don&apos;t put the child in the way of the water we are going to splash over the floor. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1c]</itype> go into the path of. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> place oneself in full view of s.o. <i>Nagpaapúpa si Kurdaping sa mga laláki samtang nalígù,</i> The fairy stood where the boys could look at him while he was bathing.

<p id=1109><form>apura</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1b2]</itype> <tr>hurry</tr> s.o., s.t. up. <i>Mag-apura kug tuun,</i> I&apos;ll study quickly. <i>Ayaw apuraha ang draybir kay piligru tag mabanggà,</i> You must not tell the driver to hurry because we might have an accident. <i>Apuraha (iapura) ang panihápun. Gigútum na ku,</i> Hurry the dinner up. I&apos;m hungry. <form>-du(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> wanting things done in a hurry. <i>Apurádu kaáyu siya kay gustu siya nga mahuman dáyun,</i> He always rushes people up because he wants things done right away. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> wanting to do things in a hurry.

<p id=1110><form>apúru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>facing</tr>, piece of cloth added to a material to allow for a hem or any turning. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> add, make into facing.

<p id=1111><form>apus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>string</tr> for spinning a top. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> hit s.t. with, make into the string for a top. <i>Apsun (apusun) nímu ang kasing arun magsígi ug úgung,</i> You hit the top with the string so that it will continue to spin.

<p id=1112><form>apustrupi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>apostrophe</tr>.

<p id=1113><form>apust&ucaron;l<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>apostle</tr>.

<p id=1114><form>apust&ucaron;l<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>paddy</tr> rice with elongated white grains. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> plant <ix>apust&ucaron;l.</ix> <i>Apustulun námù ámung basakan,</i> We will plant our paddy to <ix>apust&ucaron;l.</ix>

<p id=1115><form>apustulis</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>apostle</tr>. <number>2</number> persons who take part in a tableau of the Last Supper presented on Holy Thursday.

<p id=1116><form>apuwintmint</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>appointment</tr> to a job or office. <number>2</number> <tr>date</tr>, <tr>appointment</tr> to meet with s.o.

<p id=1117><form>apuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>boil</tr> which goes deep into the flesh and develops slowly, esp. around the knees.

<p id=1118><form>apúya</form> <pos>n</pos> pulpy, fibrous material left after extracting the juice of s.t. <i>Apúya sa amirul nga balanghuy,</i> The pulpy material left after starch has been extracted from the cassava. <i>Apúya sa kapi,</i> Coffee grounds. <pos>v</pos> <pb n=54><itype>[b6]</itype> consider pulpy. <i>Giapuyáhan na ku ning nilugáwa kay wà na may lanut,</i> This porridge is all pulp because there is no water.

<p id=1119><form>apuyus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>maggots</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be maggotty. <i>Ang kusáhus giapuyus kay dílì maáyung pagkabulad,</i> The jerked meat is full of maggots because it was not well-dried.

<p id=1120><form>apyu</form> <pos>n</pos> variety of <tr>celery</tr> with a thin body and light green leaves.

<p id=1121><form>apyug</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> general <tr>debility</tr> brought about as a result of sickness or malnutrition. <i>Human sa tákig gitaptan siya sa apyug,</i> After his malaria a general debility settled over him. <number>2</number> <tr>weakling</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> get to be weak. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>weak</tr>, <tr>debilitated</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be weak, debilitated.

<p id=1122><form>árà</form> <xr>= <sc>ANÁA</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p id=1123><form>árab<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> <tr>burn</tr> s.t. with a rapid bright flame and then die down. <i>Ang kaláyu miárab sa kakugnan,</i> The fire burned the cogon grass. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> burning readily. <i>Kining tabakúa barut kay arab,</i> This is a poor k.o. tobacco because it burns fast.

<p id=1124><form>árab<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b5P]</itype> <tr>cut</tr> s.t. without hesitating or caring much about the result. <i>Kinsay nag-árab sa ákung karsunisun? Nadáut na,</i> Who did such a sloppy job of cutting my trousers? Now, they are ruined. <i>Giarában (giárab) lang nímu ang ákung buhuk,</i> You cut my hair too short and in a careless way.

<p id=1125><form>arabi</form> <pos>n</pos> tall breed of <tr>horse</tr> with a white coat and slender body.

<p id=1126><form>arabun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. special sticky <tr>rice</tr> used for the preparation of confections.

<p id=1127><form>arabya</form> <xr>= <sc>GWAYABANU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1128><form>aradur</form> <pos>n</pos> full-grown male <tr>carabao</tr>.

<p id=1129><form>árag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN]</itype> for leaves to fall off. <i>Mangárag ang dáhun sa arbul ug ting-init,</i> The poinciana loses its leaves in the hot season.

<p id=1130><form>arang</form> <number>1</number> <tr>possible and fitting</tr>. <i>Arang himúung upisína kining baláya,</i> This is a good house to make into an office. <i>Wà kuy arang ikabáyad,</i> I don&apos;t have enough to pay the debt. <i>Dì tà nà arang isulti níya,</i> That is not a fitting thing to say to him. <i>Kinsay arang mugámit niíni?</i> Who has the right to use this? <number>2</number> <formx>walay, kinsay &mdash;</formx> no one has, who has more right and power. <i>Kinsay arang sa Diyus?</i> Who is more powerful than God? <i>Walay arang nákù dinhi. Ákù ning tanan,</i> No one has more rights around here than I have. All this belongs to me. <number>3</number> <ix>followed by exclamation:</ix> My, how! <i>Arang paíta!</i> My! How bitter it is! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B256]</itype> <tr>fit</tr>, be <corr sic=accomodated>accommodated</corr>. <i>Muarang ning pirnúha ánang bangag?</i> Will this bolt get into that hole? <i>Maarang ba tang tanan sa dyíp?</i> Can all of us get into the jeep? <form>kun ma-</form> <tr>please</tr>. <i>Kun maarang ayaw ug sábà,</i> Please don&apos;t make any noise. <form>(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>ARANG</sc>, <ix>3.</ix></xr> <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>presentable</tr>, <tr>all right</tr>. <i>Arangan tà siyag hitsúra apan tagabúkid,</i> She looks all right, but she&apos;s a mountain girl. <form>arang-arang, maarang-arang</form> <pos>a</pos> a bit better. <i>Arang-arang (maarang-arang) ning ákung sapátus sa imúha,</i> My shoes are a bit better than yours. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> get better. <i>Miarang-arang (naarang-arang) na ang ákung památì,</i> I&apos;m feeling a bit better now. <i>Nagkaarang-arang na ang ílang kahimtang,</i> Their financial situation is improving. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> being well-off financially.

<p id=1131><form>árang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <tr>call off</tr> a game. <i>Arángun ta ning dáma kay sígi ku nímung limbúngan,</i> We&apos;ll call off this checker game because you keep cheating.

<p id=1132><form>arangka<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> speak seriously in order to convince. <i>Arangkáhi si Tasing, básig musugut,</i> Speak seriously to Tasing. She might accept.

<p id=1133><form>arangka<sub><corr sic="3">2</corr></sub>, arangk&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> force s.t. open, by prying s.t. off. <i>Ug way yáwi dì arangkáhun!</i> If there&apos;s no key, then force it open! <number>2</number> disassemble a machine. <i>Siyay nag-arangkar sa makina,</i> He was the one who disassembled the engine.

<p id=1134><form>aransil</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>church fees</tr>. <number>2</number> schedule posting church fees.

<p id=1135><form>aranya, aranyas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>chandelier</tr>. <number>2</number> teardrop-shaped pieces of crystal that hang on a chandelier. <number>3</number> earring with a pendant shaped like a teardrop. <number>4</number> k.o. hanging fancy hibiscus: <bio>Hibiscus schizopetalus</bio>. <number>5</number> <xr>= <sc>TAHURI</sc> (so called because the <ix>tahuri</ix> is teardrop-shaped).</xr>

<p id=1136><form>arapal</form> (from <ix>dápal</ix>) <pos>n</pos> a cactus similar to the prickly pear, but thornless: <bio>Nopalea cochinellifera</bio>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> appear in distinct rounded lumps like a cactus. <i>Nag-arapal nga pangánud,</i> Billowing clouds.

<p id=1137><form>aráru</form> <xr>= <sc>ALÁRU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1138><form>áras<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>coins</tr> used in a marriage ceremony.

<p id=1139><form>áras<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tars</tr> produced by burning s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> form, produce tar. <i>Ang kwáku kusug muáras,</i> The pipe collects lots of tars. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> producing tar. <i>Ang byatilis arásung kahúya,</i> The ipil-ipil is a tree that forms lots of tars.

<p id=1140><form>áras<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>KÁRAS<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=1141><form>*arasti</form> <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> venture to do s.t. which one is incapable of doing satisfactorily. <i>Nangarasti kag gubà niánà, ug karun unsa, dì na ka makaúlì?</i> You took it on yourself to take that thing apart, and now you can&apos;t get it back together again? <number>2</number> take a long chance on s.t. <i>Pangarastíhi lang siyag hangyù. Básig musugut,</i> Try and ask her. <pb n=55>She might just agree.

<p id=1142><form>arastri</form> <pos>n</pos> loading, unloading, transshipping service of goods shipped from abroad.

<p id=1143><form>árat<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for throat to be sore. <number>2</number> for citrus to have an acrid taste. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B3N; a2b4]</itype> for the throat to be sore. <i>Nangárat ang ákung tutunlan sa pagsinyágit,</i> My throat became sore from shouting. <i>Arátan ka gánì sa tutunlan ubhun ka,</i> If your throat becomes sore, you are going to catch cold. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> turn out to have an acrid taste.

<p id=1144><form>árat<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> actions to impress others. <i>Bídag árat ning tawhána,</i> My, how that man puts on. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> do s.t. to <tr>impress</tr> s.o.<i> Dì ku kapaarátan níya. Wà siyay ikapaárat nákù,</i> He can&apos;t impress me. There&apos;s nothing he can do that will impress me.

<p id=1145><form>arawkarya</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ornamental tree similar to a fir but with bright green needles and with fewer branches.

<p id=1146><form>aray<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>AGAY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1147><form>aray<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; cP]</itype> set s.t. out before s.o. <i>Giarayan (gipaarayan) ku siya ug tulu ka butilya, ug mikanta dáyun,</i> I put three bottles in front of him, and he sang at once. <i>Pagkáun nga giaray (gipaaray) kaníla,</i> The food that was set before them.

<p id=1148><form>arayis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>skipper</tr> of small boats. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> become, make into skipper.

<p id=1149><form>arbul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b5]</itype> join s.o. in s.t. they have to eat, drink, ask for a smoke. <i>Mangarbul (muarbul) na sad nig sigarilyu,</i> He&apos;ll probably come over to get a cigarette from us.

<p id=1150><form>arbul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the royal poinciana tree: <bio>Delonix regia</bio>.&dagger;

<p id=1151><form>arbularyu</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>folk doctor</tr> who deals with plants. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be, become an <ix>arbularyu.</ix> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6(1)]</itype> have s.o. treated by an <ix>arbularyu.</ix> <i>Paarbularyúhi na lang nà, kay dì madá sa duktur,</i> Let an <ix>arbularyu</ix> treat it because a regular doctor can do nothing.

<p id=1152><form>argabyádu</form> <xr>= <sc>AGRABYÁDU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1153><form>argabyu</form> <xr>= <sc>AGRABYU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1154><form>argardulsi</form> <xr>= <sc>LIMUNSÍTU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1155><form>argh</form> word used in writing to represent sound of coughing.

<p id=1156><form>argulya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>metal ring</tr>. <number>2</number> k.o. merry-go-round consisting of a wheel mounted on a pole from which metal chains with rings at the end dangle. To operate this contrivance the child holds on to a ring and runs around generating momentum until he can swing around holding on to the ring. Other children can ride by holding rings suspended from the other chains.

<p id=1157><form>argumintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> arguments for or against s.t. <number>2</number> <tr>argument</tr>, discussion. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; a12]</itype> <tr>argue</tr> with s.o. about s.t. <i>Nagkaargumintu mi mahitungud sa báyad,</i> We had an argument about the payment. <i>Argumintúhun nátù ni ug dílì ta magkaúyun,</i> We will argue this out if we can&apos;t make each other see eye to eye.

<p id=1158><form>ari</form> <number>1</number> <tr>here</tr> (near speaker but not near person spoken to). <i>Ari ibutang ang lamísa,</i> Put the table over here. <i>Ari na mi,</i> We&apos;re on our way (lit. will be over here) now. <number>2</number> let&apos;s go over to the following point. <i>Karun ari ta sa ikaduhang ánib sa libru,</i> Now, let&apos;s turn to the second chapter of the book. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> come over here, bring here. <i>Makaari ka sa Lúnis?</i> Can you come over on Monday? <i>Iari nákù ang bátà kay akuy bantay,</i> Bring the child over here and I&apos;ll watch (him). <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a2]</itype> come to get. <i>Kinsa may mag-ari diri sa libru?</i> Who is going to come here to get the book? <i>Aria diri ang libru, kay dì ku makahatud,</i> Come here to get the book, because I have no time to deliver it. <form>umari ka, marika</form> <tr>come here</tr> (said by superiors to inferiors). <i>Marika ra gud Pidung,</i> Come here, Pedong. <form>(&larr;)<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>ARI</sc>.</xr> <form>hi-/ha-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> wind up here. <form>arian</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> always come here. <form>ariúnun, alaríun</form> <pos>n</pos> things one has to come here to get.

<p id=1159><form>ári<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>NIÍRI</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>KIRI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1160><form>aríba<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a percentage deducted by the operator of a gambling game from the proceeds of the winner. <i>Bayri úsà ang aríba arun makítag pilay limpiyu,</i> Pay the <tr>rake-off</tr> first so we can determine the net winnings. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> pay the owner his rake-off. <i>Aribáhan úsà nátù ang bulangan únà bahína ang daug,</i> We&apos;ll pay the arena&apos;s percentage first before we divide the winnings. <form>-dur(&rarr;)</form> <number>1</number> one who rents out gambling devices for a percentage of the winnings. <number>2</number> one who gambles with s.o.&apos;s gambling equipment and pays a percentage to him. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> be, become a gambling device operator.

<p id=1161><form>aríba<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>hoist</tr>, <tr>lift</tr>. <i>Wà makaaríba pagdúngan ang mga nanaglálung sa balay,</i> The persons who were moving the house didn&apos;t lift it together. <i>Iaríba (aribáha) ang láyag,</i> Hoist the sail.

<p id=1162><form>aríba<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>block the way</tr>. <i>Kuháa nang nakaaríbang batu,</i> Remove that stone blocking the way. <i>Giaribáhan nákù ang awtu,</i> I blocked the path of the car.

<p id=1163><form>aribáda</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> go, put s.w. for <tr>refuge</tr> or <tr>safekeeping</tr>. <i>Didtu mi nakaaribáda sa simbahan pagbagyu,</i> We took refuge in the church during the typhoon. <i>Ug dúnay Hapun iaribáda sa lángub ang mga babáyi,</i> Hide the women in the cave when the Japanese <pb n=56>soldiers come.

<p id=1164><form>arigláda</form> <xr>= <sc>ARIGLÁDU</sc>, <ix>1.</ix></xr>

<p id=1165><form>arigládu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>neat</tr>, orderly. <i>Arigládu siyang mamisti,</i> She dresses neatly. <i>Arigládu na ang ímung kwartu,</i> Your room is in order now. <number>2</number> <tr>prepared</tr>, ready. <i>Arigládu na ang papílis pára sa ímung byáhi,</i> The papers for your trip are all in order. <i>Arigládu na ang panihápun,</i> Dinner is ready now. <number>3</number> in agreement. <i>Arigládu na. Adtu ta ugmà,</i> It&apos;s all arranged. We&apos;ll go tomorrow. <number>3a</number> for a quarrel to be settled. <i>Arigládu na ang ílang áway,</i> Their fight is settled now. <number>3b</number> <tr>surely</tr>; it&apos;s all right. <i>Makagáwì ku sa ímung tilipunu? Arigládu,</i> May I use your phone? Surely. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> get neat, in order, reconciled.

<p id=1166><form>arigl&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>arrange</tr>, put in good order. <i>Tabángi ku pag-arigl&acaron;r sa ákung buhuk,</i> Help me fix my hair. <i>Nakaarigl&acaron;r ka na ba sa ákung katri?</i> Have you made my bed yet? <number>2a</number> attend to, take care of. <i>Wà ku kapanglaba kay nag-arigl&acaron;r ku sa mga bátà,</i> I wasn&apos;t able to do the washing because I was looking after the children. <number>2b</number> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> take charge of, <tr>assume responsibility for</tr>. <i>Ariglahun ku ang mga gastus sa ímung pag-iskuyla,</i> I will take charge of your school expenses. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>settle</tr> a case, quarrel. <i>Ariglaha na lang ang inyung áway,</i> Settle your dispute. <number>4a</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> beat s.o. up (lit. put him in order). <i>Ariglahun ta ning limbungan,</i> Let&apos;s beat this cheater up. <number>4b</number> do away with s.o. <i>Giingun nga ariglahun si Bituy sa mga buguy,</i> The thugs said they would liquidate Bitoy. <number>5</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> treat an illness with <ix>arigl&acaron;r</ix>. <pos>n</pos> treatment in folk medicine with special water made magic by having had a piece of paper with a magic formula (<ix>urasiyun</ix>) put into it. The water is either drunk or applied directly over the diseased part, and the person under this treatment is prohibited from uttering curse words. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> groom oneself nicely. <i>Nangarigl&acaron;r na siya kay mamisíta man ni Tíba,</i> He is grooming himself carefully because he is going to visit Tiba.

<p id=1167><form>ariglu</form> <pos>n</pos> settlement, compromise. <i>Maáyu pa ang ariglu nga alang-álang kay sa burúka,</i> A poor compromise is better than a court case. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> settle by arbitration. <i>Ariglúhun mu sa kapitan sa baryu,</i> The barrio captain will arbitrate between you two.

<p id=1168><form>arikmitik</form> <xr>= <sc>ARITMITIK</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1169><form>arimadur</form> <pos>n</pos> the one who brings the fighting cocks into the arena when they are ready.

<p id=1170><form>arimar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>enliven</tr>, help cheer up. <i>Ang kumidiyanti mauy mag-arimar sa dúlà,</i> The comedian brings a note of comedy to the play. <i>Arimáha (arimáhi) ang subù nímung inahan,</i> Cheer up your mother because she is sad.

<p id=1171><form>arína</form> <xr>= <sc>HARÍNA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1172><form>arindu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lease</tr> on land or s.t. that produces an income. <i>Ang arindu sa ímung yútà mulungtad ug lima ka túig,</i> The lease on your land will last for five years. <i>Mil písus ra ang arindu sa ákung yútà pára lima ka túig,</i> The lease on my land is a thousand pesos for five years. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>lease</tr>. <i>Giarindúhan ku ang ílang panágat,</i> I leased their fishing equipment.

<p id=1173><form>aringkil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>clattering sound</tr>. <i>Ang aringkil sa mga táru,</i> The clattering of the cans. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>clatter</tr>, <tr>clink</tr>. <i>Miaringkil ang mga butilya dihang gipamakling sa iring,</i> The bottles clattered when the cat knocked them over.

<p id=1174><form>arinúla</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chamber pot</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> provide with a chamber pot.

<p id=1175><form>*arisg&acaron;r</form> <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>try</tr> s.t. regardless of the consequences. <i>Mangarisg&acaron;r kug panágat bisag dakù ang balud,</i> I will venture out to sea even though there are big waves. <i>Nagpangarisg&acaron;r siyag tindug bisag lúya pa ang láwas,</i> He&apos;s trying bravely to get up even though his body is weak. <form>arisgádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>daring</tr>, <tr>bold</tr>. <i>Ug arisgádu ka pa, mulátay ka sa usa ka bulus kawáyan,</i> If you are daring, you will cross over on a bamboo pole. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become daring.

<p id=1176><form>arist&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> put under <tr>arrest</tr>. <i>Aristahun ta ka,</i> I&apos;ll put you under arrest. <form>aristádu</form> be under arrest. <i>Aristádu ka. Ayawg líhuk,</i> You&apos;re under arrest. Don&apos;t move. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be arrested. <i>Kun maaristádu ka gánì, ayaw giyud pagsúkul,</i> If you are ever arrested, don&apos;t resist.

<p id=1177><form>*aristu</form> <form>mandamyintu di-</form> <tr>warrant of arrest</tr>.

<p id=1178><form>aristukrata</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>snooty</tr>, <tr>snobbish</tr> in behavior. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become <tr>condescending</tr>, snooty.

<p id=1179><form>árit</form> (from <ix>tíra</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; a2b2]</itype> <tr>have sexual intercourse</tr> (slang). <i>Kuyugkúyug pa sa ímung trátu ug magabíi hing-aritan unyà ka,</i> Keep going with that boy at night, and you&apos;re going to wind up in bed with him.&dagger;

<p id=1180><form>arítis</form> <xr>= <sc>ARIYUS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1181><form>aritmitik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>arithmetic</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> <tr>figure things out</tr>. <i>Maáyung muaritmitik ning bat-ána, swítung way Santa Kláwus,</i> This child figures things out fast. He knows there is no Santa Claus.

<p id=1182><form>aritmitika, aritmitiku</form> <xr>= <sc>ARITMITIK</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1183><form>arítus</form> <xr>= <sc>ARIYUS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1184><form>aríya<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b7c1]</itype> <tr>lower</tr>. <i>Ariyáhi ang písì ug dupa,</i> Pay out a fathom of rope. <i>Iaríya <pb n=57>(ariyáha) na ang láyag,</i> Lower the sail. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>2a</number> <tr>unload cargo</tr>. <i>Iaríya na ang mga kargang humay,</i> The rice cargo will be unloaded now. <number>2b</number> <tr>throw overboard</tr>. <i>Iaríya tanang mga karga arun masalbar ta,</i> Throw the cargo overboard so that we may be saved. <number>3</number> <itype>[a2]</itype> <tr>come out</tr>, be released. <i>Miaríya na ang tumatub,</i> The bag of waters has broken. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>dispose</tr> of s.t. by sale. <i>Iaríya dáyun ang abut inigprisyu,</i> Sell the produce at once when the price rises. <number>5</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>move</tr> from one place to another. <i>Muaríya mi íning baláya kay mahal ug ábang,</i> We will move from this house because the rent is too high.&dagger;

<p id=1185><form>aríya<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> beat up thoroughly or <tr>rape</tr>. <i>Giariyáhan ang impurmir sa mga ismaglir,</i> The smugglers mauled the informer.

<p id=1186><form>ariyádu</form> <tr>timber</tr> (the tree is falling)!

<p id=1187><form>ariyus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>earrings</tr>. <number>2</number> seal made of metal fastened to s.t. with wire which locks it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> put on, make into earrings. <i>Kinsay nag-ariyus sa bátà?</i> Who put earrings on the child? <number>2</number> put a seal on s.t. <i>Dì mahilabtan ang kuntadur kay giariyúsan,</i> Nobody can tamper with the meter because it has a seal on it. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> wear earrings. <i>Ang laláki karun mangaríyus na,</i> Men are wearing earrings these days.

<p id=1188><form>ark</form> word used in writing to represent sound of infliction of pain.

<p id=1189><form>arka</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>Noah&apos;s ark</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>ark</tr> of the covenant. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, make into the ark.

<p id=1190><form>arkabála</form> <xr>= <sc>ALKABÁLA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1191><form>arkanghil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>archangel</tr>. <i>Si San Migil Arkanghil,</i> St. Michael the Archangel.

<p id=1192><form>arkaydi</form> <xr>= <sc>ALKALDI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1193><form>arkila</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> <tr>rent</tr>. <i>Inarkilahan lang kining baláya,</i> We&apos;re just renting this house. <pos>n</pos> amount of rent. <i>Pilay arkila sa dyíp?</i> How much is the rent for the jeep?

<p id=1194><form>arkitiktu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>architect</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> become, make into an architect. <form>-ra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>architecture</tr> course, subject.

<p id=1195><form>arku</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>arch</tr> placed over a thoroughfare to commemorate s.t. <number>2</number> <tr>arc</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> make, put an arch s.w. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> form an arc. <i>Miarku ang ági sa kwítis,</i> The fireworks formed an arch.

<p id=1196><form>arkuhul</form> <xr>= <sc>ALKUHUL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1197><form>arkus</form> <xr>= <sc>ARKU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1198><form>armáda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>armada</tr>.

<p id=1199><form>armádu</form> <corr><pos>a</pos></corr><tr>armed</tr>. <i>Usa ka grúpung armádu ang mitúlis sa bálu,</i> An armed group robbed the widow. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be, become armed.

<p id=1200><form>armamintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>armament</tr>. <i>Lumbà sa armamintu,</i> Armament race.

<p id=1201><form>armar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>set up</tr> s.t. folded or in pieces, or set s.t. in its proper place so it may be operated. <i>Nag-armar siya sa ulutáwan,</i> He is setting up the ironing board. <i>Nag-armar mig mga kanyun líbut sa planta,</i> We emplaced cannons around the plant. <i>Ang bumba sa túbig iarmar duul sa kanal,</i> Emplace the water pump near the canal.

<p id=1202><form>armas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>arms</tr>, <tr>weapon</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>penis</tr> (humorous euphemism). <form>&mdash; dimánu</form> bladed weapons. <form>&mdash; dipuygu</form> <tr>firearms</tr>.

<p id=1203><form>armatyur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>armature</tr> of an electric motor or generator. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> put the armature on a motor.

<p id=1204><form>armi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>army</tr>.

<p id=1205><form>armikat</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>crew cut</tr>. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> get a crew cut. <i>Magpaarmikat ku kay mag-ar-utísi mi ugmà,</i> I will get a crew cut because we have <abbr expan="Reserve Officers&apos; Training Corps">ROTC</abbr> tomorrow.

<p id=1206><form>armirul</form> <xr>= <sc>ALMIRUL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1207><form>armistisyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>armistice</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> have an armistice. <i>Mag-armistisyu sila sa Bitnam,</i> They will have an armistice in Viet Nam.

<p id=1208><form>armunyum, armunyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>harmonium</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN13]</itype> play the harmonium.

<p id=1209><form>arníbal</form> <xr>= <sc>ANÍBAL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1210><form>arnika<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>ANGHILIKA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1211><form>arnika<sub>2</sub></form> <corr><pos>n</pos> </corr><tr>arnica</tr>. <form>tintúra &mdash;</form> tincture of arnica.

<p id=1212><form>arnis</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> throw s.o. off balance by <tr>tripping</tr> or <tr>shoving</tr>. <i>Ug ímung arnísan ang ímung kadúlà mapáwul ka,</i> It&apos;s a foul if you trip your fellow player. <number>2</number> <itype>[C; c3]</itype> fence using sticks. <pos>n</pos> <tr>fencing</tr> with sticks.

<p id=1213><form>arpa</form> <xr>= <sc>ALPA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1214><form>arpilir, arpiril</form> <xr>= <sc>ALPILIR</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1215><form>arsa</form> <xr>= <sc>ALSA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1216><form>arsii</form> <pos>n</pos> RCA, abbreviation for the Philippine Government Rice and Corn Administration. <i>Bugas arsii,</i> Rice from the RCA.

<p id=1217><form>arsubispu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>archbishop</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> be, make into an archbishop. <form>arsubispádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>archbishopric</tr>.

<p id=1218><form>art.</form> <pos>n</pos> abbreviation for <ix>artikulu.</ix>

<p id=1219><form>artal</form> <xr>= <sc>ALTAR</sc>.</xr>

<!-- sub entry out of order -->

<p id=1220><form>arti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>art</tr>. <i>Arti sa pamálak,</i> Art of poetry. <form>may, walay &mdash;</form> be (not be) artistic. <i>May arti siyang mukanta,</i> She sings artfully. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>affected</tr>. <i>Arti kaáyu nga manulti ning buánga, mu rag unsay nakamauhan,</i> The fool speaks in an affected way. You&apos;d think he knew s.t. <number>2</number> affected in dress. <i>Pastilang artíhang mamisti ning bayhána,</i> My! That woman sure does overdress. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3N; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> for speech or behavior to be affected. <number>2</number> <tr>overdress</tr>, have too much make-up on. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> put on an act. <i>Maáyu muarti, makalingaw sa naguul,</i> He puts on a good act which could entertain people who are sad. <form>artiarti</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> do s.t. <tr>unessential</tr> and <tr>unnecessary</tr> <pb n=58>just to put on a big show. <i>Tuhi, muartiarti pa nà siyag pamaláyi bísag dúgay na nílang púyù,</i> Phooey, he puts on a show of asking for the girl&apos;s hand, as if they hadn&apos;t already been living together for a long time. <pos>n</pos> action of doing unnecessary things just for show. <i>Ug náay mangasáwa nákù, minyù dáyun sa way daghang artiarti,</i> If s.o. asks me to marry him, I&apos;ll say yes, without fuss and bother. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make a <tr>show</tr> of doing s.t. <i>Magpaarti silag hulgà nímu, piru ayawg tagda,</i> They will put a big show of threatening you, but pay no attention. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> things one wears for vanity&apos;s sake. <i>Nangáyù siyag lipstik, ariyus ug uban pang mga pangarti,</i> She asked for lipstick, earrings, and other vanities. <form>di-</form> <pos>a</pos> artistic. <i>Panulat nga diarti,</i> Artistic writings.

<p id=1221><form>artikulu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>article</tr>, a piece published. <number>2</number> article of a law.

<p id=1222><form>artiliyiríya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>artillery</tr>.

<p id=1223><form>artipisyal</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>artificial</tr>, affected and not natural. <i>Dalágang syudadnun nga púlus artipisyal ang panglihuk,</i> City girls that always put on. <number>2</number> not naturally occurring, <tr>contrived</tr>. <i>Ang kangihit sa humay artipisyal dílì tungud sa húlaw,</i> The scarcity of rice is artificial and not due to the drought. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> become, make artificial.

<p id=1224><form>artista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>actor</tr>, <tr>actress</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B15; a12]</itype> be, become an actor. <i>Gustu siyang mag-artista sa Haliwud,</i> She wants to become an actress in Hollywood. <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> put on an act. <i>Nag-inartista siyag hangyù,</i> He&apos;s putting on an act while he is asking for it.

<p id=1225><form>*artisyánu</form> <form>púsu &mdash;</form> <tr>artesian well</tr>.

<p id=1226><form>*árù</form> <form>ka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be in varied profusion. <i>Nagkaárù ang mga pagkáun nga giaray,</i> Food was set before them in lavish profusion. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> ask for s.t. to one&apos;s heart&apos;s desire. <i>Nagpaárù na sad siya sa mga pahindik,</i> She is asking for cosmetics to her heart&apos;s desire. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>lavish</tr> on s.o. to his heart&apos;s content. <i>Gipaarúan na lang siyag unsay gustu,</i> They gave him whatever he wanted to his heart&apos;s content.

<p id=1227><form>aruk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>money</tr> (slang). <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> having money (slang).

<p id=1228><form>arul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> <tr>shave</tr> the hair off the head. <i>Giarulan ang binilanggung patyunun,</i> The condemned prisoner had his hair shaved off. <number>2</number> <itype>[BN; b6]</itype> lose hair, feathers. <i>Muarul (mangarul) ang manuk ihás ug mating-init,</i> Wild chickens shed their feathers in the hot season.

<p id=1229><form>arúma</form> <pos>n</pos> spiny shrub or small tree similar to <ix>ipil-ipil,</ix> used for firewood. Said to be the plant from which Christ&apos;s crown of thorns was made: <bio>Acacia farnesiana</bio>.

<p id=1230><form>arun<sub>1</sub></form> <tr>in order to</tr>. <i>Mupaúlì siya arun pag-utaw (nga mangutaw),</i> She is going home to iron. <form>kay &mdash;</form> in order to, so that. <i>Magtígum ku kay arun makapalit kug awtu,</i> I will save so that I can buy a car. <form>&mdash; ingnun</form> in order to be said, to be mistaken for. <i>Nagpulupangutána siya arun ingnun walà masáyud,</i> He keeps asking questions so they will think he does not know. <form>pa-, paka- ingnun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> make false pretenses. <i>Adtu siya magpakaarun-ingnun (magpaarun-ingnun) nga dakung táwu,</i> There he goes making pretenses that he is an important person. <form>paarun-árun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> do s.t. under pretenses. <i>Nagpaarun-árun siya ug diskursu bísan ug dílì siya kamau,</i> He made pretensions of delivering a speech though he doesn&apos;t know how.

<p id=1231><form>arun<sub>2</sub></form> (from <ix>karun</ix>) <number>1</number> particle calling s.o.&apos;s attention when he is being spoken to. <i>Arun, Pidru, gitawag ka,</i> Hey, Pedro! S.o. is calling you! <number>2</number> particle introducing a new subject. <i>Arun, muadtu ka sa Amirika?</i> Now, are you going to America?

<p id=1232><form>árun</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>KARUN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1233><form>arunsa</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>move</tr>, move s.t. over. <i>Iarunsa ngari ang kahun,</i> Move the box this way. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> <tr>advance</tr>, <tr>progress</tr>. <i>Muarunsa ang táwu ug magkúgi,</i> A person who works hard will prosper. <number>3</number> <itype>[b7c1]</itype> <tr>advance</tr>, <tr>move</tr> s.t. ahead in time. <i>Arunsáhun (iarunsa, arunsáhan) nátù ang adlaw sa kasal,</i> Let us advance the date of the marriage. <number>4</number> <itype>[B]</itype> become more and more. <i>Nag-arunsa siya pagkaabusáda,</i> She is getting more and more abusive. <number>5</number> <itype>[APB; b7c1]</itype> <tr>raise</tr>, <tr>rise</tr>. <i>Muabut na ang bag-u nátung isták, mag-arunsa (magpaarunsa) ta sa prisyu,</i> When the new stock arrives, let&apos;s raise the price. <i>Muarunsa ang prisyu sa humay,</i> The price of rice will rise. <pos>n</pos> <tr>progress</tr>, <tr>advancement</tr>. <i>Gamay ang arunsa sa íyang swildu,</i> He received a very small increase in pay.

<p id=1234><form>arus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cut a growth short: hair, grass, hedge; strip the leaves, fruits, or flowers from a plant. <i>Kinsay miarus sa mga rúsas?</i> Who picked all of the roses? <i>Naarus ang íyang kílay dihang mikalit pagsiláub ang kaláyu,</i> Her eyebrow was singed off when the flame suddenly flared up. <i>Giarusan ku siya kay gikutu,</i> I cut her hair short because she has lice.

<p id=1235><form>*arus<sub>2</sub></form> <form>&mdash; ala balinsiyána</form> <pos>n</pos> Arroz a la Valenciana. <form>&mdash; kaldu</form> <pos>n</pos> rice porridge with chicken. <form>&mdash; kun kamarun</form> <pos>n</pos> rice with shrimp. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> prepare a rice dish.

<p id=1236><form>ar-utísi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ROTC</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> hold, attend ROTC. <i>Dílì ku muar-utísi rung hápun kay sakit <pb n=59>ákung tiil,</i> I will not attend ROTC drill this afternoon because my foot hurts. <i>Mag-ar-utísi ba ta ugmà?</i> Will we have ROTC tomorrow?

<p id=1237><form>aruwákà</form> <pos>n</pos> <corr><number>1</number> </corr>k.o. ornamental plant with flowers that bloom at midnight. <number>2</number> <tr>prostitute</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> become a <tr>prostitute</tr>.

<p id=1238><form>aruy</form> <xr>= <sc>AGAY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1239><form>arya</form> <xr>= <sc>ARÍYA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1240><form>aryat</form> <pos>a</pos> for women to be vain, choosy, affected, and coquettish. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1N; b6]</itype> be <ix>aryat.</ix> <i>Nangaryat na sad ang byúda,</i> The widow is putting on airs. <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4; a]</itype> act in a vain, affected way. <i>Kuntra ku giyud nang mag-inaryat ug sinultihan,</i> How I hate those women that are affected in their speech.

<p id=1241><form>aryindu</form> <xr>= <sc>ARINDU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1242><form>asa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> <tr>pay attention to</tr>, take s.o.&apos;s word or behavior seriously. <i>Ayawg ashi (asahi) ang sulti sa hubug,</i> Don&apos;t take a drunk&apos;s words seriously.

<p id=1243><form>ása<sub>1</sub></form> <number>1</number> <tr>where</tr>? (future). <i>Ása ka muiskuyla?</i> Where will you go to school? <number>1a</number> going where? <i>Ása ka?</i> Where are you going? <number>2</number> <tr>which</tr> (of several) will... <i>Ása kang siníha mutan-aw?</i> Which movie will you go to see? <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; <r>[<ix>verb</ix>]</r></formx> how could [so-and-so] ever happen? <i>Ása gud siya mutúu nímu?</i> How could she ever believe you? <number>4</number> (short for <ix>mahi-</ix>) What ever happened to...? <i>Ása na man tung ákung bulpin?</i> Now, where did my pen go to? <number>5</number> such-and-such a thing is likely to be there in due time. <i>Ása man nang bisiklítag madakù ka,</i> It&apos;ll be time enough to get a bicycle when you get big. (Lit. Where will your bicycle be when you grow up.) <i>Ayaw pangulitáwu. Ása ra man nà ug matituládu ka,</i> Don&apos;t propose yet. She&apos;ll still be there (lit. where will she be) after you have graduated. <i>Ása ka ra man unyà. Magkítà ra ta,</i> You&apos;ll be right there (where I can get you). We&apos;ll meet again some day. <form>i-</form> what can you do with, of what use will it be? <i>Iása man nà nímung mga dáang papil?</i> What good are those old papers to you? <i>&lsquo;Gustu ka?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Iása.&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Do you want it?&rsquo; &lsquo;No. What good is it to me?&rsquo; <form>ma-</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>ÁSA</sc>, <ix>5.</ix></xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>MAHI-</sc>.</xr> <form>hi-/ha-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> where did/will it wind up at. <i>Bísag mahiása ku, mabúhì,</i> Wherever I wind up, I can survive.

<p id=1244><form>ása<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>keep doing</tr> s.t. <i>Inay gipahílum miása hinúun,</i> We told her to stop crying, but she kept on. <i>Wà kay búhat nga mahímù ug mag-ása kag hinuktuk,</i> You won&apos;t accomplish anything if you keep brooding. <i>Asáhan (asáhun) bítaw námù ug tan-aw, midukù lagi,</i> We kept staring at her until she finally bowed her head.

<p id=1245><form>ása<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ab(1)]</itype> <tr>hope</tr>. <i>Makaása ba mi sa ímung pagbálik?</i> Can we hope for your return? <i>Si Dun Magnu ang ílang giasáhan nga muluwas kaníla,</i> They hoped Don Magno would save them.

<p id=1246><form>asádu</form> <pos>a</pos> roasted, <tr>broiled rare</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; a12]</itype> roast, broil rare. <i>Ayawg lutúa, asadúha lang,</i> Don&apos;t cook it through. Just broil it rare.

<p id=1247><form>asal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> roast over hot coals (not said of sea food). <i>Kinsay nag-asal íni nga kagubkub man?</i> Who roasted this pig that it is so crisp? <form>aslunun, alaslun</form> <pos>n</pos> a pig of the size right for roasting. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> roast pig.

<p id=1248><form>asamblíya</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>assembly</tr>, the lawmaking body of the Philippine Commonwealth.

<p id=1249><form>as-as</form> <pos>a</pos> for leaves to be very dry. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a12P]</itype> for leaves to become very dry. <i>Nagkaas-as ang patayng dáhun nga nabulad,</i> The leaves are getting dried out well under the sun.

<p id=1250><form>asáwa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wife</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa banig</form> good-for-nothing wife (lit. good only in bed). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123S; a3]</itype> happen to get for a wife, can marry. <i>Nakaasawa siyag iridíra,</i> He got an heiress for a wife. <i>Maasáwa ku siya,</i> I can marry her. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> for men to get married. <i>Dì ku siya pangasaw-un,</i> I refuse to marry her. <form>pa-, papaN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c4]</itype> be married off to. <i>Ipaasáwa (ipapangasáwa) ba gud siya nákù ánang hubug?</i> Would I allow her to marry that drunk? <i>maN-l-</i> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bridegroom-to-be</tr>. <form>igpaN-r-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. used for marriage. <i>Ang kang Lúlit ang gugma igpapangasawa,</i> As far as Lolet was concerned love (i.e. sex) was s.t. reserved for marriage. <i>Igpapangasawa ning bábuy,</i> This pig is to be slaughtered at his wedding. <number>2</number> desirous of getting married. <i>Igpapangasawa na kaáyu ang ákung ginháwa,</i> I am very ready to get married. <form>pangasaw-unun, pangalasaw-un</form> <tr>wife-to-be</tr>.&dagger;

<p id=1251><form>asayti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lubricating oil</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b]</itype> apply lubricating oil. <i>Asaytíhig diyútay arun dílì muígut,</i> Apply a little lubricating oil so that it won&apos;t squeak. <form>&mdash; dibakalaw</form> cod liver oil. <form>&mdash; dikastur</form> castor oil. <form>&mdash; diulíbu</form> olive oil.

<p id=1252><form>asbistus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>asbestos</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> put asbestos sheets on s.t.

<p id=1253><form>asdang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> move forward to attack, face in battle. <i>Asdángun ta ang mga Hapun,</i> We will attack the Japanese. <pos>n</pos> advance, <tr>attack</tr>.

<p id=1254><form>asgad</form> <pos>a</pos> very <tr>salty</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> become salty. <i>Ug asin sa lawlaw iasgad, mudúgang sa lamì ug muasgad gihápun ang sabaw,</i> If you salt the soup with fish salt, the soup will become more delicious and get salty at the same time. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> salt pork.

<p id=1255><form>ási</form> <number>1</number> expression needling a person for pretending. <i>Ási, patulugtúlug. Bákun na dihà,</i> <pb n=60>Ha, pretending to sleep, are you? Get up! <i>Ási, padilìdílì, apan gustu uruy,</i> Ha, you pretend you don&apos;t want any, but you do. <number>2</number> chiding a person jokingly for s.t. one notices for the first time. <i>Ási, bag-u ta run ug sapátus,</i> My! I see we have new shoes today. <i>Ási, kúyug man lagi ka,</i> Ah, I see you are going out with him! <number>3</number> chiding a person for acting beyond his station. <i>Ási, pasugùsúgù pa man siya nákù!</i> Hey! Where do you get off ordering me around! <form>asiasi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> rush in to do s.t. without thought. <i>Dì ni maáyung asiasihung (asiasihang) trabahúa,</i> This isn&apos;t the sort of thing you should rush in to do without thinking. <number>2</number> presume to do s.t., taking a person for granted. <i>Nag-asiasi ka lang ug kúhà sa ákung mangga sa way pupananghid nákù,</i> You presumed to take a mango without bothering to ask my permission. <i>Dì nà nímu maasiasing tawhána,</i> He isn&apos;t the sort of man you can take for granted (rush into doing anything you want him to do on the spur of the moment). <number>3</number> <itype>[AP; b5]</itype> presume to do s.t. one cannot do. <i>Nag-asiasi (nagpaasiasi) ka mang mag-istrungkar íning makinilya. Na karun, iúlì,</i> You presumed to take the typewriter apart. Now let&apos;s see you put it back together. <form>manggiasiasihun, maasiasihun, asiasihun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>presumptuous</tr>, <tr>taking for granted</tr>.

<p id=1256><form>asidu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>acid</tr>. <i>Kining tambála makalínis sa asidu,</i> This medicine can dissolve the acid. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> apply acid to s.t. <i>Asiduhi ang labábu,</i> Apply acid to the wash bowl.

<p id=1257><form>asikásu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>pay attention to</tr>. <i>Wà na lang asikasúhi níya ang mga biaybíay,</i> He just paid no attention to the words of derision. <number>2</number> <tr>attend to</tr>. <i>Wà siya mag-asikásu sa íyang pamisti,</i> She didn&apos;t pay attention to her appearance. <i>Dì ku makaasikásu sa ákung papílis,</i> I cannot attend to my papers. <i>Asikasúha ang mga bisíta,</i> Tend to the visitors. <number>3</number> make an issue out of s.t. <i>Ug mag-asikásu ka ánang diyútayng tabì,</i> If you make an issue out of that small gossip.

<p id=1258><form>asiláda</form> <pos>n</pos> a girl student who works for her board and lodging in a dormitory run by nuns. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> be an <ix>asiláda</ix>. <i>Nakaiskuyla ku kay nag-asiláda man ku,</i> I was able to study because I had a job in a dormitory.

<p id=1259><form>asílu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>asylum</tr> for orphans, destitute people.

<p id=1260><form>asíman</form> <xr>= <sc>ULASÍMAN</sc>.</xr>

<!-- entry out of order -->

<p id=1261><form>asin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>salt</tr>. <form>walay &mdash;</form> without substance, <tr>unbelievable</tr>. <i>Walay asin ang íyang mga púlung,</i> His words cannot be believed. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> form salt. <i>Muasin ang túbig sa dágat ug itúsun,</i> Sea water forms salt if you boil it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> make salt. <i>Nag-asin siya,</i> He&apos;s making salt. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>preserve</tr> food with salt. <i>Asinun ta ning karni,</i> Let&apos;s preserve this meat with salt. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>season</tr> with salt. <i>Asini ang sabaw,</i> Put salt in the soup. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> food preserved in salt. <form>-l-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> salt factory. <form>pang-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> salt beds.

<p id=1262><form>asin-ásin</form> <pos>n</pos> rice or corn cooked to a mushy consistency. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> boil rice or corn grits soft, but not watery. <i>Asin-asína ang sampuraduhun,</i> Cook the rice and chocolate into a pudding.

<p id=1263><form>asinda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>plantation</tr>. <form>asindíru</form> <pos>n</pos> plantation owner. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56]</itype> become a plantation owner.&dagger;

<p id=1264><form>asinsiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Ascension Day</tr>.

<p id=1265><form>asinsu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> improve economically. <i>Dílì ka makaasinsu ánang panginabuhía,</i> You can not better yourself financially in that line of work. <pos>n</pos> improvement in economic situation. <i>Walay asinsu kining lungsúra,</i> This town hasn&apos;t shown any improvement.

<p id=1266><form>*as-ip</form> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> pretend to be what one is not. <i>Magpaas-ip bayà siyang dátù unyà pubri diay,</i> She is pretending to be well-off although she is poor.

<p id=1267><form>asir</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> come out successfully. <i>Sulayi lang ning tambála básig muasir,</i> Just try this medicine. It might be effective. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> <tr>assert</tr>. <i>Kinahanglan giyud nga mangasir ka sa ímung katungud sa pagkaasáwa,</i> You&apos;ve got to assert your rights as a wife. <form>pa-</form> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>prove</tr> s.t. by making it come out. <i>Ipaasir sab ang ímung pagkaduktur, dílì kay dukturduktur lang,</i> Prove to them that you are a genuine doctor, not just a quack.

<p id=1268><form>asíras</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sidewalk</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> put a sidewalk. <i>Maáyung asirásan ang kílid sa kalyi,</i> It&apos;d be good to put a sidewalk at the side of the street.

<p id=1269><form>asiráwu</form> <pos>a</pos> for a steel to be <tr>mild-tempered</tr>, soft. <i>Asiráwu nang kutsilyúha kay dalì rang mahábul,</i> That knife is mild-tempered because it easily gets dull. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> for steel to come out mild-tempered.&dagger;

<p id=1270><form>asíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>steel</tr>. <number>2</number> steel wire leader of fishlines. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> attach a steel wire leader.

<p id=1271><form>asistinsiya</form> <pos>n</pos> financial <tr>assistance</tr> given in social or civic programs.

<p id=1272><form>asist&icaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> give <tr>aid</tr> in doing work. <i>Muasistir sila sa pagtúkud sa balay,</i> They will help build the house. <number>2</number> <tr>assist</tr> at a mass.&dagger;

<p id=1273><form>asíti</form> <xr>= <sc>ASAYTI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1274><form>asitíra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>oil can</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into an oil can.

<p id=1275><form>asitun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>acetone</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> put or apply acetone. <i>Asitunan lag diyútay ug mahuswà ang kútiks,</i> Just apply a little acetone on it, and the nail polish will come off.

<pb n=61>

<p id=1276><form>aslay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; b6]</itype> <tr>splash</tr> up, for grains to <tr>bounce</tr> up. <i>Ayawg ibundak ang baldi kay muaslay ang túbig,</i> Don&apos;t bang the pail down because the water will splash out. <i>Ang humay nag-aslay tungud sa ímung linubkan,</i> The way you are pounding it is making the rice fly up.

<p id=1277><form>aslum</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sour</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>cross</tr>, sour in facial expression. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> be, become sour. <i>Way kaláki ang tubà nga nag-aslum lang,</i> The palm toddy is no good because it is sour. <i>Aslúmun nátù ang kahiláda,</i> Let&apos;s make the lemonade good and sour. <number>2</number> <itype>[BN; a12]</itype> be <tr>sour-faced</tr>. <i>Mangaslum dáyun íyang nawung ug badlúngun siya,</i> Her face gets a sour expression if she is told to stop doing s.t.

<p id=1278><form>asnat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>lift</tr> s.t. heavy. <i>Asnáta ang lamísa arun dì magasgas ang salug,</i> Lift the table when you carry it so you don&apos;t scratch the floor.

<p id=1279><form>asnu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ass</tr>.

<p id=1280><form>aspaltu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>asphalt</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> apply asphalt. <i>Aspaltúhun ang baskitbulan,</i> The basketball court will be asphalted. <form>aspaltádu</form> <pos>a</pos> paved with asphalt.

<p id=1281><form>asparagus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>asparagus</tr>. <form>&mdash; irmúsu</form> ornamental herb with leaves like asparagus.

<p id=1282><form>aspíra ultima</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>MANSANILYA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1283><form>aspiranti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>aspirant</tr> for a position. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become an aspirant. <i>Dì ku mag-aspiranti sa pagkaprisidinti kay hikuntrahan ta,</i> I don&apos;t want to be a candidate for president because I will make enemies.

<p id=1284><form>aspirasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>aspiration</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> <tr>aspire</tr>. <i>Ang pagkaduktur mauy íyang giaspirasyunan,</i> He aspired to be a doctor.

<p id=1285><form>aspirin, aspirína</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>aspirin</tr>.

<p id=1286><form>asta</form> <xr>= <sc>HASTA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1287><form>astri</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ash tray</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into an ash tray.

<p id=1288><form>astrunawta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>astronaut</tr>.

<p id=1289><form>astrunumíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>astronomy</tr>.

<p id=1290><form>astrunumu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>astronomer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; a12]</itype> be, become an astronomer.

<p id=1291><form>astrunut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>astronaut</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; a12]</itype> be, become an astronaut.

<p id=1292><form>asu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>smoke</tr>. <i>Way asu nga makumkum,</i> You can&apos;t hide smoke in your fist. (No secret can be kept for long.) <number>2</number> <tr>fumes</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> give off smoke, fumes. <i>Ngánung nag-asu man ang dapug?</i> Why is the hearth giving off smoke? <number>2</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> be in path of smoke. <i>Ayawg dáub dihà kay maasuhan mi diri,</i> Don&apos;t build a fire there because we&apos;re right in the path of the smoke. <number>3</number> <itype>[B1246]</itype> go up in smoke, be for naught. <i>Ang kwartang gigugul nímu naasu lang,</i> The money you invested was for naught. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>fumigate</tr>, apply smoke to plants to make them bear. <i>Paasuhi ang mangga arun mamúwak,</i> Smoke the mango tree so it will bloom. <form>asuasu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> give off smoke continuously. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; b(1)]</itype> come fast and thick, in rapid succession. <i>Miasuasu ang íyang kúmù,</i> The blows from his fists came fast and furiously. <form>alasúhan</form> <pos>a</pos> exposed to smoke. <pos>n</pos> <tr>chimney</tr>.

<p id=1293><form>ásud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2C; ac]</itype> for two or more people to pound cereal in mortar together and in synchronization. <i>Asúra (iásud) ang mga lubuk,</i> Do your pounding alternately&mdash;when one lifts, the other comes down. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> come one after another in rapid succession, like several people pounding rice on one pestle. <i>Nag-ásud ang pangutána sa mga piryudista,</i> The newspapermen&apos;s questions came in rapid succession. <i>Giasúran ug haluk ang bátà sa mga dalága,</i> The girls smothered the baby with kisses. <form>asud-asud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> <xr>= <sc>ÁSUD</sc>, <ix>2.</ix></xr>

<p id=1294><form>asúgi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>head of a match</tr>.

<p id=1295><form>asúkal</form> <xr>= <sc>ASÚKAR</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1296><form>asúkar</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>refined sugar</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13B23]</itype> make into, become sugar. <i>Ang sintral nag-asúkar sa tubu,</i> The mill is making refined sugar. <i>Ug muasúkar na ang binúkal nga dugà,</i> When the boiled juice forms sugar. <number>2</number> <itype>[c]</itype> put sugar into s.t. <i>Giasukaran ba nímu ang kapi?</i> Have you put sugar in the coffee? <form>asukaríra</form> <pos>n</pos> sugar container for table use.

<p id=1297><form>asul</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>blue</tr>. <form>&mdash; marína, marínu</form> <tr>navy blue</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN; a1]</itype> be blue. <i>Nag-asul ang lawud,</i> The deep part of the sea looks blue.

<p id=1298><form>asunting</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. erect branching shrub, wild but occasionally planted as ornamental. The leaves are used in treating skin fungi: <bio>Cassia alata</bio>.

<p id=1299><form>asuntu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>court case</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>matter</tr>, <tr>concern</tr> to be reckoned with. <i>Asuntu sa kasingkásing,</i> A matter of the heart. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2; a12]</itype> have a court case. <i>Asuntúhun pa ba nátù kini nga gamay ra man?</i> Shall we make a court case out of this small matter?

<p id=1300><form>asupli</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sulphur</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> put sulphur on s.t. <i>Asuplíhan kunu nang núka,</i> Put sulphur on the sores.

<p id=1301><form>asupri</form> <xr>= <sc>ASUPLI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1302><form>asus</form> <xr>= <sc>HISUS</sc>, <ix>2.</ix></xr>

<p id=1303><form>asusasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>association</tr>, <tr>organization</tr>.

<p id=1304><form>asusíluy</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. black and white songbird, the <tr>magpie robin</tr>: <bio>Copsychus saularis</bio>.

<p id=1305><form>asusína</form> <xr>= <sc>ASUSÍNAS</sc>, <ix>1.</ix></xr>

<p id=1306><form>asusínas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. bulbous ornamental plant with spikes of fragrant white flowers, borne in pairs: <bio>Polianthes tuberosa</bio>. <number>2</number> k.o. dried banana blossoms used as a spice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> spice with banana blossoms.

<pb n=62>

<p id=1307><form>asusisyun</form> <xr>= <sc>ASUSASIYUN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1308><form>asusyit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C12; b(1)]</itype> <tr>associate</tr> with people. <i>Maáyu nà siyang datúa kay muasusyit (makig-asusyit) sa mga pubri,</i> That rich man is a fine man because he associates with the poor. <pos>n</pos> <tr>associate</tr>. <form>&mdash; iditur</form> <tr>associate editor</tr>.

<p id=1309><form>asutíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>open porch</tr>. <i>Adtu mi manglingkud sa asutíya ug walay ulan,</i> We sit on the porch when it doesn&apos;t rain. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> construct, attach an open porch.

<p id=1310><form>asúus</form> <xr>= <sc>ALASÚUS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1311><form>ásuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>tell</tr>, <tr>relate</tr>. <i>Lisud asúyun (iásuy) ang ákung kaági,</i> It is hard to relate my experiences. <i>Památì, asúyan ta kag isturya,</i> Listen, I&apos;ll tell you a story. <i>Ang naásuy nga tigúlang,</i> The old man I mentioned just now. <pos>n</pos> <tr>story</tr>, <tr>narration</tr>. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>conversation</tr>. <i>Ang ílang hingásuy milungtad sa gabíi,</i> Their conversation lasted into the night. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> engage in story-telling. <i>Naghingásuy siya sa kaági níya sa gíra,</i> He was telling stories about his experiences in the war. <form>-l-un</form> <pos>a</pos> be a long story.

<p id=1312><form>aswang</form> <xr>= <sc>UNGLÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1313><form>aswas</form> (from <ix>asáwa</ix>) <tr>wife</tr> (slang).

<p id=1314><form>aswat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>lift</tr> s.t. heavy. <i>Aswáta ang malíta,</i> Pick up the suitcase. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> lift part of one&apos;s body. <i>Aswáta ímung tiil bi,</i> Please lift your foot.

<p id=1315><form>Asya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Asia</tr>.

<p id=1316><form>asyinda</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>plantation</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>department of finance</tr> in government. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a plantation. <i>Asyindáhun ug tubu ang yútà,</i> Turn the land into a sugar plantation.

<p id=1317><form>asyíti</form> <xr>= <sc>ASAYTI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1318><form>asyus</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>finicky</tr>, <tr>fussy</tr>. <i>Asyus kaáyu siya. Dì mukáun ug munggus, dì muhigdag salug, magsingárig ílis,</i> He&apos;s terribly finicky: he doesn&apos;t eat beans, won&apos;t sleep on the floor, and keeps changing clothes. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> be overly finicky. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> dress up. <i>Nangasyus man ta run, náa bay mamisíta?</i> We are all dressed up today, aren&apos;t we? Is s.o. coming over?

<p id=1319><form>asyúsa</form> <xr>= <sc>ASYÚSU</sc>, (female).</xr>

<p id=1320><form>asyúsu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>ASYUS</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> choosy about whom one is friendly with. <i>Asyúsu kaáyu. Dì na mutagad námù,</i> He&apos;s very hoity-toity. He doesn&apos;t notice us any more. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become finicky or choosy.

<p id=1321><form>asyútis</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small tree, the seeds of which produce a reddish-brown dye: <bio>Bixa orellana</bio>.

<p id=1322><form>át</form> <xr>= <sc>ALAT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1323><form>átà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ink</tr> of squids and similar creatures. <form>wà nay &mdash;</form> be out of semen (lit. ink). <i>Magminyù pa giyud ang tigúwang bisag wà nay átà,</i> The old man is going to marry again, even though his semen is all dried up. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> be black as ink. <i>Nag-átà ang kagabhíun,</i> The night was pitch-dark. <form>ka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> get ink from the squid all over oneself. <i>Nagkaátà ang ímung dintru,</i> You got ink from the squid all over your shirt.

<p id=1324><form>átab<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> for the mouth to move vigorously in eating or talking. <i>Nag-átab ang ímung bàbà ug úsap sa mani,</i> Your mouth is moving vigorously chewing peanuts. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> engage in idle talk. <i>Nagpaátab siya ug tabì nga ikaw pinaangkan,</i> He spread the word around that you are an illegitimate child. <i>Ug paatában ka gánì sa íyang pagkadátù,</i> If he gives you big talk about his being rich. <form>pasi-, pasi-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>boast</tr>. <i>Nagpasiátab siyang daghang trátu,</i> He is boasting that he has lots of girl friends.

<p id=1325><form>átab<sub>2</sub></form> (from <ix>bátà</ix>) <pos>n</pos> girl friend (slang). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> get a girl friend. <i>Makaátab kahà ning hitsúra ku?</i> Do you think s.o. with my face can get a girl friend?

<p id=1326><form>atábay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>open well</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3S; b6]</itype> dig a well.

<p id=1327><form>átad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> be spread in profuse disarray. <i>Wà makítà ang yútà nga giatáran sa mga dáhun,</i> You couldn&apos;t see the ground for all the leaves scattered over it.

<p id=1328><form>atádu</form> <xr>= <sc>ATÁRU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1329><form>atáhu</form> <xr>= <sc>MUHUN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1330><form>átak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB3(1); a]</itype> for s.t. which is of some weight and attached to s.t. to fall off. <i>Ug muátak (mupaátak) kug búnga, bantayig ása tugdun,</i> If I knock one down, watch where it lands. <i>Naátak sa kaínit ang mga tuytuy,</i> The buds fell off the tree because of the heat. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; b8]</itype> for the eyes to bulge out, a symptom of a fatal disease caused by sorcery. <i>Namatay siya. Naatákan man sa mata,</i> He died because he got the bulging eye disease.

<p id=1331><form>atakar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> for a sickness to attack one. <number>2</number> dare to approach s.o. <i>Unyà na atakara ug báli kun maáyug buut,</i> Approach him for a cash advance later when he&apos;s in a good mood.

<p id=1332><form>atáki</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>attack</tr>, assault. <i>Atakíhun nátù ang Hapun,</i> We will attack the Japanese. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> attack s.o. personally. <i>Ug manuburnu ka atakíhun ka sa mga piryudista,</i> If you give bribes, the newspapers will attack you. <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> be attacked by a sickness. <i>Giatáki sa kasingkásing si Pápa,</i> Dad had a heart attack. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> attack, assault on s.t. <number>2</number> attack of a disease. <form>&mdash; silibr&acaron;r</form> <pos>n</pos> cerebral thrombosis.

<p id=1333><form>atáman</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a3]</itype> manage to keep up with a large quantity. <i>Dì na maatáman ang daghang asayinmint,</i> I can&apos;t keep up with all <pb n=63>the assignments.

<p id=1334><form>atang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>watch</tr>, but not carefully, keep an eye on. <i>Atngi (atangi) ang linung-ag arun dílì muáwas,</i> Keep an eye on the rice so it won&apos;t boil over. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> watch for s.t. or s.o. to pass. <i>Ímu tang atngan ang trák arun makasakay ta,</i> You should watch for the bus so that we can get on. <form>(&larr;)<sub>1</sub></form> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>ambush</tr>. <i>Ang mga girilya nag-átang sa mga Hapun,</i> The guerillas are ambushing the Japanese. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2N]</itype> meet one&apos;s girl friend at her place of work or study to accompany her. <i>Túa siya nangátang sa íyang trátu,</i> There he is, waiting for his girl friend to bring her home. <pos>n</pos> <tr>ambush</tr>.

<p id=1335><form>átang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shelf</tr> set next to a stove at the same height with it to hold the pots and pans. <i>Haúna ang tinúla ug ibutang sa átang,</i> Take the fish stew off the stove and put it on the sideboard. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12b(1)]</itype> put a <tr>sideboard</tr> next to a stove.

<p id=1336><form>atáru</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make s.t. into <tr>portions</tr> for sale. <i>Atarúha sa tagdus písus ang bábuy,</i> Cut the pork into pieces and put them together into portions worth two pesos each. <pos>n</pos> a <tr>portion</tr> for sale. <i>Ang tabákù tagdiyis ang atáru,</i> The tobacco leaves are ten cents a bundle.

<p id=1337><form>átas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be <tr>sickly</tr>, <tr>retarded</tr> in growth after being made to do s.t. before reaching the proper age. <i>Maátas ang baktin kun sayung lutásun,</i> The piglet will be <tr>stunted</tr> if you wean it prematurely. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>wear out</tr> a razor blade. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> worn out dull. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> get worn out. <i>Muatas ang labáha,</i> The razor will get dull.

<p id=1338><form>at-at<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make an <tr>opening</tr> by pushing two sides apart. <i>Midakù ang lungag sa kural kay íya mang giat-at ang alambri,</i> There is a big hole in the fence because he pushed the wire strands apart. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> bring s.t. to public knowledge by telling the whole story. <i>At-átun (iat-at) ku nang tanang líhuk nímu ngadtu ni Tátay,</i> I&apos;ll tell Father everything you did. <number>3</number> <itype>[AB12; a]</itype> find out in complete detail, be found out. <i>Ang ditiktib miat-at sa hinungdan sa súnug,</i> The detective investigated in detail the cause of the fire. <i>Nagkaat-at na ang mistiryu sa íyang pagkaw&amacrgra;,</i> The mystery of her disappearance is gradually coming to light.

<p id=1339><form>at-at<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>AK-AK</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1340><form>atatalu</form> <xr>= <sc>HANTATALU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1341><form>atay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>liver</tr>. <number>2</number> liver as the seat of emotions. <form>makapakitbì, makapakúlù sa &mdash;</form> makes the blood curdle. <form>makapadakù sa &mdash;</form> make s.t. go to one&apos;s head. <number>3</number> <formx>bàbà sa &mdash;</formx> <pos>n</pos> pit of the stomach. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a1]</itype> hit in the liver. <i>Giatay siya pagdunggab,</i> He was stabbed in the liver.

<p id=1342><form>atay-átay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> pit of the stomach. <number>2</number> the hollow or fleshy part of the palm and its analogue in the foot. <i>Natunuk siya sa atay-átay sa íyang tiil,</i> He got a thorn in the arch of his sole. <number>3</number> k.o. ornamental shrub with mottled red or green elliptic leaves and smooth margins: <bio>Graptophyllum pictum</bio>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> be hit on the solar plexus or on the fleshy part of the palm or sole of the foot.&dagger;

<p id=1343><form>átay</form> <pos>n</pos> illness of chicken. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> <number>1</number> be affected with <tr>chicken cholera</tr>. <i>Walà ba atáya ang inyung manuk?</i> Are not your chickens affected with chicken cholera? <i>Atáyun ka untà,</i> Why don&apos;t you drop dead? <number>2</number> <itype>[a4]</itype> be, act in a way that arouses annoyance and disapproval. <i>Giátay nang bayhána. Miápas na pud,</i> That damn woman. She followed me again. <number>2a</number> <formx>gi-</formx> <tr>Damn</tr>! <i>Giátay, mabdus na sad ku!</i> Damn, I&apos;m pregnant again! <form>-l-un, -unun</form> <pos>a</pos> susceptible to chicken cholera.

<p id=1344><form>atbang</form> (from <ix>atubang</ix>) across, <tr>opposite</tr>. <i>Ang íla atbang sa ámù,</i> Their place is across from ours. <form>&mdash; sa hángin</form> where one can get the full benefit of the breeze. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; ac]</itype> <number>1</number> be in the place across. <i>Mag-atbang ang ílang balay,</i> Their houses are across from each other. <i>Atbángun ta silag lingkud,</i> Let&apos;s have them sit opposite each other. <number>2</number> be opponents. <i>Atbángan ta ka bísag unsay partídu mu,</i> I&apos;ll be your opponent whatever your party is. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> go to a place opposite s.o. so he can see you. <i>Gipaatbángan ni Kurding ang gwápung laláki,</i> Cording took a seat opposite the handsome young man. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>opponent</tr>, <tr>rival</tr>. <i>Kinsay ímung kaatbang sa tínis, sa pangulitáwu níya?</i> Who is your opponent in tennis, rival in courting her?

<p id=1345><form>atbu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6P]</itype> <number>1</number> for emotions to surge up and burst forth. <i>Miatbu ang ákung kalípay,</i> My heart leaped with happiness. <i>Bantay. Hiatbuhan ka unyà sa ákung kasukù,</i> Watch out. I&apos;ll blow up in anger at you. <number>2</number> for very fine particles to fly up and be scattered in the air. <i>Nag-atbu ang duldul sa unlan,</i> The kapok flew out of the pillow. <i>Giatbúhan (gipaatbúhan) lang ku níya sa asu. Wà giyud mutubag,</i> He just blew smoke in my face. He didn&apos;t reply at all.

<p id=1346><form>atbug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> fly up in thick quantities. <i>Miatbug ang lángaw pag-itsa nákù sa basúra,</i> The flies rose in a swarm when I threw out the garbage. <number>2</number> for emotions to burst forth.

<p id=1347><form>athag</form> <xr>= <sc>KULANGKULANG</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>KÚLANG</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=64>

<p id=1348><form>atibás</form> <xr>= <sc>TIBALAS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1349><form>átik</form> (from <ix>bulátik</ix>) <pos>a</pos> show-off, <tr>boastful</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b6]</itype> get s.t. from s.o. by flattery or other verbal chicanery. <i>Kahibáwu siyang muátik (mupaátik) ni Lúla,</i> He&apos;s good at getting things out of Grandma. <i>Ayawg hátag kay giatíkan ka lang,</i> Don&apos;t give him any. He&apos;s just putting you on to get s.t. from you. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. said to get s.t. from s.o. <number>2</number> pocket money (slang). <form>atik-átik</form> <xr>= <sc>ÁTIK</sc>, <ix>v</ix>.</xr> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>ÁTIK</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> show off. <i>Ipaátik níya ang bag-u níyang kutsi,</i> He will show off his new car.

<p id=1350><form>atiman</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> give s.t. the attention that it requires. <i>Dì siya makaatiman sa mga bátà,</i> She cannot look after the children. <i>Atimana ang ímung pagtuun,</i> Tend to your studies. <number>2</number> keep up doing s.t. <i>Dì ku maatiman ning labhanan, daghan kaáyu,</i> I can&apos;t keep up with all this laundry.

<p id=1351><form>atimúya</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large fruit similar to the <ix>guayabana,</ix> but with yellowish flesh and a flat taste: <bio>Anona sp</bio>.

<p id=1352><form>atin</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> attend classes or a meeting. <i>Dì ku muatin sa klási,</i> I won&apos;t attend classes.

<p id=1353><form>atindan, atindant</form> <pos>n</pos> hospital <tr>attendant</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; b(1)]</itype> be a hospital attendant.

<p id=1354><form>atindída</form> <xr>= <sc>ATINDÍDU</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=1355><form>atindídu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>attentive</tr>, courteous. <i>Atindídu siya sa íyang pamisti,</i> He dresses carefully. <i>Atindídu siya sa mga bisíta,</i> She attends to the visitors courteously. <number>2</number> paying attention to things that are not one&apos;s business. <i>Atindídu kaáyu nà siya sa sayup sa uban,</i> He is very observant of other peoples&apos; mistakes.

<p id=1356><form>atindir</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>attend</tr> classes or a meeting. <i>Kumpirinsyang ákung giatindiran (giatindihan),</i> The conference I attended. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> give one&apos;s attention to s.t. <i>Dúna kuy asuntu nga atindihan (atindihun),</i> I have a court case to attend to. <i>Atindihi (atindiha) ang mga bisíta,</i> Attend to the visitors.

<p id=1357><form>atinsiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>attention</tr>, special care. <i>Nagkinahanglan ug atinsiyun ang masakitun,</i> The patient needs special attention. <number>2</number> attention! <i>Atinsiyun mga sinyúris,</i> Attention, Ladies and Gentlemen!

<p id=1358><form>átip</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>join pieces</tr> by sewing, welding, or pasting. <i>Maátip pa kahà nang maáyu mang pagkagidlay?</i> Do you think it can still be put back together in one piece? It is completely torn up. <number>2</number> put a crazy person in a kapok tree stock to cure him. <i>Atípa ang búang sa duldul,</i> Put the crazy man in the stocks.

<p id=1359><form>atipú, atipúlu</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to several large wild trees of the breadfruit family which have small to medium fruits, the seeds of which are eaten: <bio>Artocarpus spp</bio>.

<p id=1360><form>átis</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sugar apple</tr>, a widely planted sweet fruit with numerous black seeds: <bio>Anona squamosa</bio>. <number>2</number> <tr>bruise</tr>, <tr>cussing out</tr>, or anything unpleasant that can be inflicted on one (slang). <i>Unsa bay sígig tagawtaw dihà. Mangáyù ka bag átis?</i> What are you grumbling about. You want me to box you? <i>Si Nanit hinúun walà kaáyu makatilaw ug átis,</i> Nanette, however, escaped the cussing-out.

<p id=1361><form>atlíta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>athlete</tr>.

<p id=1362><form>atmuspíra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>atmosphere</tr> surrounding the earth.

<p id=1363><form>atnga, atngal</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>teat</tr>, <tr>nipple</tr>. <i>Gisakitan siya sa atngal human magpasúsu,</i> Her nipples hurt after she suckled the baby. <number>2</number> the lower right-angled corner of a sack or one of the four corners of a pillow. <i>Ug mag-aswat mug sáku usa ninyu maggunit sa atngal,</i> If you lift a sack, one of you hold the lower corner.

<p id=1364><form>atngaw</form> <xr>= <sc>ATNGAL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1365><form>atráka</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>get close</tr> to s.t. not easy to approach. <i>Mu rag dílì muatráka sa kaláyu ang mga bumbíru,</i> It looks as though the firemen will not get close to the fire. <i>Dì ku kaatráka níya kay dátù,</i> I feel ashamed to <tr>approach</tr> her because she is rich. <number>2</number> attack a job with dispatch. <i>Ug dílì ka muatráka sa trabáhu, wà kay umintu,</i> If you don&apos;t do your work with dispatch, you won&apos;t make progress. <i>Atrakáha lang siya pagpaningil,</i> Get in there and press her to pay you. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> hold one&apos;s own in a conversation. <i>Burung. Dì kaatrákag kukabildu,</i> She lacks social grace. She can&apos;t keep a conversation going.

<p id=1366><form>atraksiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>attraction</tr>, s.t. that appeals. <i>Ang Luníta usa sa mga atraksiyun sa Manílà,</i> The Luneta park is one of the attractions in Manila. <i>Bisag unsáug arti, wà giyud kay atraksiyun,</i> No matter how much you put on, you still don&apos;t have sex-appeal.

<p id=1367><form>atraktíbu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>attractive</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become attractive.

<p id=1368><form>atras</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>rear wheel</tr>. <i>Nahyúsan mi sa atras,</i> We had a flat tire in the rear. <number>2</number> <tr>rear</tr> part of vehicles. <i>Adtu ikarga sa atras,</i> Load it in the back. <number>3</number> <tr>reverse gear</tr>. <i>Ang kambiyu dílì musulud sa atras,</i> The gear won&apos;t shift into reverse. <form>&mdash; abanti</form> <pos>a</pos> sewing machine capable of forward and backward movement. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>back up</tr> a vehicle. <i>Iatras ang trák,</i> Back the truck up. <number>2</number> <tr>back out</tr> of an agreement. <i>Dì ku muatras sa átung sábut,</i> I will not back out of our agreement. <number>3</number> <tr>give way</tr>, back off from. <i>Dì ta ka atrásan,</i> I won&apos;t <pb n=65>give ground to you.&dagger;

<p id=1369><form>atrasádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>late</tr>, not on time. <i>Alas nuybi na, atrasádu ka kaáyu,</i> It&apos;s nine o&apos;clock now. You&apos;re very late. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B123(1)6; a2b3]</itype> be, late. <i>Atrasadúhun nátù ang átung paglarga,</i> Let&apos;s start late.

<p id=1370><form>atrasar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; a2b3]</itype> <tr>delay</tr> s.t. <i>Ayawg atrasara ang ákung paniudtu,</i> Don&apos;t delay my lunch. <i>Unsa kahay naatrasahan ni Pípi?</i> What could have delayed Pepe?

<p id=1371><form>atrasáwu</form> <xr>= <sc>ATRASÁDU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1372><form>atrásu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; a12P]</itype> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>ATRASAR</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> cause s.t. to become delayed or get behindhand in fulfilling an obligation. <i>Ug maatrásu ta ug duha ka adlaw, dakù ang multa,</i> There is a big fine if you are two days delinquent. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> have done a wrong to s.o. which requires retribution. <i>Nakaatrásu ka nákù, panimaslan ta ka,</i> You have done me a wrong. I&apos;ll get revenge. <number>3b</number> have a debt which one has failed to pay. <pos>n</pos> <number>1a</number> <tr>delay</tr>. <i>Ang atrásu nakapaalkansi námug dakù,</i> The delay caused us great loss. <number>1b</number> fine imposed for a delay. <number>2</number> wrong done to s.o. <i>Unsay atrásu nákù nímu?</i> What wrong have I done you?

<p id=1373><form>atribídu</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ATRIBIR</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1374><form>atribir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> do s.t. one has no business doing. <i>Kinsay nag-atribir ug arangka niíni?</i> Who went and took this apart? <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> touch s.t. one has no business touching, mix into things not of one&apos;s business. <i>Nangatribir ka pud sa ákung butang, ha?</i> So you dared to touch my things, did you? <form>atribídu</form> <pos>a</pos> doing things one has no business doing. <i>Atribídu ka bisag dílì kamau,</i> You take it on yourself even if you don&apos;t know how. <i>Atribídu ka sa mga áway bisag wà kay lábut,</i> You mix into quarrels that are none of your business. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be <ix>atribídu.</ix>

<p id=1375><form>atril<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>music stand</tr>, <tr>lectern</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> use, use for a music stand, lectern. <i>Muatril ka pa nga namimurya na man nímu ang písa?</i> Will you use a music stand even if you&apos;ve memorized the piece?

<p id=1376><form>atril<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; a12]</itype> for dust, dirt to be thick. <i>Miatril ang abug paglabay sa trák,</i> Dust filled the air when the bus passed. <i>Nag-atril ang buling sa ímung tangkúgù,</i> You have thick dirt on your nape.

<p id=1377><form>atripisyu, atripisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. one is occupied with temporarily or one&apos;s work. <i>Pagpanágat mauy íyang atripisyu,</i> Fishing is his occupation.

<p id=1378><form>atsa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>axe</tr>, <tr>hatchet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23; a12]</itype> <tr>hit</tr>, <tr>chop</tr> s.t. with an ax. <i>Aku lay muatsa ánang irúa ug mabúang nà,</i> I will hit that dog with an axe if it has distemper. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into an axe.&dagger;

<p id=1379><form>atsaatsa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> be hard pressed doing s.t. because of its being more than one can handle. <i>Nagkaatsaatsa kug pangítag ikabáyad sa ákung mga útang,</i> I am going crazy trying to look for money to pay my debts.

<p id=1380><form>atsal</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pickles</tr> made of shredded green papaya and various other vegetables cut in slivers. <number>2</number> name given to various varieties of large <tr>peppers</tr>, e.g., sweet pepper, long hot pepper: <bio>Capsicum annuum</bio>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make papaya pickles. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> cook sweet pepper, put sweet peppers into s.t.

<p id=1381><form>atsar</form> <xr>= <sc>ATSAL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1382><form>atsára</form> <xr>= <sc>ATSAL</sc>, <ix>1.</ix></xr>

<p id=1383><form>atsay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>kept woman</tr>, <tr>paramour</tr> (coarse). <number>2</number> <tr>maid of all work</tr>, <tr>servant</tr> (coarse). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12B; a2]</itype> become a mistress, manage to get a mistress. <i>Nakaatsay na kug mistísa, Dung,</i> Let me tell you, son, I have already had a mistress of Spanish blood. <i>Giatsayan ka lang nákù. Tinúud kung asáwa, arun ka masáyud,</i> You think I&apos;m your mistress? Well, in case you didn&apos;t know, I&apos;m your wife. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; a2]</itype> be paid female help. <i>Nakaatsay na ku sa tagasinyur istap,</i> I&apos;ve already tasted what it&apos;s like to be a helper to the Senior Staff.

<p id=1384><form>*atsay<sub>2</sub></form> <form>gi-</form> euphemism for <ix>giátay,</ix> an expression of displeasure at s.o.&apos;s behavior. <i>Giatsay ka ba nga natúlug ka man dihà?</i> What are you doing sleeping there? Are you crazy?

<p id=1385><form>atsi<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> name of letter H.

<p id=1386><form>atsi<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sneeze</tr>, act of <tr>sneezing</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2N; b6]</itype> <tr>sneeze</tr>. <i>Ug muatsi (mangatsi) ka, panap-ung sa ímung bàbà,</i> If you sneeze, cover your mouth.

<p id=1387><form>atsuytis</form> <xr>= <sc>ASYÚTIS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1388><form>atu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> keep up doing s.t. to things as they come up. <i>Makaatu ka ba sa mga balayranan sa iskuyláhan?</i> Can you keep up with the school fees? <i>Atuhun nímug laba ang mga bulingun,</i> You should wash the soiled clothes as soon as they get dirty.

<p id=1389><form>átu</form> <xr>= <sc>ADTU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1390><form>átù</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>KITA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1391><form>atúa</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>túa</bx> <tr>is there</tr>, <tr>far away</tr>. <i>Atúa (túa) pa ba siya puyù sa Manílà?</i> Does he still live (there) in Manila? <i>Tua na. Bag-u pa siyang milakaw,</i> He&apos;s gone (lit. over there). He just left.

<p id=1392><form>átub<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> stone prison cell. <number>2</number> pile of stones put s.w. to attract fish and crabs and get them where they can be readily found. <number>3</number> pit with a flimsy top for trapping animals. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> construct an <ix>átub.</ix> <number>2</number> <itype>[A2N; a1]</itype> trap in a pitfall. <i>Nakaátub (nakapangátub) mig bábuy ihálas,</i> We trapped a wild pig in <pb n=66>a pitfall.

<p id=1393><form>átub<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>soak</tr> maguey leaves in the sea to soften them. <i>Atúban (atúbun) ang magay unyà labhan,</i> Maguey leaves are soaked and the flesh is washed off.

<p id=1394><form>átub<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> fall in great quantities. <i>Miátub ang bumba sa syudad,</i> Bombs rained on the city. <i>Nag-átub ang ulan,</i> The rain was pouring down. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> <number>1</number> expose oneself to a downpour. <number>2</number> expose oneself to danger. <i>Hiilugan ka sa búlag magpaátub ka,</i> They&apos;ll get the ball away from you if you just stand there.

<p id=1395><form>atubang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>face</tr> towards. <i>Sígi ka lang nag-atubang sa ispíhu,</i> You&apos;re always looking at yourself in (lit. facing) the mirror. <i>Iatubang ang ispíhu ngari,</i> Face the mirror this way. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> set oneself to doing s.t. as it needs to be done. <i>Daghan akung buluhatung atubangun,</i> I have lots of work to do. <i>Atubangun kug báyad ang instulmin,</i> I&apos;ll pay the installments as they come up. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3C; c3]</itype> be face to face with s.o. <i>Nag-atúbang silag lingkud,</i> They were sitting face to face. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> <tr>receive</tr>, <tr>entertain</tr> visitors. <i>Kinahanglan atubángun ang mamisíta,</i> If s.o. visits you, you have to receive him. <number>3</number> <itype>[AN2; a12]</itype> go see s.o. to talk things over. <i>Ikaw bay muatúbang (mangatúbang) sa hípi?</i> Will you go to see the chief to talk things over? <i>Kinsay ákung atubángun (pangatubángun)?</i> Who shall I go to see to talk it over with? <number>3a</number> <tr>speak</tr> for a girl&apos;s hand. <i>Sa pamaláyi ang dakung táwu mauy mangatúbang,</i> In arranging a marriage, the intermediary will speak to her parents. <form>pa-</form> <tr>towards</tr>, in a direction to. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> go in a direction to (lit. make oneself face). <i>Nagdagan si Pidru nagpaatubang sa baybay,</i> Peter was running toward the shore. <i>Paatubanga ang barútu sa píliw,</i> Head the boat for the shallows. <form>-ay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> meet face to face in a confrontation. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>genitalia</tr> usually female (euphemism). <form>-an(&larr;)</form> <number>1</number> place in front of, in the face of. <i>Wà giyud siya mag-usab atubángan sa mapait nga kalisud,</i> He hasn&apos;t changed in the face of bitter difficulties. <i>Ang irù túa gihukut sa atubángan,</i> The dog is tied in the front yard. <i>Gibundak níya ang libru sa ákung atubángan,</i> He banged the book down in my presence. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>ATUBANGAN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1396><form>átud</form> particle showing displeasure (euphemism for <ix>giátay</ix>). <i>Átud, nawà man ta, Darn!</i> We are lost. <form>gi-</form> <tr>darn</tr>! <i>Giátud ka bang nangindiyan ka man,</i> Darn you! You didn&apos;t show up for our date.

<p id=1397><form>atug</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>clitoris</tr>. <form>taas ug &mdash;</form> having a shrill voice (humorous).

<p id=1398><form>atug-atug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; a]</itype> presume to take responsibility or present oneself and one&apos;s services unasked. <i>Nakaatug-atug (nakapaatug-atug) si Píli pagtábang sa táwu kay nalúuy siya,</i> Fely forced her help on the man unasked because she pitied him.

<p id=1399><form>atul</form> <tr>coincide</tr> in time. <i>Ang íyang adlaw atul sa bag-ung túig,</i> His birthday coincides with New Year&apos;s. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2C; c1]</itype> do s.t. at the same time as s.t. else happens. <i>Dì ka muatul ug labang ug dúnay awtung muági,</i> Do not cross at the same time that there&apos;s a car coming. <i>Nag-átul mig pamisíta sa ka Lusing,</i> We happened to visit Lucing at the same time. <i>Atulun (iatul) nílag pangáun ang pamisíta,</i> They make their visits coincide with mealtime. <number>2</number> <itype>[b2]</itype> for s.t. to happen to one coincidentally with s.t. else. <i>Hiatlan mig ulan sa Magalyánis,</i> We were caught in the rain downtown. <i>Naatlan níya si Bin nga bugnaw ang úlu,</i> This time, she chanced to come on Ben while he was cool-headed.

<p id=1400><form>atuli</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>earwax</tr>. <number>2</number> materials like earwax. <number>a</number> yellow paste. <number>b</number> tobacco tars. <number>c</number> yellow, hardened grease sticking in corners of machinery. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac1]</itype> make, apply paste to. <i>Nagkayabkáyab nang mga drúwing sa bungbung. Iatuli (atuliha) ra,</i> The drawings are flapping up and down on the wall. Paste them down. <form>(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>ATULI</sc>, <ix>2a.</ix></xr> <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>PANGHIN-</sc>.</xr> <form>hiN-</form> <pos>n</pos> instrument for getting earwax out. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> remove earwax. <i>Akuy muhingatuli sa bátà,</i> I will remove the child&apos;s earwax. <form>panghiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> remove one&apos;s earwax. <i>Dílì maáyung manghingatuli sa kadaghánan,</i> It&apos;s not good to remove one&apos;s earwax in public.

<p id=1401><form>átum<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>atom</tr>.

<p id=1402><form>*átum<sub>2</sub></form> <form>atum-atum</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>ATUG-ATUG</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> attach undue importance to s.t., pay s.t. heed which is not worth it. <i>Ang muatum-atum sa sulti sa gamayng bátà buang,</i> Whoever gives importance to everything a child says is a fool. <i>Sigíhan man kug súngug, nakaatum-atum ku,</i> They teased me mercilessly, so I rose to the bait. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>PANGARASTI</sc>.</xr> <xr>see <sc>*ARASTI</sc>.</xr> <form>atum-atumun</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to give undue importance to s.t. <form>-ay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab5]</itype> give s.t. careful and diligent attention. <i>Kinahanglan atumáyun ang mga ginikánan sa ílang pagkatigúlang,</i> One should give good care to his parents in their old age. <i>Láin man ang ímung giatumáyan (giatúmay), dílì ang gisúgù nímu,</i> Instead of sticking to your chores, your attention was elsewhere.

<p id=1403><form>atumátik</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. <tr>automatic</tr>. <i>Atumátik ning ákung kamira,</i> My camera is automatic. <number>2</number> <pb n=67>automatic pistol. <number>3</number> <tr>snap fastener</tr> for clothing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> attach, close a snap fastener. <i>Atumatíki ang likud,</i> Put a snap fastener on the back (or snap the back).

<p id=1404><form>*atúmik</form> <form>&mdash; bam</form> <tr>atom bomb</tr>. <form>&mdash; ids</form> <tr>atomic age</tr>.

<p id=1405><form>atumika</form> <pos><corr sic=n>a</corr></pos> <tr>atomic</tr>, <tr>nuclear</tr>. <i>Bumba atumika,</i> Atomic bomb.

<p id=1406><form>atung</form> <xr>= <sc>ATANG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1407><form>atup</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>roof</tr>. <number>2</number> paper <tr>covering</tr> for a kite. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> put a roof. <i>Aptan (atpan) tag sín ímung balay,</i> We&apos;ll put a galvanized iron roof on your house. <number>2</number> <tr>cover</tr> a kite.

<!-- TODO: _1 not needed here -->

<p id=1408><form>atup-atup<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. roundish sea crab around nine square inches<corr> in size</corr> with scalloped edges.

<p id=1409><form>aturga, aturg&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b5]</itype> take on responsibility, assume work without being asked to. <i>Giaturg&acaron;r (giaturgaran, giaturgahan) nákù ang pagdáwat sa urdir,</i> I took on the responsibility of receiving the order.

<p id=1410><form>aturni</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> public <tr>attorney</tr>, lawyer. <number>2</number> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>turni</bx> title of address for lawyers. <i>Maáyung buntag, turni,</i> Good morning, Attorney. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B15]</itype> be, become an attorney.

<p id=1411><form>atutung</form> <pos>n</pos> blackening of the teeth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> get blackened teeth. <i>Ug dì ta manipilyu atutungun ta,</i> If you don&apos;t brush your teeth, you&apos;ll get black spots on them. <form>ka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> having black spots on the teeth. <i>Nagkaatutung íyang ngípun,</i> His teeth has black places all over them.

<p id=1412><form>aw, àw</form> <number>1</number> particle preceding a statement made to correct oneself. <i>Tagdus písus, aw, dus singkwinta diay,</i> It&apos;s two, I mean, two-fifty. <number>1a</number> particle preceding an afterthought. <i>Aw kanà lang diay, ímu na nà,</i> Oh that. You can have that. <number>2</number> particle preceding a statement or question meaning &lsquo;is that so?&rsquo; and shows surprise. <i>Aw, mau diay nà?</i> Oh! Is that so! <number>3</number> pause word before starting to speak. <i>Aw, makahímù ba tag gáwì sa ímung tilipunu?</i> Er, may I use your phone? <number>4</number> particle preceding a predetermined answer: &lsquo;of course&rsquo;. <i>Aw, ú. Mabalibáran ba gud nà nákù?</i> Yes, of course. How could I refuse that!

<p id=1413><form>áwà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish, the ten-pounder: <bio>Elops hawaiensis</bio>.

<p id=1414><form>áwà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126; b5c1]</itype> <tr>envy</tr>, be jealous. <i>Ngánung maáwà ka man sa ímung igsúun?</i> Why should you be jealous of your sister? <i>Makaáwà man nang ímung kahimtang,</i> Your circumstances inspire envy. <i>Dílì man nà ángay awáun (awáan, iáwà),</i> That is not worth envying. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1; b5c1]</itype> <tr>be worried</tr>. <i>Mag-áwà man ka nga wà may nahinabù?</i> Why are you worried when nothing terrible has happened?

<p id=1415><form>awáaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>deserted place</tr>. <i>Giatángan sila sa dapit nga awáaw,</i> They were ambushed at the remote and lonely spot. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be, become deserted and lonely.

<p id=1416><form>awahi</form> <xr>= <sc>ULAHI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1417><form>áwak</form> <pos>n</pos> continuous <tr>vaginal bleeding</tr>, severe or slight. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4b4]</itype> have continuous vaginal bleeding. <i>Giáwak (giawákan) ka na ba sukad?</i> Did you ever suffer continuous vaginal bleeding?

<p id=1418><form>awang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> space between the upper two front teeth. In folk belief, a woman is thought to be oversexed if she has this gap. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> for s.o. to have a wide gap between the two front teeth. <i>Birgatinya kunu ang babáying awangan,</i> They say that a woman is oversexed if she has a wide gap between her two front teeth.

<p id=1419><form>awang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small fresh-water crab that is edible.

<p id=1420><form>áwas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> for liquid to <tr>boil over</tr>, spill over the top of a container. <i>Muáwas ang sabaw,</i> The soup will boil over. <i>Nag-awas ang túbig sa baldi,</i> The water in the pail is running over. <number>1a</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> have <tr>wet dreams</tr>. <i>Awásan siyag magabíi,</i> He has wet dreams at night. <number>1b</number> <itype>[B256]</itype> <bx>&mdash; sa kalindaryu</bx> pass thirty (Lit. go over the number in the calendar&mdash;slang). <i>Miáwas (naáwas) na lang síya sa kalindaryu, wà pa giyud maminyù,</i> She is past thirty and still hasn&apos;t gotten married. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2S]</itype> for blows to miss the mark. <i>Muáwas lang ang kúmù kay maáyung mulikay ang kuntra,</i> Since his opponent dodge well his fist won&apos;t hit the mark. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>parry</tr>, <tr>ward off</tr> blows. <i>Paawásun níya ang pipila ka sukmag úsà siya mubálus,</i> He will ward off several blows before he retaliates. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> abundant to overflowing. <i>Ang Hapun karun awas sa mga pruduktu,</i> Japan has products in abundance. <form>&mdash;, -an(&rarr;) ug pálad</form> <tr>spendthrift</tr>, <tr>extravagant</tr>. <form>-an(&rarr;) sa apdu</form> k.o. sickness. <form>awasánan</form> <pos>n</pos> down spout of a roof gutter.

<p id=1421><form>awat, áwat<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>imitate</tr>, <tr>follow after</tr>. <i>Kusug kitang muawat sa múda sa mga kanù,</i> We are quick to imitate American fashions. <i>Awata ang ákung linaktan,</i> Imitate my way of walking. <i>Iawat ang ímung linihukan sa ákù,</i> Make your movements be like mine.

<p id=1422><form>áwat<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> part or disengage persons fighting. <i>Awáta sila kay magpatyanay unyà,</i> Break them up because they might kill each other.

<p id=1423><form>aw-aw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>bark</tr>. <i>Ay lag dágan ug aw-áwun (hiaw-awan) ka sa irù,</i> Don&apos;t run if the dog barks at you. <pos>n</pos> dish prepared from dog meat (slang). <i>Aw-aw ang ílang gisumsum,</i> <pb n=68>They had dog meat to go with their drinks.

<p id=1424><form>áway</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; a12b3]</itype> <tr>quarrel</tr>, <tr>fight</tr>. <i>Awáyun ta ka run,</i> I will quarrel with you. <i>Ug dì madalag sulti, átù ning awáyun,</i> We&apos;ll fight it out if we can&apos;t talk it out. <i>Unsa may inyung giawáyan?</i> What are you two quarreling about? <i>Ang pátag nga ílang gipanag-awáyan,</i> The plains where they did battle. <i>Gikaáway ku siya,</i> I had a fight with him. <pos>n</pos> <tr>fight</tr>, <tr>quarrel</tr>. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> in a game, a piece used to hit off others or used to determine the first performer of the game. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>enemy</tr>. <form>pala-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>quarrelsome</tr>. <i>Dì ku makigdúlà nímu kay palaaway ka,</i> I will not play with you because you&apos;re quarrelsome. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become quarrelsome.

<p id=1425><form>awdisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>audition</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>audition</tr>.

<p id=1426><form>awditíbu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>telephone receiver</tr>.

<p id=1427><form>awditur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>auditor</tr>.

<p id=1428><form>awdituryum</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>auditorium</tr>.

<p id=1429><form>awgid</form> <xr>= <sc>AMGID</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1430><form>awhag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>urge</tr> s.o. to do s.t. <i>Miawhag námù ang pulis sa pagpadágan ug hínay,</i> The police urged us to drive slowly. <i>Awhágun (awhágan) ta mu sa pagdagínut,</i> I urge you to economize. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>persuasive</tr>, <tr>urging</tr>. <i>Maawhágung mga púlung,</i> Words of persuasion.&dagger;

<p id=1431><form>awhu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>barracuda</tr>.

<p id=1432><form>awíhaw</form> <xr>= <sc>ALUWÍHAW</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1433><form>áwil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>paddle</tr> a boat to make it stay in place. <i>Awíli ang sakayan arun dílì ta iánud,</i> Paddle the boat in place so we won&apos;t be carried away.

<p id=1434><form>áwit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>sing</tr>. <i>Unsa may íyang awítun?</i> What will she sing? <i>Awítan ta ka,</i> I will sing you a song. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>sing</tr>, <tr>squeal</tr> (slang). <i>Hibaw-an na mung tanan kay nakaáwit na ang dinakpan,</i> You are all known because the suspect has squealed. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>scold</tr>. <i>Hastilang nakaáwit ni Nánay mu, naghápun man lang,</i> How your mother scolds. It lasts till afternoon. <number>4</number> <itype>[b]</itype> <tr>demand</tr> a person&apos;s possessions (slang). <i>Pagsulud níyas prísu, giawítan dáyun ang íyang púlu,</i> As soon as he entered the prison, they demanded his shirt right away. <pos>n</pos> <tr>song</tr>. <form>karáang &mdash;</form> old, oft-repeated story.

<p id=1435><form>awlà</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>fish</tr>.

<p id=1436><form>*awra</form> <form>&mdash; mismu</form> <tr>right then and there</tr>. <i>Awra mismung gipapaháwà ang kiriwan nga mutsatsa,</i> They dismissed the maid on the spot because she was a thief. <i>Anus-a ta mulakat? Awra mismu?</i> When shall we leave? Right away?

<p id=1437><form>awrúra<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> religious procession held in time of pestilence in the early morning or late evening hours for the purpose of preventing further pestilence. <number>2</number> religious procession held on eight consecutive evenings before the feast day of saints. This procession is held after the novena. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> hold a procession of this sort.

<p id=1438><form>awrúra<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> name given to several k.o. ornamental bulbous plants.

<p id=1439><form>Awstriyanhun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Austrian</tr>.

<p id=1440><form>awsud</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>barracuda</tr>.

<p id=1441><form>awtburd</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>outboard motor</tr> or <tr>motorboat</tr>.

<p id=1442><form>awting</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>outing</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> have or hold an outing. <i>Ang klási mag-awting sa Talísay ugmà,</i> The class will have an outing at Talisay tomorrow.

<!-- TODO: Only one meaning as verb, no number needed -->

<p id=1443><form>awtlit</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> drain for liquids. <i>Naglúmung ang túbig dinhi kay walay awtlit,</i> Water stagnates here because there is no outlet. <number>2</number> <tr>electric outlet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> supply with a drain for water or electric outlet; make an outlet.

<p id=1444><form>awtu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>car</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a]</itype> go by, get a car. <i>Dílì maawtu,</i> You can&apos;t go there by car. <form>awtúhan</form> <pos>a</pos> having an auto. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> getting to have a car.

<p id=1445><form>awtugrap</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>autograph book</tr>, book of dedications. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> write in an autograph book.

<p id=1446><form>awtumátik, awtumatiku</form> <xr>= <sc>ATUMÁTIK</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1447><form>awtumubil</form> <xr>= <sc>AWTU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1448><form>awtunumíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>autonomy</tr>.

<p id=1449><form>awtupsi, awtupsíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>autopsy</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> perform an autopsy. <i>Awtupsiyáhun (awtupsiyáhan, awtupsíhun) ang minatay antis ilubung,</i> The cadaver will be autopsied before it is buried.

<p id=1450><form>awtur</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>author</tr> of a book. <number>2</number> author of an act.

<p id=1451><form>awturidad</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>authority</tr>, right to do s.t. <i>Wà kay awturidad sa pagpapaháwà nákù áning yutáa,</i> You have no authority to eject me from this land. <number>2</number> governmental authorities. <i>Ang awturidad nag-awhag sa mga táwu sa pagpabáyad sa mga buluhísan,</i> The authorities are enjoining the people to pay their taxes. <i>Gipangítà siya sa awturidad,</i> He is being hunted by the authorities. <number>3</number> authority, <tr>expert</tr> in s.t. <i>Si Manang usa ka awturidad sa madyung,</i> Manang is an authority on mahjong. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be an authority on s.t.

<p id=1452><form>awturisar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>authorize</tr>, <tr>empower</tr>.

<p id=1453><form>awturisasyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>authorization</tr>.

<!-- Nothing else but a see also? -->

<p id=1454><form>awu-</form> <xr><ix>see also</ix> <sc>ALU-</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1455><form>áwug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; c]</itype> <tr>furnish</tr> s.t. for free or as a privilege. <i>Giawgan siyag dyip sa gubyirnu,</i> The government furnishes him with a jeep. <i>Walay buhis ang mga baligyang iáwug sa Amirika sa íyang mga sundálu,</i> The goods <pb n=69>that America furnishes her soldiers are tax-free.

<p id=1456><form>áwug<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> magical <tr>charm</tr> hung on fruit and vegetable plants to protect them from thieves. This charm may harm the culprit who eats it or give him some illusion which prevents him from leaving the place until he gets caught. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> apply a charm of this sort. <i>Awgi ang kalbásà arun way mangáwat,</i> Hang a charm on the squash so nobody will steal it. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> fruit trees on which a charm has been hung; fruits from such trees.

<p id=1457><form>áwuk</form> <xr>= <sc>UNGLÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1458><form>awuk-uk</form> <xr>= <sc>UK-UK</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1459><form>awul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> go <tr><abbr expan="absent without leave">awol</abbr></tr>. <i>Ug dílì ku tugtan, muawul na lang ku,</i> If they don&apos;t give me permission, I will go awol.

<p id=1460><form>awumbak</form> <pos>n</pos> dried piece of banana trunk.

<!-- Sub entry out-of-order -->

<p id=1461><form>áwut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> be out in a ball game. <number>2</number> be out of a place, out of stock, etc. <form>&mdash; ab bawuns, lak, istak, etc.</form> out of bounds, luck, stock, etc. <i>Awut ab <corr sic="tápic">tápik</corr> ka,</i> You are out of order, off the subject. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P; a2]</itype> make s.o. or s.t. out in ball games. <i>Nakaáwut na ang pitsir ug duha,</i> The pitcher has already struck two batters out. <i>Hiawtan silag duha,</i> They have had two outs. <number>2</number> <itype>[B56]</itype> get to be out of a place, out of luck, stock, etc. <i>Muáwut ku ugmà,</i> I&apos;ll get out of this place tomorrow. <i>Maáwut ang búla,</i> The ball will go out of bounds.

<p id=1462><form>áwut<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>ALUT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1463><form>awutsayid</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>out of bounds</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> go out of bounds. <i>Ug maawtsayid ang búla ning sirbíha, pildi ta,</i> If the ball goes out of bounds on this serve, we lose.

<p id=1464><form>áwuy</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. shrub that bears umbels of black pellet-sized berries which are edible. The leaves are used as a fish poison and are applied to wounds to stop bleeding: <bio>Calliocarpa eriochlona</bio>. <form>&mdash; agkut</form> k.o. <ix>áwuy</ix> that is hairy: <bio>Calliocarpa formosana</bio>.

<p id=1465><form>awyan</form> <xr>= <sc>AYAYAN</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>AYAY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1466><form>ay<sub>1</sub></form> <number>1</number> expression dismissing what follows as unimportant. <i>Ay kanà, ihátag na lang nà,</i> Oh that! Just give it away. <number>2</number> particle showing exasperation or frustrated helplessness. <i>Ay, Inday. Wà pa giyud ka makat-un?</i> Goodness, my dear. Can&apos;t you ever learn? <i>Ay, ulahi ka na, nahurut na ug kahálin,</i> Oh you are too late. They&apos;re all sold out. <i>Ay, kapait ning kinabuhía,</i> My, how difficult life is. <number>3</number> particle preceding an exclamation of delight. <i>Ay, kanindut sa búlak!</i> Oh, what a beautiful flower.

<p id=1467><form>ay<sub>2</sub></form> particle following s.t. which calls attention to s.t. <i>Si Pidru ay, Mam. Nanghíwì nákù,</i> Teacher, Pedro was making faces at me. <i>Pagkabuta nímu. Túa sa iskína ay,</i> How blind you are! It&apos;s right there at the corner! <i>Kining bataána ay. Nagsígi lag dúlag lápuk,</i> My, this child. He keeps playing in the mud. <form>únu, dus, &mdash;, tris</form> one, two, three, go!

<p id=1468><form>ay<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>AYAW</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1469><form>ay<sub>4</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a pair of mahjong pieces of the same number and design. In order to get mahjong, a set must contain an <ix>ay.</ix>

<p id=1470><form>-ay<sub>1</sub></form> affix forming verbs which refer <number>1</number> to reciprocal actions. <i>Naglalisay sila,</i> They argued back and forth. <i>Nagtutukay sila,</i> They stared at each other. <i>Naghigugmáay sila,</i> They were in love with one another. <number>2</number> to intense actions. <i>Naghilákay sila,</i> They cried and cried. <i>Naghikayay sila kay pista ugmà,</i> They were busy preparing because the fiesta was the following day.

<p id=1471><form>-ay<sub>2</sub></form> affix added to verbs to form nouns referring to manner in which s.t. is done. <i>Maghúlin ta, bihagay,</i> Let&apos;s play marbles for keeps (in the manner of <ix>bíhag</ix> &lsquo;capture&rsquo;). <i>Magtínis ta, sirbisahay,</i> Let&apos;s play tennis. The loser buys beer (lit. in the beer manner). <i>Tagsingkwinta ang gatus, way piliay,</i> They cost fifty a hundred, but no choosing.

<p id=1472><form>ayà</form> <xr>= <sc>WAYÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1473><form>ayaan</form> <xr>= <sc>IYAAN</sc>.</xr> <xr>see <sc>IYÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1474><form>ayáay</form> <pos>n</pos> time when water is slack at low tide before rising or at high tide before ebbing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b4]</itype> become <tr>slack tide</tr>. <i>Maáyung ipamúkut ug muayáay ang dágat,</i> A good time to go net fishing is when the water is slack.

<p id=1475><form>ayad<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> refuse to go through with s.t., have second thoughts, esp. about buying. <i>Walay makaayad áning prisyung kubus,</i> No one can have second thoughts about buying it at this low price. <number>2</number> <tr>reject</tr> an offer. <i>Ikaw pa lay miayad sa ákung panábang,</i> You&apos;re the only one so far who has refused my aid. <i>Pagkaaláut ning gugmang ímung giayran,</i> Pity the one whose love you spurned. <number>3</number> <tr>avoid</tr>, refrain contact with. <i>Nangayad siya sa mga pagkáun kay nanamkun,</i> She couldn&apos;t stand food because she was pregnant. <i>Giayran siya sa mga táwu human siya mabangkarúta,</i> People avoided him after he went bankrupt. <number>4</number> particle expressing eagerness. <i>&lsquo;Mukáun kag mangga?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Ayad!&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Do you want to eat mangoes?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Sure thing. (Lit. Would I avoid them?)&rsquo; <form>inayran</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>spurned</tr>, avoided. <i>Inayran sa katilingban,</i> Spurned by society.

<p id=1476><form>ayad<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>repair</tr> s.t. <i>Ayrun nákù ang munyíka nga natangtángag kamut,</i> I&apos;ll fix <pb n=70>the doll that lost one of its arms.

<p id=1477><form>áyag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>sift</tr>, separate the coarse from the fine. <i>Ayágun ang bugas arun malain ang pínu,</i> The rice is sifted so the fine particles can be separated. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> sifter, <tr>sieve</tr>.

<p id=1478><form>ayágak</form> <xr>= <sc>IYÁGAK</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1479><form>áyam</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> for a dog to chase s.t. <i>Háin íning irúa ang nag-áyam sa manuk?</i> Which dog chased the chicken? <number>2</number> hunt with dogs where the dog keeps track of the spoor. <i>Bakatin ang ílang giáyam,</i> They are hunting for wild pigs. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> go hunting with dogs. <i>Nangáyam sila sa lasang,</i> They went hunting in the forest. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> occupation of hunting with dogs. <number>2</number> s.t. used to hunt. <number>3</number> hunting trip. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> place one hunts. <form>ig-l-(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>PAN-, 3</sc>.</xr> <form>maN-r-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hunter</tr>. <form>pinaN-an</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. caught hunting.

<p id=1480><form>ayang-ang</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>in full view</tr>, uncovered. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be open to full view. <i>Muayang-ang gánì ang pultahan, musulud dáyun ang irù,</i> If the door is open, the dog will get in. <i>Nag-ayang-ang ang mga pinalit sa mga bukas nga bukag,</i> The goods they bought were in full view in the open baskets. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac2]</itype> <tr>expose</tr> s.t. to full view. <i>Magpaayang-ang lang nà siya bísan ug daghang táwu,</i> She sits in such a way that she exposes her crotch, even when there are a lot of people around. <i>Nakapaayang-ang siya sa íyang kasukù,</i> She exposed her anger. <i>Paayang-anga lang nang pultahan sa ímung kwartu,</i> Leave your door partly open. <i>Ayaw paayang-angi ang sud-an,</i> Don&apos;t leave the food exposed. <form>-un, -an</form> <pos>a</pos> careless of speech and ways.

<p id=1481><form>ay-ar payib</form> <pos>n</pos> <corr>IR5, </corr>k.o. recently-introduced strain of rice.

<p id=1482><form>ayaw</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>ay</bx> <tr>don</tr>&apos;t do! <i>Ayaw ug syágit. Ayaw pagsiyágit,</i> Do not shout. <i>Ayaw ug kabaláka, ayaw kabaláka, ayaw pagkabaláka,</i> Don&apos;t worry. <form>&mdash; lang</form> <number>1</number> never mind doing. <i>Ayaw lang ug sirhi nang pwirta,</i> Don&apos;t bother closing the door. <i>&lsquo;Gustu ka?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Ayaw lang,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Do you want any?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;No, thanks.&rsquo; <number>2</number> don&apos;t (it&apos;s a small thing to ask). <i>Ay lang ingna ánà,</i> Don&apos;t do like that! <form>&mdash; na</form> stop doing. <i>Ayaw nag hílak,</i> Stop crying. <i>Ayaw na, Tay. Dì na ku muusab,</i> That&apos;s enough, Dad. I won&apos;t do it again. <form>&mdash; na lang</form> don&apos;t bother doing what you&apos;ve started or made a motion to do. <i>Ay na lang kug ihatud,</i> Don&apos;t bother taking me home. <form>&mdash; na lang ku ánà</form> don&apos;t give me that reason. <i>Ay na lang ku ánà. Nakabatì na ku ánang rasúna,</i> Don&apos;t give me that. I&apos;ve heard that line before. <form>&mdash; na ku, ta (nímu)</form> don&apos;t try to fool me. <i>Ay na lang ku nímu, Syu. Swítu na kaáyu ku nímu,</i> Don&apos;t try to put one over me, Cio. I know you too well already.

<p id=1483><form>áyaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> for a child to cry when not allowed to go with s.o. <i>Natural, ang bátà muáyaw sa inahan,</i> It&apos;s natural for a child to cry when he&apos;s not allowed to go with his mother.

<p id=1484><form>ayawan</form> <xr>= <sc>AWAYAN</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ÁWAY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1485><form>ayáwat</form> <xr>= <sc>IYÁWAT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1486><form>ayay</form> particle <number>1</number> expressing pleasant surprise. <i>Ayay, kanindut!</i> Yippie. How nice! <number>2</number> expressing pain. <i>Ayay, kasakit,</i> Ouch. How painful. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> overly sensitive and easily incapacitated by pain or sickness. <i>Ayayan kaáyung batáa maung dì magpaindiksiyun,</i> This child is a terrible sissy. She won&apos;t let them give her a shot. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be a big sissy.

<p id=1487><form>aybru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>eyebrow</tr>. <number>2</number> eyebrow pencil. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> apply eyebrow pencil on s.o. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> apply eyebrow pencil on oneself.

<p id=1488><form>ayda</form> <pos>n</pos> kerosene pressure lantern (so called from the brand name).

<p id=1489><form>aydi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>identification card</tr>.

<p id=1490><form>ayhà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> talk s.o. into doing s.t., esp. buying. <i>Ayháun ku siya sa ámù,</i> I&apos;ll persuade her to stay at our place. <i>Singsing nga kináwat ang giayhà sa táwu,</i> They offered the man a stolen ring.

<p id=1491><form>ayhà<sub>2</sub></form> <tr>before</tr> [so-and-so] happens. <i>Mikáun siya ayhà mulakaw,</i> He ate before he left the house. <form>&mdash; na</form> only then will, does [so-and-so] happen. <i>Ayhà na ka bayri ug maintrígu mu ang risíbu,</i> You get paid only when you hand over the receipt. <form>&mdash; pa</form> only then did [so-and-so] happen. <i>Hápit na mahurut ayhà pa ku tagái,</i> I wasn&apos;t given any until they were almost all gone.


<!-- Why is this entry starred? -->

<p id=1492><form><corr sic="*"></corr>ayhab</form><!-- = I have --> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> <tr>menstruate</tr> (euphemism). <i>Giayhab ka?</i> Are you menstruating?

<p id=1493><form>ayis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ice</tr>. <form>&mdash; bag</form> <pos>n</pos> ice bag. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> apply an ice bag to. <form>&mdash; baks</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>refrigerator</tr>. <form>&mdash; drap</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>popsicle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make, make into a popsicle. <form>&mdash; kap</form> <xr>= <sc>AYIS BAG</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; kindi</form> <pos>n</pos> ice candy. <form>&mdash; krim</form> <pos>n</pos> ice cream. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make, make into ice cream. <form>&mdash; kiyub</form> <pos>n</pos> ice cubes. <form>&mdash; pik</form> <pos>n</pos> ice pick. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a1]</itype> use an ice pick on, stab with an ice pick. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a]</itype> make ice. <i>Maáyu muayis ang ripridiyirítur,</i> The refrigerator makes ice well. <number>2</number> <itype>[B3; c1P]</itype> <tr>freeze</tr>. <i>Dalì rang muayis (maayis, mag-ayis) ang ayis kindi kun ibutang sa prísir,</i> The ice candy will freeze quickly if you put it in the freezer. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> preserve s.t. with ice. <i>Inaysan ba nang isdà?</i> Has that fish been kept with ice?

<p id=1494><form>ayis-ayis</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; a1]</itype> <tr>flirt with the eyes</tr>. <i>Maistra man diay tung ákung giayis-aysan,</i> I just found out that the lady I was making eyes at was a teacher. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> eye s.o. <pb n=71>or s.t. for a purpose. <i>Nakaayis-ayis ku niánang sinináa,</i> I have been eyeing that dress. <pos>n</pos> flirtation with the eyes.

<p id=1495><form>ayri</form> <pos>n</pos> air that gets into s.o.&apos;s body causing disorder. <i>Kuyaw sa ayri nang paságad lag indiksiyun,</i> If you&apos;re careless in giving shots, there is danger of air getting into the body. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B246; b4]</itype> for air to get into the body. <i>Ayawg pahangin humag kalígù kay ayrihan ka,</i> Don&apos;t expose yourself to the wind after you bathe, for air might get into you. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> admit air into a kerosene pressure lamp. <i>Ayríhag hínay arun dílì musiláub,</i> Let air into it slowly so it won&apos;t flare up. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> get on a bicycle by stepping on the pedal which is in an up position, so that the wheel is propelled as one steps on the pedal. <i>Iayri ang bisiklíta inigsakay nímu,</i> Pump the pedal as you get on the bike. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> mount a woman (slang). <i>Nindut ayríhan nang bayhána,</i> It&apos;d be nice to have intercourse with that woman.

<p id=1496><form>ayruplánu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>airplane</tr>. <form>&mdash; nga báyut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>light plane</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> go by, ride a plane. <i>Ayruplanúhun ta lang ang Manílà,</i> Let&apos;s go to Manila by airplane.

<p id=1497><form>aysyid</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>eye shadow</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> apply eye shadow on s.o. <i>Aysíran kang manang mu,</i> Big sister will apply eye shadow on you. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> apply eye shadow on oneself.

<p id=1498><form>ayta<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Aeta</tr>, the <tr><corr sic=Negritoes>Negritos</corr></tr>.

<p id=1499><form>ayta<sub>2</sub></form> short form for <bx>tagái ta</bx> &lsquo;give me&rsquo;. <i>Ayta duha kabuuk bi,</i> Let me have two, please.

<p id=1500><form>áyu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> do s.t. well. <i>Ayúha nig limpiyu,</i> Clean this carefully. <i>Gitan-aw níya pag-áyu ang sulud,</i> He looked carefully into the insides. <number>1b</number> do s.t. to an intense degree. <i>Giáyu siya ug kastígu,</i> He was severely punished. <i>Nasukù siya pag-áyu,</i> He got very angry. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> do well in a given situation. <i>Muáyu ang mais dinhi kay hustu sa ulan,</i> Corn will do well here because there is enough rain. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> repair, restore into working order. <i>Ikay muáyu sa awtu kay ikay nakadáut,</i> You repair the car because you ruined it. <i>Ayúha ning ákung mutur,</i> Repair my motorcycle. <number>4</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> get better. <i>Naáyu na ku. Wà na ku hilanti,</i> I am well now. I don&apos;t have a fever any more. <form>&mdash; ang buut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4]</itype> be in a good mood. <i>Muáyu ang íyang buut ug bisitáhan siya ni Piduy,</i> She gets in a good mood when Pedoy visits her. <i>Giayúhan siya sa buut,</i> She is in a good mood. <number>5</number> <itype>[A23; b6]</itype> treat s.o. nicely. <i>Muáyu ka lang nákù ug magkinahanglan kag sápì,</i> You treat me nicely only if you want money. <i>Ug dì ka níla ayúhan, ayawg tagda,</i> If they don&apos;t treat you nicely, never mind. <number>6</number> <itype>[c]</itype> be on good terms with one another. <i>Nagkaáyu na ba mung duha?</i> Have you two gotten to be on good terms yet? <form>ma-</form> <pos>a</pos> <ix>short forms:</ix> <bx>maay, máyu</bx> <number>1</number> <tr>nice</tr>, <tr>good</tr>, <tr>well</tr>. <i>Maáyu ning librúha,</i> This book is good. <i>Maáyu siyang magkinatsilà,</i> He speaks Spanish well. <number>2</number> <formx>-ng buntag, hápun, etc.</formx> <tr>Good morning, afternoon, etc.</tr> <bx>-ng Pasku</bx> <tr>Merry Christmas</tr>. <number>2a</number> greeting upon arriving at s.o.&apos;s premises (short for <ix>maáyung buntag, etc.</ix>). <i>Maáyu. Uy wà may táwu,</i> Hello! Oh, there&apos;s nobody home. <number>3a</number> <formx>&mdash; nga bátà</formx> <tr>beautiful</tr>. <i>Maáyung bátà ang íyang asáwa,</i> He has a beautiful wife. <number>3b</number> <formx>&mdash; láki</formx> of exceptional ability in s.t. <i>Si Tiryu maáyung láki sa pamálak,</i> Terio has exceptional ability in poetry. <number>4</number> <formx>ug ma-</formx> <tr>done well</tr>, to an intense degree. <i>Gilimpiyuhag maáyu,</i> It was well cleaned. <i>Gibunálag maáyu,</i> Got a good beating. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be good, better. <i>Ug mumaáyu ang guwà, padayúni,</i> If it gives a good outcome, continue with it. <i>Ug mamaáyu ang íyang tíngug sa mayik, dawáta pára sa amatyur,</i> If his voice turns out good with the microphone, accept him for the singing contest. <i>Namaáyu na ku sa sakit,</i> I recovered from the sickness. <i>Nagkamaayu ang íyang ági,</i> His penmanship is getting better. <i>Nagmaáyu ang tilimad-un ug walay kapakyásan,</i> The indications are good, and it won&apos;t fail. <form>mina-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> in a good way. <form>ayuáyu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> behave properly. <i>Mag-ayuáyu ka sa ímung paglakaw,</i> You behave properly on your trip. <form>pag-</form> goodbye, be careful on your trip. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23; b5]</itype> treat nicely. <i>Ayuayúhun (ayuayúhan) ka lang níya pagkakarun,</i> He is just treating you nice for now. <form>pahi-/paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> cure an illness. <i>Didtu siya magpakaáyu (magpahiáyu) sa Manílà sa íyang sakit,</i> He was in Manila to get treated for his sickness. <form>paayuáyu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> pretend to be nice. <i>Nagpaayuáyu ang libakíra,</i> The scandalmonger is pretending to be nice. <form>ka-, kama-</form> <tr>how nice</tr>, <tr>well</tr>. <i>Kaáyu (kamaáyu) nímung manista,</i> How nicely you play! <i>Kaáyu gyung latiguhun nímu,</i> How nice it would be to whip you! <form>ka-</form> <ix>short forms:</ix> <bx>kaay, káyu</bx> <tr>very</tr>, <tr>very much</tr>. <i>Mahal kaáyu,</i> It&apos;s very expensive. <i>Gustu ku kaáyu,</i> I want to very much. <form>alayúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>repair shop</tr>. <form>alayuhun</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. to be repaired. <form>kaayúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>benefit</tr>.

<p id=1501><form>ayù</form> (from <ix>káyù</ix>) <pos>a</pos> asking for trouble. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> ask for trouble. <i>Nag-ayù ka ug kasab-an?</i> Are you asking for a scolding?

<p id=1502><form>ayúda</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>help</tr>. <i>Ayudáhi kug alsa ári,</i> Help me lift this. <number>2</number> give s.t. as a help. <i>Ang mga Láyuns nag-ayúda ug kinahun nga sardínas,</i> The Lions gave boxes of sardines as <pb n=72>aid. <pos>n</pos> <tr>aid</tr>, <tr>help</tr> given. <form>&mdash; dikampu</form> <tr>aide-de-camp</tr>. <form>-nti</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>helper</tr>. <i>Ayudanti sa imprinta,</i> A helper in the printing press. <number>2</number> <tr>aide-de-camp</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> be, become a helper, aide-de-camp.

<p id=1503><form>ayudi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>intra-uterine device</tr> (I.U.D.) <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> have an I.U.D. installed.

<p id=1504><form>áyum</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB3(1); a12]</itype> <number>1</number> for a wound to be healed or cured. <i>Dalì rang miáyum (naáyum) ang samad,</i> It took only a short time for the wound to <tr>heal</tr>. <number>2</number> free from troubles, grief, evil habits. <i>Ang panahun muáyum (mupaáyum) sa kaguul,</i> Time will make us forget our sorrows. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>repair</tr>, <tr>mend</tr>, <tr>fix</tr>. <i>Muáyum siyag sapátus gubà,</i> He repairs torn shoes. <i>Ayúma ang ímung sinínà kay hugut da,</i> Fix your dress because it&apos;s too tight. <form>ayum-áyum</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> <tr>fix</tr> s.t. up quickly in a makeshift way. <i>Nag-ayum-áyum siya sa kunut sa íyang sinínà,</i> She hurriedly smoothed over her wrinkled dress. <i>Kini makaayum-áyum sa ímung kagútum,</i> This will alleviate your hunger temporarily. <i>Ayum-ayúma (iayum-áyum) lang nang hiwì sa bukag,</i> Just straighten out the crooked basket quickly. <number>2</number> <itype>[AP; b6P]</itype> make do with s.t. <i>Maáyu siyang muayum-áyum (mupaayum-áyum) sa tinábas sa pagtahì ug bistídu,</i> She is good in making do with remnants in sewing her dresses. <number>3</number> <itype>[AP; bP]</itype> put up with s.t. temporarily. <i>Ayum-ayúmi (paayum-ayúmi) lang ang íyang kasábà, Tutal, ági man lang nà,</i> Try to put up with her scolding. Anyway, it won&apos;t last.

<p id=1505><form>ayun</form> moving dragged <tr>along</tr> with s.t. <i>Midágan ang barútu ayun sa súg,</i> The boat is travelling along with the current. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> go with, for s.t. to <tr>harmonize</tr> with s.t. else. <i>Kining dintrúha muayun sa ímung karsúnis,</i> This shirt goes well with your pants. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2C3; b(1)]</itype> <tr>like</tr>, come to like. <i>Ug ákung kaayunan ang buluk, ákung palitun ang panaptun,</i> If I like the color, I will buy the cloth. <i>Wà magkaáyun ang magtiáyun, maung nagkabúlag,</i> The couple couldn&apos;t get along very well so they separated. <form>pa-</form> <xr>= <sc>PAHI-</sc>.</xr> <form>pahi-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> make s.t. fit with, conform to s.t. else. <i>Ang balay gipahiayun sa ílang gustu,</i> The house was built exactly according to their wishes. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> put up with s.t., adjust oneself to s.t. <i>Pahiayunan ku lang ang ílang hukum,</i> I will just go along with their decision. <form>ti-</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>TIÁYUN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1506><form>áyun</form> <xr>= <sc>ALÁYUN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1507><form>*ayup</form> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> let s.t. cook over low heat before taking it off the stove. <i>Paayupi ang linung-ag kadiyut úsà haúna,</i> Let the rice stay on the fire awhile before you take it off.

<p id=1508><form>ayup-up</form> <xr>= <sc>ÁLUP</sc>, <ix>1.</ix></xr>

<p id=1509><form>ayus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> refuse to have intercourse with one&apos;s new husband. <i>Ang bána nga giayusan sa asáwa,</i> The husband whose wife refused to sleep with him.


</body>
</text>
</TEI.2>
