<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN" [

<!ENTITY larr       CDATA "&#x2190;"            -- leftwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY rarr       CDATA "&#x2192;"            -- rightwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY glots      CDATA "&#x0294;"            -- glottal stop -->

<!ENTITY amacr      CDATA "&#x0101;"            -- a with macron -->
<!ENTITY imacr      CDATA "&#x012B;"            -- i with macron -->
<!ENTITY umacr      CDATA "&#x016B;"            -- u with macron -->

<!ENTITY amacrgra   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0300;"    -- a with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY imacrgra   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0300;"    -- i with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY umacrgra   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0300;"    -- u with macron and grave -->

<!ENTITY amacracu   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0301;"    -- a with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY imacracu   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0301;"    -- i with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY umacracu   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0301;"    -- u with macron and acute -->

<!ENTITY Acaron     CDATA "&#x01CD;"            -- A with caron -->
<!ENTITY acaron     CDATA "&#x01CE;"            -- a with caron -->
<!ENTITY Icaron     CDATA "&#x01CF;"            -- I with caron -->
<!ENTITY icaron     CDATA "&#x01D0;"            -- i with caron -->
<!ENTITY Ucaron     CDATA "&#x01D3;"            -- U with caron -->
<!ENTITY ucaron     CDATA "&#x01D4;"            -- u with caron -->

<!ENTITY schwa      CDATA "&#x0259;"            -- schwa (turned e) -->
<!ENTITY N          CDATA "N"                   -- N symbol (as used in this dictionary) -->

]><TEI.2 lang=en>
<teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
        <titleStmt>
            <title>A Dictionary of Cebuano Visayan</title>
            <author>John U. Wolff</author>
        </titleStmt>
    </fileDesc>
    <profileDesc>
        <langUsage>
            <language id=en>English</language>
            <language id=en-US>English (United States)</language>
            <language id=ceb>Cebuano</language>
        </langUsage>
    </profileDesc>
</teiHeader>
<text>
<body>
<pb n=72>
<div1 type=Letter id=letter.b n=B>
<head>B</head>


<p id=1511><form>ba</form> <number>1</number> question marker used in questions with no interrogative. <i>Muanhi ka ba ugmà?</i> Will you come here tomorrow? <number>1a</number> <ix>with indirect questions:</ix> <tr>whether</tr>. <i>Pangutan-a si Husi ug nahinumdum ba siya,</i> Ask José if he remembers it. <number>1b</number> was it [so-and-so]? <i>Písus ba tu ímung gihátag nákù?</i> Was it a peso you gave me? <number>2</number> <formx>dì, dílì &mdash;</formx> <number>2a</number> isn&apos;t that the case? <i>Mulikù ta sa tuu, dì ba?</i> We turn right, don&apos;t we? <number>2b</number> [so-and-so] is surely going to be the consequence. <i>Hilabti nang makinilya. Dì ba latiguhun tika,</i> Just touch that typewriter. You think I&apos;m not going to smack you one? <number>3</number> <ix>with interrogatives:</ix> particle indicating impatience or a strong questioning tone. <i>Pila bay plíti?</i> How much is it now? <form>unsa &mdash;</form> what do you say? how about it? <i>Unsa ba, palitun nátù tung awtu?</i> How about it? Shall we buy that car? <form>&mdash; gud</form> particle indicating disbelief. <i>Mangáwat ba gud ku?</i> Do you think I would steal? <number>4</number> shall we say? <i>Muanhi ka ug sayu ugmà, mga alas sayis ba,</i> Come here early tomorrow, shall we say, six o&apos;clock? <number>5</number> <formx>X &mdash; Y &mdash;</formx> either X or Y. <i>Muanhi ka dáyun. Pagkaugmà ba, sa sunud adlaw ba,</i> Come here as soon as possible. Either the next day or the day after that. <number>6</number> particle asking if the hearer understands. <i>Si Mistir Krus tu, ag maistru ba,</i> That was Mr. Cruz, the teacher, you know. <i>Sugkáyun, pára ba maáyung pagkaságul,</i> Stir it so, you know, it will get well-mixed. <pb n=73><number>7</number> <ix>in exclamations:</ix> <number>7a</number> how unbelievable that it is that way! <i>Pagkabúang ba gayud nákù,</i> How could I be so foolish! <number>7b</number> though. <i>Itusmaw sa ínit nga túbig? Pagkamakalulúuy ba sab,</i> Throw it into boiling water? How pitiful! <form>laliman ka &mdash;</form> can you beat that! <i>Laliman ka ba niánà! Bayran ang tulu ka awtu ug kás!</i> Can you beat that! Paying cash for the three cars! <form>tíaw mu &mdash;</form> Just imagine. <i>Tíaw mu bay latiguhun sa publiku!</i> Imagine! Being whipped in public! <form>ra &mdash;</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ra</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1512><form>bá</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>báli</sc>, <ix>2</ix> (dialectal).</xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>bála<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=1513><form>*bà</form> (from <ix>sábà</ix>) <form>&mdash; dihà</form> it is not true, despite what you say. <i>Bà dihà! Gustu lagi ku nímu,</i> Oh, come on. I do so like you! <i>Bà dihà uy. Wà ka man lagi manghúwat,</i> Oh, shut up! You did not wait for me.

<p id=1514><form>báag<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> make, become <tr>embers</tr>. <i>Nagbáag (nagpabáag) akug igpaplantsa,</i> I&apos;m making embers for the iron. <i>Nabáag na ang tibuuk balángay únà mahiabut ang bumbíru,</i> The whole village was already in embers before the firemen arrived. <number>2</number> <tr>heat</tr> s.t., become hot. <i>Nagkabáag ang kaínit sa mga táwu nga nagkaduul ang iliksyun,</i> The people are becoming more and more heated up as the election approaches. <i>Baága (ibáag) ra ning gátas,</i> Please heat this milk. <pos>n</pos> <tr>heat</tr>. <i>Ang báag sa adlaw mauy nakaitum kanákù,</i> The heat of the sun has made me black. <form>(&rarr;), baagbaag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c]</itype> for actions to become <tr>incoherent</tr>, <tr>aimless</tr>. <i>Nabaagbaag (nabaag) ang íyang diklarasiyun,</i> His declaration became senseless and incoherent. <i>Nagkabaagbaag siyag panghangyù ug pakitábang,</i> She went around everywhere asking for help. <form>baagbaagun</form> <pos>a</pos> of an <tr>incoherent</tr> sort.

<p id=1515><form>baang, báang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B3; c]</itype> <tr>plug up</tr> a hole. <i>Sagbut ang nakabaang sa imburnal,</i> Garbage has choked up the sewer. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> stuff s.t. into the mouth. <i>Pakit-ag kan-unun dì ba mubáang dáyun,</i> Show him s.t. to eat and he&apos;ll shove it into his mouth instantly. <pos>n</pos> action of opening the mouth to shove food into it.&dagger;

<p id=1516><form>báang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> extract <tr>starch</tr> from the buri palm. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>buri starch</tr>.

<p id=1517><form>báat</form> <xr>= <sc>baláat</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1518><form>báb</form> <xr>= <sc>babhir</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1519><form>baba, bába</form> <xr>= <sc>bála<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<!-- Sub entry out of order -->

<p id=1520><form>bàbà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>mouth</tr>. <number>2</number> any mouth-like <tr>opening</tr>. <i>Bàbà sa lángub,</i> Mouth of the cave. <i>Bàbà sa butilya,</i> Mouth of the bottle. <form>&mdash; sa atay</form> pit of the stomach. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> hit in the mouth. <i>Bàbaun (bàbáun) ku siyag pátid,</i> I&apos;ll kick him in the mouth. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> put a mouth-like opening. <i>Bàbáan ku ang alkansíya,</i> I&apos;ll saw a slit on the piggy bank. <number>3</number> <itype>[b2]</itype> utter a truth without even knowing that one is doing so. <i>Hibàbaan nákù siya nga nangáwat,</i> I hit on him as the thief without even knowing it. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> rant at or scold s.o. in a loud voice. <i>Nagpamàbà na sad ang maldíta níyang asáwa,</i> His termagant wife is ranting at him again. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> say words glibly. <i>Maáyu siya mamàbà mau nga daghang trátu,</i> He is glib. That is why he has many girl friends. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> say special prayers to ward off evil. <i>Manágan giyud ang mga dautang ispiritu ug pamàbáan nákù,</i> The evil spirits will run away from me if I utter special prayers against them. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ranting</tr>. <number>2</number> gift of gab. <number>3</number> prayers to ward off evil. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> oral. <i>Nahagbung ku sa pasúlit nga binàbà,</i> I failed in the oral examination. <form>-an, -un</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to rant in a loud voice. <form>tigpa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> spokesman, press relations officer. <i>Ang tigpamàbà sa wilgista abugádu,</i> The strikers have a lawyer as their spokesman.&dagger;

<p id=1521><form>babad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> turn around on its axis. <i>Wà makababad ang pála sa pambut kay nagápus sa sámù,</i> The boat propeller would not turn because seaweeds were entangled in it. <i>Ibabad (babara) ang ímung kayril,</i> Twirl your key chain. <number>2</number> <tr>brandish</tr>. <i>Nagbabad ang pildírung kaáway sa bandírang putì,</i> The defeated enemy waved the white flag.

<p id=1522><form>bábad<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a torch by binding dry strips of coconut leaves, coconut sheaths, or similar materials together. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> swing a torch made in this way to cause it to flare up. <i>Ibábad (babára) ang <sic corr="sulù">sû</sic> arun mudakù ang síga,</i> Swing the torch to fan up the light.

<p id=1523><form>bábad<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>immerse</tr> or soak in liquid. <i>Dì ku mubábad sa túbig kay dalì ra kung tugnawun,</i> I won&apos;t immerse myself in the water because I easily catch chills. <i>Gibábad ang karni sa túyù,</i> The meat was soaked in soy sauce.

<p id=1524><form>bábag<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>balábag</sc>, <ix>v1, 2, 3, n1, 3.</ix></xr>

<p id=1525><form>bábag<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for meals to be irregular and scanty. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> eat meals on an irregular and scanty basis. <i>Mahibalu bayà gud ku mubábag ug káun,</i> I know how to make do with irregular and scanty meals. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> for meals to become irregular and scanty. <i>Nabábag ang ílang káun sa nasakit ang amahan,</i> Their meals got to be irregular and scanty when their father got sick.

<p id=1526><form>babaw</form> <pos>n</pos> place up s.w. <form>hi&N;-/ha&N;-(&larr;), hi&N;-/ha&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B5]</itype> get to be almost full. <i>Muhimábaw (muhimabaw) na gánì ang baldi, sirhi ang grípu,</i> When the pail is almost full, close the faucet. <form>i-, i-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> place high up. <i>Si <pb n=74>Guryu túa sa ibábaw nangáhuy,</i> Goryo is in the hills gathering firewood. <number>2</number> place <tr>on top of</tr> s.t. <i>Ibabaw (ibábaw) sa lamísa,</i> On top of the table. <i>Ibabaw sa patay kung láwas,</i> Over my dead body. <form>i-</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>high</tr>. <i>Ibabaw ra ang inyu sa ámù,</i> Your place is higher than ours. <i>Ibabawng balay balauránan,</i> Senate. <form>&mdash; pa niánà</form> in addition to that. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6P]</itype> <number>1</number> put s.t. on top of s.t. else. <i>Giibabwan (gipaibabwan) ku sa ákung sinínà ang ímung libru,</i> I placed my clothes on top of your book. <number>2</number> put s.t. higher. <i>Ibabwi (paibabwi) lag diyútay,</i> Just elevate it a little. <form>pai-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>soar</tr> up. <i>Mipaibabaw ang uwak nga gilútus sa banug,</i> The crow soared up because it was pursued by the hawk. <number>2</number> <itype>[B125]</itype> be the part on top. <i>Ang nawung sa panaptun mauy maibabaw,</i> The right side of the cloth should be on the outside. <form>tig-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23P; b6P]</itype> <number>1</number> go to surface. <i>Mitigbábaw (mipatigbábaw) ang submarínu sa dágat,</i> The submarine surfaced in the sea. <number>2</number> came out distinctly. <i>Mitigbábaw (mipatigbábaw) giyud ang íyang tíngug bísan sa kasábà,</i> His voice came out distinctly despite the noise. <number>3</number> <tr>prevail</tr>. <i>Sa katapúsan mutigbábaw (mupatigbábaw) gayud ang katarúngan,</i> In the end justice prevails. <i>Ang gibátì níya kang Túni gitigbabáwan (gipatigbabáwan) sa gibátì níya kang Prid,</i> Her feelings for Fred prevailed over her feelings for Tony. <form>patig-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>tig-</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> air out a sentiment, heave a prayer, etc. to s.o. above. <i>Ipatigbábaw ang inyung pasalámat ngadtu kang Hiyúba,</i> Offer your prayers of thanksgiving to Jehovah.

<p id=1527><form>bábay</form> <tr>bye-bye</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for a child to say bye-bye. <form>hi&N;-</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of waving bye-bye.

<p id=1528><form>babáyi</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>bayi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1529><form>babaylan</form> <xr>= <sc>baylan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1530><form>babha</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>slash</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b5]</itype> have a wide slash in it. <i>Nagbabha ang íyang kílid,</i> His side was slashed wide open.

<p id=1531><form>babhir</form> <pos><corr sic=a>n</corr></pos> <tr>bobbed</tr> hairstyle. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> bob hair. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear one&apos;s hair bobbed.

<p id=1532><form>babil</form> <pos>a</pos> be <tr>bothered</tr> with s.t. s.o. is carrying. <i>Ayaw pagdalag mga bátà kay babil ka unyà kaáyu,</i> Don&apos;t take the children. They&apos;ll be a nuisance. <form>(&larr;), babil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> be a <tr>burden</tr>. <i>Nakababil (nakabábil) sa ákung paghigdà kining pistúla sa ákung luyu,</i> This pistol in my hip pocket bothered me as I lay down to sleep. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <number>1</number> have difficulty in carrying more than one can. <i>Nagkabábil kug dala sa mga kartun,</i> I was having a hard time carrying all the different cartons. <number>2</number> be in great disorder. <i>Nagkabábil ang kwartu kay way nanghípus,</i> The room was in great disorder because no one picked it up.

<p id=1533><form>bábit<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> heavy metal or stone used by a deep-sea diver to weigh him down. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> use a <tr>weight</tr> in diving. <i>Ang mga mananawum ug pirlas magbábit inigsáwum níla,</i> The pearl divers use a weight when they dive.

<p id=1534><form>bábit<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> female sex organ (slang).

<p id=1535><form>bábul gam</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bubble gum</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> chew, get bubble gum. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> put bubble gum s.w.

<p id=1536><form>babung, bábung</form> a good-looking girl (slang).

<p id=1537><form>babuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> have an epileptic fit. <i>Mibuwà íyang bàbà dihang gibabuy siya,</i> He was frothing when he had an epileptic seizure. <form>-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>epileptic</tr>.

<p id=1538><form>bábuy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pig</tr>, <tr>pork</tr>. <i>Mahal ang bábuy karun,</i> Pork is high now. <form>&mdash; ihálas, sulup</form> <tr>wild pig</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain a pig. <i><corr sic=Nakababuy>Nakabábuy</corr> aku ug tulu ka buuk sa pagbatun ku sa íyang anay,</i> I got three pigs for taking care of his sow. <number>2</number> <itype>[AP; a2]</itype> <number>a</number> corner, pin down. <i>Nakabábuy (nakapabábuy) ang mga Písi sa mga Múrus sa pulù,</i> The <abbr expan="Philippine Constabulary">P.C.</abbr> blockaded the Moros on the island. <i>Nabábuy kami tungud sa dakung bahà,</i> We were blocked in because of the great flood. <number>b</number> <tr>checkmate</tr> (in chess). <i>Babúyun nákù ang ímung piyun,</i> I&apos;m going to checkmate your pawn. <number>c</number> <itype>[AP; c1]</itype> tie up capital. <i>Ang ákung kwarta nabábuy sa nigusyu,</i> My money is tied up in business. <pos>a</pos> piggish, <tr>dirty</tr>. <form>&mdash; ug balatían</form> <tr>swinish</tr>, having no moral qualms. <form>paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> consider, treat like a pig. <i>Gipakabábuy lang ku nímu,</i> You just treat me like a pig. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>piggery</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> have, obtain a piggery. <form>-in-</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> like a pig. <number>2</number> for a scolding to be abusive. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> treat like a pig. <i>Gibinábuy ku nílag hikut,</i> They hog-tied me. <number>2</number> be mercilessly scolded. <i>Gibinábuy ku níyag kasábà,</i> He scolded me abusively. <form>mag-r-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pig-dealer</tr>.

<p id=1539><form>bábuy<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> bulge in a muscle which results from a blow. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B246]</itype> have a muscle bulge. <i>Mibábuy ákung buktun,</i> My arm got a charley horse.

<p id=1540><form>babuybabuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. <tr>louse</tr> which hides in crannies and lives in damp places. <number>2</number> k.o. <tr>cowrie</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> infested with wood lice. <i>Gibabuybabuy ang hugasan,</i> The sink is infested with wood lice. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>bábuy<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=1541><form>bad-ay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1]</itype> be placed transversely across. <i>Nagbad-ay ang buktun sa bána sa tiyan sa íyang asáwa,</i> The husband&apos;s arm lay across his wife&apos;s stomach. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN]</itype> appear prominently in a bulge along the surface. <i>Mibad-ay (namad-ay) sa yútà ang gamut sa akasya,</i> The roots of the monkeypod tree stick out along the ground. <i>Barikus nga namad-ay (mibad-ay) sa bitíis,</i> Varicose veins <pb n=75>appearing prominently on the legs. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>be strewn about</tr>. <i>Pagkah&umacracu;g sa trák namad-ay ang daghang patay,</i> When the truck fell, dead bodies were strewn all about.

<p id=1542><form>badaybaday</form> <xr>= <sc>baraybaray</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1543><form>badbad<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB123; a]</itype> <tr>untie</tr>, get untied. <i>Nakabadbad ang bábuy sa íyang gihigtan,</i> The pig got loose from where he was tied. <i>Badbára na ang bindáhi,</i> Undo the bandage. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> liquidate a debt. <i>Badbárun (badbarun) ku ang ákung útang,</i> I will pay off my debts. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>solve</tr> a problem. <i>Badbárun ra nátù ang prublíma,</i> We&apos;ll solve the problem. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>translate</tr>. <i>Ang ubra ni Línin wà pa mabadbad sa Binisayà,</i> The works of Lenin have not been translated into Visayan. <pos>a</pos> <tr>resolved</tr>, paid off. <form>badbaran</form> <pos>n</pos> skein holder, a device to hold a skein of thread as it is being reeled.

<p id=1544><form>badbad<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. thorny tree.

<p id=1545><form>badigard</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bodyguard</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b]</itype> <number>1</number> be, become a bodyguard. <number>2</number> <tr>watch</tr> over. <i>Gibadigaran si Tasyug maáyu sa asáwa kay himabayi,</i> Tacio&apos;s wife watched him closely because he is fond of women.&dagger;

<p id=1546><form>badingding</form> <pos>n</pos> term of endearment to a baby. <i>Kumusta ang ákung badingding?</i> How is my little darling? <pos>a</pos> <tr>very dear</tr>. <i>Badingding kaáyu ning ákung anak,</i> This baby is very dear to me. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; a12]</itype> make s.o. his little darling.

<p id=1547><form>badlipánis</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> badly punished in boxing. <i>Badlipánis siya sa siks ráwun,</i> He was badly punished in the sixth round. <number>2</number> have undergone sexual intercourse. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> maul s.o. in boxing. <number>2</number> have heavy sexual activity with a woman. <i>Nabadlipánis siya sa íyang bána,</i> Her husband gave her a good sexual going over.

<p id=1548><form>badlis</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB3; a]</itype> draw a <tr>line</tr>, for a line to show itself. <i>Mibadlis sa íyang agtang ang dagkung ugat,</i> His forehead was prominently lined with veins. <i>Mibadlis sa íyang nawung ang kahadluk,</i> Fear was written all over his face. <i>Kinsay nagbadlis sa átung bungbung?</i> Who drew a line on our wall? <number>1a</number> cross out the mark made by a bettor in cockfighting as an indication that the bet is taken on. <i>Misulud aku sa galyíra ug gibadlísan ku ang naglugrug tris-idus,</i> I went into the arena and I took on the bet of three to two. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> set limits to a person&apos;s behavior. <i>Badlísan ku ning tawhána kay nagdahan ang batásan,</i> I will put a stop to this guy because he&apos;s getting worse and worse. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> lines in the skin. <number>1a</number> <formx>&mdash; sa pálad, kinabúhì</formx> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fate</tr>. <i>Mau tingáli giyuy badlis sa íyang pálad nga maminyù siyag kriminal,</i> Perhaps it was her fate to marry a criminal. <number>2</number> <tr>line</tr> drawn. <number>3</number> <tr>Ash Wednesday</tr>. <form>&mdash; Myirkulis, ting-</form> <xr>= <sc>badlis</sc>, <ix>3.</ix></xr> <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having lines. <number>2</number> name given to k.o. <ix>danggit</ix> and <ix>sapsap</ix> that have light vertical lines on the upper sides.

<p id=1549><form>badlit</form> <xr>= <sc>kadlit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1550><form>badlun</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to various k.o. crevalles and pompanos: <bio>Caranx compressus</bio>, <bio>stellates</bio>; <bio>Gnathanodon speciosus</bio>, etc.

<p id=1551><form>badlung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> tell s.o. to stop doing s.t., <tr>admonish</tr>. <i>Ang kanáway mubadlung sa tímug,</i> The west wind makes the east wind stop blowing. <i>Badlúngun nímu ang himabáyi nímung bána,</i> You should admonish your husband because he chases after women. <pos>n</pos> <tr>admonishment</tr> not to do s.t. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <number>1</number> allow s.o. to admonish one. <i>Dì giyud nà siya pabadlung,</i> He won&apos;t obey (allow anyone to tell him to stop). <number>2</number> act in such a way as to cause admonishment. <i>Nagpabadlung na pud ka,</i> You&apos;re making a nuisance of yourself again. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> deserving to be told to stop, <tr>troublemaker</tr>. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>admonishing</tr>. <i>Mabadlúngung tinan-awan,</i> An admonishing look.

<p id=1552><form>badmintun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>badminton</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> play badminton.

<p id=1553><form>badúduy</form> <pos>n</pos> children&apos;s word for <tr>genitalia</tr>.

<p id=1554><form>bad-un</form> <xr>= <sc>balad-un</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>balà<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=1555><form>badung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. long <tr>sword</tr> made by Muslims.

<p id=1556><form>badut</form> <xr>= <sc>barut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1557><form>badútu</form> <xr>= <sc>barútu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1558><form>badyang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tuberous plant with arrow-shaped leaves reaching 4&prime; and more. Edible but itchy root, grown as ornamental and wild: <bio>Alocasia macrorrhiza</bio>.

<p id=1559><form>badyang<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>báyang<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=1560><form>badyángun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish, a small <ix>bulgan.</ix>

<p id=1561><form>badyi</form> <xr>= <sc>bayi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1562><form>badyibadyi</form> <xr>= <sc>bayingbaying</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1563><form>badyikdyik</form> <pos>a</pos> for a girl to be <tr>sexy</tr> (slang). <i>Badyikdyik kaáyu,</i> She&apos;s very sexy. <pos>n</pos> s.o.&apos;s <tr>mistress</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> become sexy. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into one&apos;s mistress. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> keeping a woman. <i>Badyikdyíkan siya kay kwartáhan,</i> He keeps a woman because he&apos;s got lots of dough.

<p id=1564><form>badyit<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>budget</tr>. <i>Ang badyit sa Pilipínas mikábat nag duha ka bilyun,</i> The budget of the Philippines has reached two billion. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>budget</tr>, allocate money. <i>Kamau ka bang mubadyit sa ímung kítà?</i> Do you know how to budget your income?

<p id=1565><form>badyit<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>kadlit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1566><form>badyù</form> <pos>a</pos> for sweet potatoes to have a rotten, sour taste. <i>Badyù ang lamì sa kamúti nga giúlud,</i> Sweet potatoes that are infested with <pb n=76>worms taste rotten. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> get infested with rot. <i>Gibadyù ang tanan nílang mga kamúti,</i> Their sweet potatoes are all infested with rot. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> of a <tr>rotten</tr> and sour quality.

<p id=1567><form>badyung</form> <pos>n</pos> prolonged humming, droning, buzzing sound. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> make a droning sound. <i>Magdalì ta kay mibadyung nang ayruplánu,</i> Let&apos;s hurry because the airplane has started to drone. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> strike close to s.t. so as to cause a whizzing sound without actually hitting it. <i>Badyúngan ku sa ákung kúmù ang ímung nawung,</i> I&apos;ll make your face feel the whizzing sound of my fists.

<p id=1568><form>bag</form> word used in writing to indicate the sound of a blow.

<p id=1569><form>bág</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bag</tr>, pocketbook. <number>2</number> kitty in a mahjong game. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>indibág</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> have, obtain a bag. <i>Babáying nagbág ug putì,</i> A lady with a white bag.&dagger;

<p id=1570><form>bága</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>embers</tr>. <form>mukáug &mdash;</form> be a tough character (eat live embers). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; a2]</itype> make, become embers. <i>Nabága (mibága) ang úling,</i> The charcoal turned into embers. <i>Bagáha ang úling kay mangutaw ku,</i> Make embers because I&apos;m going to iron. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2S]</itype> <tr>glow</tr>. <i>Nagbaga ang plantsa,</i> The iron is glowing. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b56]</itype> broil small dried fish by putting them in a plate with embers and shaking them. <i>Bagaha (bagahi) ang bulinaw,</i> Broil the anchovies. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. red fish. <form>bagabaga</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> name given to various k.o. fish with bright red scales; soldier fish, esp. <bio>Holocentrus spp</bio>. and <bio>Myripristis spp</bio>. <number>2</number> k.o. centipede with bright red body. <form>bagahan</form> <pos>a</pos> having live coals. <form>baghanan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>grill</tr>.

<p id=1571><form>bagà</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>thick</tr> in dimension. <i>Ang ámung lamísa hinímù sa bagà nga tabla,</i> Our table is made of thick wood. <number>2</number> <tr>dense</tr>. <i>Bagà kaáyu ang duut sa táwu,</i> A dense crowd of people. <number>3</number> <tr>rich</tr> (from <bx>&mdash; ug bulsa</bx> &lsquo;fat walleted&rsquo;). <form>&mdash; ug búang</form> misbehaving in an unusual way. <i>Bagà ug búang si Línu kay nanglìlì samtang nalígù ang íyang maistra,</i> Lino is very naughty because he peeped while his teacher was taking a bath. <form>&mdash; ug gwatsi</form> making subtle pranks which are not easily seen through. <form>&mdash; ug nawung</form> <tr>brazen</tr>. <i>Bagà ug nawung ning tawhána. Bisan ug wà gustuhi mangulitáwu lang gihápun,</i> This man sure has a lot of nerve. Even though she does not like him, he still continues to court her. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>thicken</tr>. <i>Undángi ug mubagà (mabagà) na ang pintal,</i> Stop when the paint thickens. <number>2</number> become dense. <i>Mibagà ang panun sa táwu pag-abut sa prisidinti,</i> The crowd became dense when the president arrived. <number>3</number> become rich. <i>Nabagà (mibagà) siya pag-intra níya sa pulitika,</i> He became rich when he entered politics. <number>4</number> <formx>&mdash; ang búang</formx> <tr>misbehave seriously</tr>. <i>Mubagà ang íyang búang kun mahubug,</i> He misbehaves seriously when he is drunk. <number>5</number> <formx>&mdash; ang nawung</formx> be completely brazen. <i>Nagbagà lang ang nawung ánang bayhána. Bisag dílì kaíla pangayúan,</i> That woman is completely shameless. She asks for things from complete strangers. <form>pa-(&larr;), pa- sa nawung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> do s.t. despite the shame it might bring. <i>Nagpabágà lang siya ug hangyù nga papangasáwa,</i> She swallowed her pride and begged him to marry her. <form>kabalag-un, gibag-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>thickness</tr>. <form>kinabag-an</form> <pos>n</pos> thickest.

<p id=1572><form>bágà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lungs</tr>.

<p id=1573><form>bagaang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be <tr>burdened</tr>, loaded with a heavy responsibility. <i>Aku ang nagbagaang ug gastu sa ímung pagtuun ug pagbuguybúguy hinúuy ímung ibálus?</i> I bore the burden of your schooling, but how do you repay me? You bum around. <i>Ikaw ang nabagaang sa tanang mga buluhatun,</i> All the household responsibilities are shoved onto you.

<p id=1574><form>bagáang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <number>1</number> feel a burning pain upon eating hot, spicy food. <i>Nabagáang ku sa síli pagkáun nákug sálad,</i> When I ate the salad I felt the hot sting of the peppers. <number>2</number> be stung by insulting words which are true. <i>Nabagáang ku sa insultu sa maistru,</i> I was stung by the teacher&apos;s insulting remarks.

<p id=1575><form>bagàbà</form> <pos>n</pos> edible seaweed found clinging to offshore rocks, roughly cylindrical, branching and hard as bone cartilage. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> gather this seaweed.

<p id=1576><form>bagákay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. thin bamboo with long internodes in yellow and green varieties, used for baskets, flutes, etc.: <bio>Schizostachyum lima</bio> and some other non-climbing species. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having a yellowish color. <number>2</number> long and thin like <ix>bagákay.</ix> <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>bugawísan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1577><form>bagal<sub>1</sub>, bágal<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lumpy</tr>. <i>Bagal kaáyu ang yútà pagdáru níla,</i> The soil was very lumpy when they plowed the field. <number>2</number> have s.t. protruding in a lump. <i>Bágal ang íyang kílid kay dihà may pistúla,</i> There was s.t. protruding on his side because he had a pistol. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>bagul</sc>, <ix>a.</ix></xr> <pos>n</pos> impacted, chunky earth. <i>Dagkù kaáyu ang bagal sa yútà sa daruhan,</i> The lumps of earth in the fields are very big. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> <number>1</number> become lumpy. <number>2</number> be protruding. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>bagul</sc>, <ix>v.</ix></xr> <form>bagalbagal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become lumpy. <i>Ang kapi mibagalbagal kay ang túbig wà pa man mubúkal,</i> The powdered coffee was full of lumps because the water was not boiling.

<p id=1578><form>bagal<sub>2</sub>, bágal<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shell</tr> of eggs, cartridges, and <pb n=77>all shellfish but shrimps. <i>Bagal sa mga kinhasun,</i> Shells from the sea animals. <i>Bagal sa blastingkap,</i> Empty shells of a dynamite blasting cap. <form>(&larr;), -an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>shrimp</tr> of tidal swamps, growing to 3&Prime; with a thick transparent shell.

<p id=1579><form>bagalnga</form> <pos>n</pos> small tree of thickets: <bio>Melia azedarach</bio>.

<p id=1580><form>bagamundu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>vagrant</tr>. <number>2</number> a variation of the game <ix>kulilísi</ix> in which two groups, each with their own leader, complete in verse, the one group trying to gain the privilege of being admitted to the wake where they can join the other group in the game. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B16]</itype> become a vagabond. <i>Nabagamundu si Uskar kay way pirmaninting pinuy-ánan,</i> Oscar became a vagabond because he has no permanent place to stay. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> play the game <ix>bagamundu.</ix>

<p id=1581><form>bagan</form> <xr>= <sc>mau ra ug</sc> (dialectal).</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>mau</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1582><form>bagánaw</form> <pos>n</pos> pool of water left after rain or after water has been washed over a dry area. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c]</itype> become a pool of water. <i>Ang kusug nga ulan nakapabagánaw (nakabagánaw) sa túbig,</i> The heavy rain has turned the puddle into pools.

<p id=1583><form>bágang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. <tr>beetle</tr> found on coconuts. <number>2</number> k.o. brown beetle commonly found in the Australian pine (<ix>agúhu</ix>).

<p id=1584><form>bag-ang</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>molars</tr>. <i>Mikágut ang íyang bag-ang sa labihang kalágut,</i> He gritted his teeth in extreme anger. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> hit in the molars. <number>2</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> be hit by the truth of a statement that hurts. <i>Nabag-ang siya sa ákung sulti kay hingmatud-an,</i> My words hit him in a vital spot because they happened to be true. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having molars. <number>2</number> be completely outstanding because of some possessions. <i>Siya mauy bag-ángang dátù sa ámù,</i> He is well-known for his wealth in our town. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become rich, powerful.

<p id=1585><form>bag-ángan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>spotted eagle ray</tr>: <bio>Aetobatus narinari</bio>. <number>2</number> k.o. red and black <tr>porgy</tr>: <bio>Lethrinius rhodopterus</bio>.

<p id=1586><form>bagansiya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vagrancy</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a3]</itype> charged with vagrancy. <i>Nabagansiya si Rus kay nasakpan nga namampam,</i> Rose was charged with vagrancy because she was caught engaging in prostitution.

<p id=1587><form>bag-as</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> <number>1</number> for animal tissue to decay and dry up. <i>Ug mabag-as, dílì na bahù,</i> Once it has decayed and dried, it doesn&apos;t smell. <number>2</number> for tough guys to die (slang). <i>Nabag-as na ang matun,</i> The tough guy kicked off.

<p id=1588><form>bagási, bagásu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bagasse</tr>, dried pulp of the sugar cane. <form>bagasíru</form> <pos>n</pos> employee in a sugar mill who gathers the pulp. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; a2]</itype> be, become a pulp-gatherer.

<p id=1589><form>bágat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> <tr>meet</tr>, esp. on the sea. <i>Nagbágat ang duha ka barku,</i> The two ships met on the sea. <i>Adtu níla ikabágat ang matahum nílang kaugmáun,</i> There they will meet their rosy future. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC; ac2]</itype> <tr>barter</tr> products (from the notion that one goes to meet a fisherman and exchanges s.t. for his fish). <i>Átung bagátun ang isig nátù kaabut,</i> We will exchange our products with each other. <i>Bagátan (ibágat) ku ning ákung humay ug isdà,</i> I will barter my rice for fish.

<p id=1590><form>bagatúngul</form> <xr>= <sc>balbangáan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1591><form>bagaw<sub>1</sub></form> as if (dialectal).

<p id=1592><form>bagaw<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>bagal<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=1593><form>bag-aw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be kept waiting. <i>Nabag-aw man lang kug pinaábut nímu,</i> You kept me waiting for a long time.

<p id=1594><form>bágay</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>befitting</tr>, <tr>becoming</tr>. <i>Bágay kaáyu sa íyang nawung ang antipára,</i> His glasses are very becoming on his face. <number>2</number> for instruments to be in tune. <i>Bágay na nang ímung sista,</i> Your guitar is tuned now. <number>2a</number> for voices to be blended. <i>Bágay kaáyu ang ílang mga tíngug,</i> Their voices are well blended. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2C]</itype> <tr>harmonize with</tr>, <tr>match</tr>. <i>Mibágay sa kurti sa íyang láwas ang íyang sinínà,</i> Her dress is very good for her sort of body. <i>Nagbágay ang íyang <sic>bag</sic> ug sapátus,</i> Her bag and shoes match. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>tune</tr> musical instruments. <i>Mubágay pa ku sa sista,</i> I&apos;ll tune the guitar first. <number>3</number> <itype>[B2; a1c3]</itype> for words to rhyme. <i>Ang púlung &lsquo;úlud&rsquo; dílì mubágay sa &lsquo;pálad&rsquo;,</i> The word &lsquo;worm&rsquo; doesn&apos;t rhyme with &lsquo;palm&rsquo;. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rhyming</tr>, <tr>verse-making</tr>.

<p id=1595><form>bagaybay</form> <pos>n</pos> fat in a fish that develops into eggs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B34; b4]</itype> develop <ix>bagaybay.</ix> <i>Mau rung panahúna ang bangrus mubagaybay,</i> This is the time the milkfish develops egg fat. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having <ix>bagaybay.</ix> <number>2</number> <tr>big-stomached</tr>. <i>Bagaybáyun ug tiyan ang mga táwung tambuk,</i> Obese people have big stomachs.

<p id=1596><form>*bagbag</form> <form>pati-</form> <xr>= <sc>alibagbag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1597><form>bagdal</form> <pos>a</pos> for a face to be too chubby to be pretty. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN]</itype> be, become too chubby. <i>Mubagdal nang ímung nawung ug manambuk ka,</i> Your face will be too chubby if you grow stout. <i>Ang íyang nawung namagdal sa hupung,</i> Her face swelled with <corr sic=endema>edema</corr>.

<p id=1598><form>bagduk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>puncture</tr>, make a small hole in. <i>May mibagduk tingáli sa ligid kay mihiyus man,</i> S.t. must have punctured the tire because it is flat. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB]</itype> for s.t. with a pointed tip to pierce and stick into s.t., cause it to do so. <i>Ang tumuy sa kutsilyu nga nahúlug mibagduk sa yútà,</i> The knife fell and the tip stuck into the ground. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>puncture</tr>. <pb n=78><number>2</number> s.t. pierced into s.t.

<p id=1599><form>*bagduy</form> <form>táwung &mdash;</form> one who roams about without purpose. <form>bagduybagduy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b1]</itype> roam around purposelessly instead of doing what one is supposed to do. <i>Nagbagduybagduy lang nà siya. Wà giyud nà siyay nahímù,</i> He just roams about. He hasn&apos;t done anything. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of roaming about.

<p id=1600><form>baghak</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. medium-sized <tr>grouper</tr>.

<p id=1601><form>baghas<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>hashas</sc>, <ix>1.</ix></xr>

<p id=1602><form>baghas<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> having offensive, rude manners. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> get to be crude, offensive. <i>Nagkabaghas siya sukad muintrag ínum,</i> He has become cruder since he took to drinking.

<p id=1603><form>baghud</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>tough</tr>, hard in feelings, character. <i>Ang íyang pahíyum mudani bísan kinsa nga baghud ug balatían,</i> Her smile wins over the hardest of hearts.

<p id=1604><form>baghut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> prompt s.o. to think ill about s.t. <i>Kinsay nibaghut sa átung ámu nga ipabalhin ku?</i> Who talked against me to have prompted the boss to transfer me? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b3c]</itype> <tr>rant</tr> loudly in anger or complaint. <i>Pangutána únà unsay hinungdan. Dílì kay mubaghut ka lang dihà dáyun,</i> Find out what the matter is before you go ranting and raving right away. <pos>n</pos> s.t. said to s.o. against s.o. else to influence him.

<p id=1605><form>bagìbì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> talk foolishly, rant often with no one present. <i>Nagbagìbì si Maríya kay walà pa gihápun ang íyang bána,</i> Mary is ranting because her husband still isn&apos;t home. -<form>an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> given to ranting and raving. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become a ranter.

<p id=1606><form>bag-id</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB46; ac]</itype> rub back and forth against. <i>Mibag-id ang bábuy sa batu kay gikatlan,</i> The pig brushed itself against the stone because it itched. <i>Kamau ka bang mubag-id ug kawáyan arun mukáyu?</i> Do you know how to rub two sticks together to make fire? <i>Nabag-iran ang ákung dyíp,</i> Some car grazed my jeep. <i>Gibag-id níya ang íyang áping sa ákù,</i> He rubbed his cheek against mine. <pos>n</pos> sticks to make fire.

<p id=1607><form>báging</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> work out with a punching bag. <i>Bagíngun ta ning ímung pansing bag,</i> I&apos;ll have a workout on your punching bag.

<p id=1608><form>bágis<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> be completely careless of all rules of decorum, esp. proper dress. <i>Bágis kaáyu siya kay magtiniil lang ug musimba,</i> He is a hippy because he goes to church barefooted. <number>2</number> be grossly misbehaved in general. <number>3</number> be a tough, ruffian. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be grossly misbehaved. <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> appear unkempt. <i>Bisan ug makabinágis ka ug kausa itsapuyráhun ka,</i> If you appear unkempt just once you will get kicked out. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> act as if one doesn&apos;t care what others say. <i>Ug aku diay binagísan níya, hilatiguhan giyud,</i> If he misbehaves toward me, I&apos;ll give him a beating.

<p id=1609><form>bágis<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>badlis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1610><form>bagit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> invite or provoke a bad outcome. <i>Nagbagit ka giyud sa ímung kadaútan,</i> You are certainly courting disaster for yourself. <number>2</number> <itype>[AP]</itype> cause to be aroused or stimulated. <i>Kining pamisti nímu nagbagit (nagpabagit) sa yawan-ung hunàhúnà sa mga laláki,</i> The way you dress arouses devilish passions in a man. <form>bagitbagit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> provoke s.o. into action. <i>Nagbagitbagit ka giyud sa ímung bána niánang ímung pagkasabaan,</i> You&apos;re provoking your husband to anger with your nagging. <form>mabagitbagitun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>provocative</tr>. <i>Pahíyum nga mabagitbagitun,</i> Provocative smile.

<p id=1611><form>bagíyus</form> <pos>n</pos> loud hissing or whizzing sound. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> whizz loudly. <i>Mibagíyus ang hángin tungud sa bagyu,</i> The wind whizzed because of the typhoon. <i>Nagbagíyus ang trák nga kusug kaáyung nagdagan,</i> The truck roared as it moved rapidly.

<p id=1612><form>baglis</form> <xr>= <sc>badlis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1613><form>bagnas</form> <xr>= <sc>bagnus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1614><form>bagnid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> shred papaya, cassava, and things of similar consistency. <i>Bagníra (ibagnid) na ang kapáyas kay átung kiláwun,</i> Shred the papaya because we are going to pickle it.

<p id=1615><form>bagnud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> rub s.t. solid against s.t. hard and even. <i>Kinsay nagbagnud ug plurwaks sa sawug?</i> Who applied wax to the floor?

<p id=1616><form>bagnus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> rub s.t. on s.t. with force. <i>Nagbagnus mi ug kandílà sa plantsa arun dílì tay-an,</i> We rub a candle against the iron so it won&apos;t get rusty. <i>Ayawg bagnúsi ang ákung bukubuku, paghíri lang,</i> Don&apos;t rub my back hard, just wipe it on gently.

<p id=1617><form>bagnut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> pull out by the roots with great force. <i><corr sic=Nagbangut>Nagbagnut</corr> siya sa dakung káhuy,</i> He pulled a big tree out by the roots. <pos>n</pos> <tr>weeds</tr>. <i>Adtu ang mga manuk mangitlug sa tag-as nga mga bagnut,</i> The chickens lay their eggs in the tall weeds. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>weedy</tr>. <number>2</number> of no use, a parasite. <i>Bagnut siya sa ílang pamilya. Dílì siya mutábang sa buluhatun,</i> He is a parasite in their family. He doesn&apos;t help with the chores. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>weedy</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>untidy</tr>. <i>Bagnutun kaáyu ang íyang hitsúra. Walay sudlay ang buhuk,</i> Her appearance is very untidy. She didn&apos;t comb her hair.

<p id=1618><form>bagransiya</form> <xr>= <sc>bagansiya</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1619><form>bagrung</form> <pos>n</pos> racing sound of engines, <tr>wind</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>roar</tr>. <i>Mibagrung ang awtu,</i> The car roared. <i>Nagbagrung ang hángin mu rag bagyu,</i> <pb n=79>The wind is roaring like a storm.

<p id=1620><form>bagsak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>fall</tr> heavily on the ground. <i>Mibagsak ang lubi sa ákung tungud,</i> A coconut fell in front of me. <i>Ibagsak ku ning ákung gidala sa ímung tiil,</i> I will drop this thing I&apos;m carrying on your feet. <i>Nabagsak ang dyít sa lasang,</i> The jet plane crashed in the forest. <number>2</number> <tr>fail</tr> in school. <i>Nabagsak siya kay way tuuntúun,</i> He failed because he did not study.

<p id=1621><form>bagsak<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give a <tr>bribe</tr>. <i>Bagsáki lang ang supirbisur arun ka masulud,</i> Just give the supervisor a bribe so you can get a job. <pos>n</pos> s.t. given as a bribe. <form>hi&N;-</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of giving bribes.

<p id=1622><form>bagsak<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> scare lines in fishing gear to drive the fish back into the net.

<p id=1623><form>bagsang</form> <xr>= <sc>balagsang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1624><form>bagtak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>calf</tr> of the leg. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having prominent calves.

<p id=1625><form>bagtas<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>baktas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1626><form>bagtas<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> part of the <tr>beach</tr> with a broad strip of sand usually not reached by the tide. <form>-un</form> <xr>= <sc>bagtas<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=1627><form>bagtì</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bone-dry</tr>. <i>Ang bagtì nga káhuy maáyung isugnud kay sigaun,</i> Bone-dry wood is good for fuel because it burns easily. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN]</itype> become very dried out because of heat. <i>Namagtì (mibagtì) ang yútà sa kaínit,</i> The earth is cracking with heat. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> place where earthenware is fired for final seasoning.

<p id=1628><form>bagtik</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>hard</tr> because of being full. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> get hard. <i>Bagtíkun nátù ang búla arun kusug muuntul,</i> Let&apos;s pump the ball hard so that it bounces well. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>hardened</tr> sap of the <ix>píli</ix> tree (<bio>Canarium luzonicum</bio>) used for caulking in the walling of small boats. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>balaw</sc>, <ix>1.</ix></xr> <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> of a hard sort.

<p id=1629><form>bagting</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ringing</tr> noise. <i>Ang bagting sa rilu nakapúkaw nákù,</i> I was awakened by the alarm clock. <form>dì kadungug, kabatì ug &mdash;</form> easily insulted, quick to take offense. <i>Dì nà siya kabatì ug bagting, dáyun siyag kasukù,</i> He can&apos;t take it. He gets angry if he hears s.t. he doesn&apos;t like. <form>&mdash; sa kampána, lángit</form> point in childbirth where the baby crowns and the mother feels the most intense pain. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB; a]</itype> <tr>ring</tr>, make s.t. ring. <i>Akuy mubagting (mupabagting) sa kampána sa tingpamúhì,</i> I ring the bell for dismissal. <i>Mubagting ang kampána sa alas diyis,</i> The bell will ring at ten. <number>2</number> <itype>[B246]</itype> reach the point of highest pain in childbirth.&dagger;

<p id=1630><form>bagtuk</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>hardened</tr>, <tr>crystallized</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APBN]</itype> become, make hard. <i>Namagtuk (mibagtuk) ang lápuk,</i> The mud hardened. <i>Ang túbig bugnaw mubagtuk (mupabagtuk) sa aníbal,</i> Cold water will make the syrup crystallize. <form>-un</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. corn in which the young grains harden instead of developing.&dagger;

<p id=1631><form>bagtus</form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>children</tr>. <i>Duha na ka bagtus ang ákung pakan-un,</i> I have two children to feed.

<p id=1632><form>bágu</form> <pos>n</pos> small wild tree the leaves of which are used as a vegetable: <bio>Gnetum gnemon</bio>.

<p id=1633><form>bagù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> disease characterized by general debility, swelling in the region of the stomach, and yellowish skin. It commonly occurs in swampy areas and is thought to be caused by snails or mosquitoes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> get <ix>bagù.</ix>

<p id=1634><form>bagù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>responsibility</tr>, lookout. <i>Ulahi ka man, wà nay pagkáun. Ímu nang bagù,</i> You are late and the food is gone. That&apos;s your problem. <i>Dakù kug bagù sa bangku,</i> I owe a lot of money to the bank.

<p id=1635><form>bag-u</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>new</tr>. <form>-ng Túgun</form> <tr>New Testament</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>modern</tr>. <i>Ang mga batan-un sa bag-ung panahun agrisíbu,</i> The youth nowadays is aggressive. <form>-ng túbù</form> the modern generation. <form>-ng túig</form> New Year. <number>3</number> <tr>recently</tr>, just now. <i>Bag-u siyang abut,</i> He is a new arrival here. <i>Bag-u pa siyang milakaw,</i> He just left. <i>Bag-u pang gabíi pagsaka sa kawatan,</i> It was early evening when the thief entered. <form>karung &mdash;</form> <tr>recently</tr>, of late. <i>Gidugù siya karung bag-u,</i> She recently menstruated. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> be, become new. <i>Mubag-u (mabag-u) nga tan-áwun ang sapátus basta limpiyáhan,</i> Shoes will look new if you clean them. <number>2</number> <itype>[AP1B1; a]</itype> change s.t. for the better, become better. <i>Dì ka gánì magbag-u,</i> If you don&apos;t reform. <i>Nagbag-u sila sa ílang panagway,</i> They made their faces over anew. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12; c]</itype> obtain s.t. new. <i>Nakabag-u siyag awtu pagkadaug sa swipstik,</i> He got a new car when he won the sweepstakes. <i>Bag-úhan (baghúan) kug ligid ang ákung dyíp,</i> I&apos;ll buy new tires for my jeep. <i>Unsa mang gumáha ang ímung ibag-u?</i> What brand of tires are you going to replace them with? <number>4</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> feel strange, <tr>unaccustomed</tr>. <i>Naglísud pa siya kay gibag-úhan pa sa trabáhu,</i> He&apos;s having a hard time because he&apos;s unaccustomed to the work. <number>5</number> <formx>-ng túig</formx> <itype>[B256; b4(1)]</itype> for it to be New Year&apos;s. <form>pa&N;- nga túig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> celebrate New Year&apos;s. <i>Didtu mi sa Hungkung mamag-ung túig,</i> We celebrated New Year&apos;s in H. K. <form>-in-</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>modern</tr>. <i>Ang binag-ung paági sa panguma,</i> The modern way of farming. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B15]</itype> <tr>change</tr>. <i>Nagbinag-u nga nadátù,</i> He changed when he became rich. <form>mabinag-úhun</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of modern things. <form>bag-úhay</form> <pos>a</pos> short while ago. <i>Bag-úhay pa lang giyud tung nilakaw si Ramun,</i> Ramon left just a while ago.&dagger;

<pb n=80>

<p id=1636><form>bagubhu</form> <pos>n</pos> deep, hollow sound produced by rapping s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> make a deep, hollow sound. <i>Mibagubhu ang ákung bukubuku nga íyang gipukpuk,</i> He pounded me on my back with a thump.

<p id=1637><form>Bagúbu, Bagúbù, Bagùbù</form> <pos>n</pos> Bagobo tribe of Davao and their language.

<p id=1638><form>bagudlus</form> <pos>n</pos> a roaring sound of the sea or wind. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>roar</tr>. <i>Inighurus sa tímug, magbagudlus ang hángin,</i> When the east wind blows, the wind roars. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> <tr>run fast</tr>. <i>Nagbagudlus kug dágan sa dihang gigukud kug irung búang,</i> I ran fast when the mad dog chased me.

<p id=1639><form>bagukbuk</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. weevil that eats lumber and secretes round and very fine waste matter.

<p id=1640><form>bagul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>coconut shell</tr>. <number>2</number> head (slang). <i>Gamíta ang ímung bagul,</i> Use your head. <pos>a</pos> <tr>uncomfortable</tr> to have weigh on one or put one&apos;s weight on because of things which protrude. <i>Ang lantay bagul higdáan,</i> It is uncomfortable to lie on bamboo slats. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become uncomfortable. <i>Ug butangan nímug kamúti ang sáku mubagul lukdúhun,</i> If you put sweet potatoes into the sack, it will become uncomfortable to carry. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> a child&apos;s game played with coconut shells or slippers where one child puts his shell on the ground and the other child (under various impediments) throws his own shell and tries to hit the first child&apos;s. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> play <ix>bágul.</ix> <form>bagulbágul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>skull</tr>. <i>Buk-un ku ang bagulbágul nímu,</i> I&apos;ll crack your skull. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> place where there are many scattered coconut shells. <form>sam-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>bágul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1641><form>bagulbul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3c5]</itype> <tr>grumble</tr>, complain about a grievance. <i>Ngánung magbagulbul ka man nga giángay ta man mug hátag?</i> Why are you grumbling when I gave you all the same amount? <pos>n</pos> grumbling. <i>Ang mga bagulbul sa katawhan nakapabalísa sa pamúnù,</i> The grumbling of the people had the President worried. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> given to grumbling.

<p id=1642><form>bagumbáyan</form> <pos>n</pos> snack made of old bread, sugared and fried.

<p id=1643><form>bagun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>wheelbarrow</tr>. <number>2</number> railroad <tr>freight car</tr>. <i>Tulu ka bagung tubu,</i> Three freight cars full of sugar cane. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> transport in a wheelbarrow, freight car. <i>Bagunun (ibagun) ta lang ning balas,</i> Let&apos;s carry this sand in the wheelbarrow.

<p id=1644><form>bágun</form> <xr>= <sc>balágun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1645><form>bagunbun</form> <pos>a</pos> for containers to be <tr>bulging</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> become bulging with content. <i>Nagbagunbun ang íyang bursa sa kwarta,</i> His pocket is bulging with money.

<p id=1646><form>bagunbúnun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. grey and brown coloration of chicken feathers, cock having that color feathers.

<p id=1647><form>bagung<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>bagun</sc>, <bx>2</bx>.</xr>

<p id=1648><form>*bagung<sub>2</sub></form> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> fail to show reaction to s.t., stay put and <tr>be unmoved</tr>. <i>Bisan ug unsáun nákug búnal ang kabáyù, nagpabagung na lang,</i> No matter how much I struck the horse, it just stayed put.

<p id=1649><form>bag-ung</form> <xr>= <sc>balag-ung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1650><form>bagungun, bagúngun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small edible cerith shell of swamps. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain <ix>bagungun.</ix> <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> get this shellfish.

<p id=1651><form>bagunul</form> <pos>a</pos> for a surface to be <tr>lumpy</tr>. <i>Bagunul ang karsáda kay walà mapisun,</i> The road is not smooth because it hasn&apos;t been rolled. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become lumpy.

<p id=1652><form>bagurus</form> <xr>= <sc>bagudlus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1653><form>bágus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> smooth a piece of wood with a knife. <i>Bagúsan ku ang kawáyan sa kurta,</i> I&apos;ll smooth the bamboo with the knife. <form>-in-, -in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. smoothed.

<p id=1654><form>bágus<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tong</tr>, protection money. <number>2</number> one who dodges or evades the payment of s.t. <i>Bágus nà siya. Wà mubáyad ug buhis,</i> He is a tax evader. He did not pay taxes. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12N; b6c1]</itype> get money by extortion. <i>Ang pulis mamágus sa tindáhang Insik,</i> The police extorts protection money from the Chinese stores. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12N; a]</itype> avoid payment, enjoy s.t. without paying. <i>Nakabágus (nakapamágus) siya sa trák kay pulis man,</i> He didn&apos;t have to pay bus fare because he is a policeman. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1, 2</number> <xr>= <sc>bágus</sc>, <ix>v</ix>.</xr> <number>3</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> play truant. <i>Nahagbung siya kay pirming mamágus,</i> He flunked because he is always truant. <form>ma&N;-r-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>truant</tr>.

<p id=1655><form>bagutbut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3c5]</itype> mumble under one&apos;s breath in complaint. <i>Ígù ra siyang makabagutbut. Dì man siya makaáku sa pagtubag,</i> All he could do was grumble under his breath. He didn&apos;t dare answer. <pos>n</pos> <tr>mumbling</tr>. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to grumble under one&apos;s breath.

<p id=1656><form>bagúud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12S46]</itype> be heavily <tr>burdened</tr>. <i>Nagbaguud siya sa usa ka alat nga mangga,</i> She was staggering under the load of a basketful of mangoes. <i>Nagbaguud ku sa mga útang,</i> I&apos;m staggering under the burden of my debts.

<p id=1657><form>bagúung</form> <pos>n</pos> salted and fermented fish paste.

<p id=1658><form>bagwísan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish.

<p id=1659><form>bagyang</form> <xr>= <sc>badyang<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=1660><form>bagyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>typhoon</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a4]</itype> for there to be a typhoon. <i>Nagbagyu run sa Batánis,</i> There&apos;s a typhoon now in the Batanes Islands. <i>Bagyuhun gánì ta, manglúpad giyud ang átung nípang atup,</i> If a typhoon hits us, our thatched roof will surely be blown off. <form>talibagyu, bumabagyu, balagyuhun</form> <pos>n</pos> about <pb n=81>to have a typhoon.&dagger;

<p id=1661><form>bagyu bins</form> <pos>n</pos> green and wax beans, the pods of which are eaten: <bio>Phaseolus vulgaris</bio>.

<p id=1662><form>*báha</form> <form>kamara &mdash;</form> Lower House of Congress.

<p id=1663><form>bahà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>flood</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; b4]</itype> <number>1</number> flow in a flood, flood over. <i>Mibahà ang sapà sa kakusug sa ulan,</i> The river flooded over because of the heavy rain. <i>Gibahaan (gibaháan) ang ámung sílung,</i> The lower portion of our house was flooded. <number>2</number> come in great quantity, experience in great intensity. <i>Mubahà ang sápì karung iliksiyun,</i> Money will flow this coming election. <i>Gibaháan ang ákung galamhan sa túmang kalípay,</i> I was overwhelmed with joy. <number>3</number> <itype>[a4]</itype> <tr>sneeze</tr>. <i>Bahaun (bàhun) ka ug mutan-aw kas adlaw,</i> You will sneeze if you look at the sun. <form>bahàbáhà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> go, come in throngs and swarms. <i>Nagbahàbáhà ang mga táwu sa kadalánan kay musúgat sa Santu Pápa,</i> People are flooding the streets to meet the Pope. <form>balaháan, bahaánan</form> <pos>n</pos><i></i> subject to floods.

<p id=1664><form>báhad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>threaten</tr> to do s.t. <i>Nagbáhad síyang ikíha ka,</i> He was threatening to sue you. <number>2</number> make up one&apos;s mind to do s.t. one is really not in a position to do. <i>Dúgay na nákung gibaháran nang awtúhang palitun,</i> I have been threatening to buy that car for the longest time. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>threat</tr>. <number>2</number> mutual agreement to meet s.w. for a fight or contest. <i>May báhad silang magsumbagay sa plása,</i> They have an agreement to have a fight in the plaza. <form>mabahárun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>threatening</tr>.

<p id=1665><form>baháda</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>downhill grade</tr>. <number>2</number> for a price to be low. <i>Baháda ang prisyu sa mais run,</i> The price of corn is low now. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> go downhill on a road. <i>Kusug kaáyu ning dyípa kun magbaháda,</i> This jeep runs fast when it goes downhill. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> go down in price.

<p id=1666><form>bahádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>below normal</tr>, <tr>low</tr>. <i>May bagyung umalábut. Bahádu ang barumítru,</i> A typhoon is coming. The barometer is below normal. <i>Bahádu ang prisyu sa kupras,</i> The price of copra is low. <number>2</number> in a bad mood. <i>Pagbantay mu. Bahádu bayà ang átung maistra run,</i> Better be careful. Our teacher is in a bad mood today. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> be in a bad mood, go down below normal.

<p id=1667><form>bahag</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>G-string</tr>. <i>Dì masaghirag bahag bayhána,</i> That woman is terribly fertile. (Lit. You can&apos;t brush a g-string against her without her getting pregnant.) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, make a g-string. <i>Gibahag níya ang íyang kamisin,</i> He made a g-string out of his undershirt. <form>&mdash; ang íkug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> <number>1</number> tuck the tail between legs. <i>Mabahag ang íkug sa irù basta daug,</i> A defeated dog tucks his tail between his legs. <number>2</number> run away in cowardice. <i>Mibahag ang íyang íkug nga gigúkud sa íyang kaáway,</i> He turned tail when his enemy pursued him. <form>bahagbahag</form> <pos>n</pos> harmless k.o. long thin <tr>jellyfish</tr>, semi-transparent, resembling a snake. Used in sorcery called <ix>sampal.</ix>

<p id=1668><form>baháhà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bleat</tr> of sheep and goats. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>bleat</tr>.

<p id=1669><form>báhak</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>baláhak</sc>.</xr> <number>2&dagger;</number>.

<p id=1670><form>bahakhak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>laugh</tr> boisterously. <pos>n</pos> <tr>boisterous laughter</tr>.

<p id=1671><form>bahal</form> <pos>n</pos> palm toddy one or two days old. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1PB26; a2]</itype> make, become <ix>bahal.</ix> <i>Ibaligyà ta ning tanan kay bahalan unyà ta,</i> Let&apos;s sell all of this, otherwise, our toddy will turn into <ix>bahal</ix> on us. <pos>a</pos> for palm toddy to be aged two or three days. <form>&mdash; nga syíti birnis</form> <xr>= <sc>síti birnis</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>birnis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1672><form>bahálà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>in charge of</tr>, <tr>responsible</tr> for. <i>Aku nay bahálà sa tanan,</i> I&apos;ll take care of everything. <form>&mdash; na</form> I don&apos;t care what happens, come what may. <i>Bahálà nag unsay mahitabù basta makabawus lang ku,</i> I don&apos;t care what happens as long as I can get even. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <number>1</number> say one doesn&apos;t care. <i>Ákù siyang giingnan ayaw pagminyù, namahálà lang,</i> When I told him not to get married, he just said he didn&apos;t care. <number>2</number> assume responsibility for. <i>Akuy mamahálà sa balayranan,</i> I&apos;ll take charge of the payments.

<p id=1673><form>bahalína</form> <pos>n</pos> coconut toddy aged for several months. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> make aged palm toddy. <i>Bahalináun ta ning tubáa,</i> Let&apos;s have this palm toddy age.

<p id=1674><form>báhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> team of militia workers. <i>Tulu ka báhan sa písi,</i> Three teams of constabulary men. <number>2</number> type of net fishing with a large group of people. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> tie in a row, large groups. <i>Itángag ang púkut didtu sa búkung ug bunut. Unyà bahánun,</i> Put the net on top of the shells and husks; then tie them in a row to the net. <form>bahanbáhan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> gang around. <i>Nagbahanbáhan na pud ang mga batan-un sa átung baryu,</i> The youngsters are running around in gangs in our neighborhood. <i>Dílì ku mutúgut nga makigbahanbáhan ka sa mga buguy,</i> I don&apos;t like you to gang around with those good-for-nothing fellows.

<p id=1675><form>bahandì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wealth</tr>, <tr>treasure</tr>. <form>ma&N;-, ma&N;-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>treasurer</tr>. <i>Mamahandì (mamamahandì) sa lungsud,</i> The treasurer of the town. <form>-ánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>wealthy</tr>. <i>Kun dì ka bahandiánun, dì ka mapílì,</i> If you are not wealthy, you will not get elected.

<p id=1676><form>bahar</form> <pos>a</pos> be low-priced at a certain season. <i>Bahar ang mangga ug maabril,</i> In April the price of mangoes is low. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> go down in price. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ab7]</itype> lower the price. <i>Pabaharan <pb n=82>ang prisyu unyà,</i> The price will go down after a while.

<p id=1677><form>bahas</form> <xr>= <sc>bahasbáhas</sc>.</xr> <form>bahasbáhas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; cP]</itype> go back and forth over an area rapidly. <i>Ang dyit mibahasbáhas sa nahagsáan,</i> The jet flew back and forth swiftly over the crash site. <i>Dílì ka makakità sa tubag ug ímu lang ibahasbáhas (ipabahasbáhas) ang tinan-awan sa panid,</i> You will never find the answer if you just let your eyes roam over the page.

<p id=1678><form>báhas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>put an end to</tr>. <i>Áway ang nagbáhas sa bayli,</i> A quarrel ended the dance early. <i>Sila ang nakabáhas sa pagkáun sa walà pa muabut ang mga bisíta,</i> They consumed all the food before the visitors arrived. <number>2</number> <tr>cancel</tr>. <i>Mubáhas giyud siya sa ímung lisinsiya,</i> He will cancel your license. <i>Ibáhas (bahásun) ang mga byáhi kun magbagyu,</i> They cancel the flights if there is a storm.

<p id=1679><form>bahaulu</form> <xr>= <sc>bahuulu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1680><form>báhaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put food out to eat. <i>Pagbáhaw na,</i> Serve the dinner now. <i>Ibáhaw (baháwa) ang kan-un sa panay,</i> Put the rice on the clay plate. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> plate for an individual serving. <number>2</number> home plate in <ix>tubigtúbig</ix> game, the area behind the last guarded line or pair of squares. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> use s.t. as a plate.

<p id=1681><form>báhaw<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> left over from before and not quite fresh. <i>Ayaw aku sirbíhig báhawng pán,</i> Don&apos;t serve me old bread. <i>Alisdi kanang túbig kay báhaw,</i> Change this water. It&apos;s left over from before. <number>2</number> old, stale news. <i>Báhaw na nang balitáa,</i> That&apos;s old news. <number>3</number> fighting cock set out to fight a second time within a day or two after having fought. <i>Báhaw na nang manúka. Lagmit bun-un nà,</i> That cock is stale. Most likely he&apos;ll be defeated. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a2b4]</itype> reserve food for some later time. <i>Baháwun ta ning bibingka,</i> Let&apos;s put these rice cakes aside for later. <i>Kanúnay lang ming baháwan káda káun,</i> We always have food left over each meal. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>breakfast</tr>. <number>2</number> late afternoon snack consisting of rice or corn. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> eat breakfast, late afternoon meal. <form>pamahawbahaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c2]</itype> take a snack from the leftovers. <i>Dúna ba tay ipamahawbahaw dihà?</i> Do we have any leftovers to have as a snack? <form>bahawbahaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small insects that swarm over leftover food or garbage. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infested with this sort of insect.

<p id=1682><form>bahay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos><corr sic=a>n</corr></pos> rice which got wet before having been threshed. <i>Bahay nga gilung-ag búsà dílì mutúbù,</i> You cooked slightly spoiled rice, so it won&apos;t rise. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a]</itype> become spoiled through getting wet.

<p id=1683><form>bahay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. forest tree, the tuberous roots of which are eaten in times of famine.

<p id=1684><form>bahayan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>rope</tr> sewn to the edge of a net to make it stiff and as a place to attach floats. <number>2</number> <tr>longline</tr> in longline fishing (<ix>palangri</ix>) to which several leaders with hooks are attached. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; c1]</itype> put rope on edge of net.

<p id=1685><form>báhì</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the hard portion of a palm trunk. <number>2</number> cane or club made of a palm trunk.

<p id=1686><form>bahig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>sort</tr>, <tr>separate</tr> according to different classes or sizes. <i>Bahigun nátù ang lubi sa tulu ka grúpu,</i> We will sort the coconut into three groups.

<p id=1687><form>bahignit</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>flirtatious</tr>, trying to attract a man&apos;s attention. <i>Bahignit kaáyu. Mangúnag kablit,</i> She&apos;s flirtatious. She nudges men to get their attention. <pos>n</pos> term of endearment of infants.

<p id=1688><form>bahíhì, bahihì, bahìhì</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>neighing</tr> of a horse, <tr>bleating</tr> of a sheep or goat. <number>2</number> sound like neighing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>neigh</tr>, <tr>bleat</tr>.

<p id=1689><form>bahikhik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> high-pitched, somewhat restrained <tr>laughter</tr>. <i>Mibahikhik sila nga namátì sa malaw-ay nga isturya,</i> They snickered as they listened to the dirty stories.

<p id=1690><form>bahilya</form> <pos>n</pos> complete set of dishes.

<p id=1691><form>báhin</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>divide</tr> into shares. <i>Bahínun ta ni sa upat,</i> Let&apos;s divide this into four pieces. <i>Gibahínan ku níyag upat ka isdà,</i> He shared four fish with me. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3S]</itype> get a share. <i>Makabahin kag daghang isdà ug magbuntag ka,</i> You get a larger share of fish if you stay until morning. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>share</tr>. <i>Átung hiwáun sa upat ka báhin,</i> Let&apos;s cut it into four shares. <number>2</number> <tr>section</tr>, <tr>portion</tr>. <i>Dúnay báhin nga binisayà ang Príman,</i> The Freeman has a Visayan section. <i>Báhin sa tulumanun,</i> Section in the program. <number>3</number> <tr>turn</tr>. <i>Ákung báhin nga pakantáhun,</i> My turn to sing. <number>4</number> <tr>role</tr> in a play. <i>Kumidiyanti ang ákung báhin sa dráma,</i> My role in the play is that of a comedian. <number>5</number> regarding. <i>Unsay ímung ikasulti báhin niánà?</i> What do you have to say concerning that? <form>sa ákung &mdash;</form> <tr>for my part</tr>. <i>Sa ákung báhin wà kuy ikasulti niánà,</i> As for me, I have nothing to say about that. <form>sa láing (luyung) &mdash;</form> <tr>on the other hand</tr>. <i>Mupatúu siya apan sa láing (luyung) báhin magpadáyun sa pagluib,</i> He makes you believe he is loyal, but behind your back he continues his treachery. <form>-ay(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> the manner of sharing. <i>Nalípay ang mga saup mahitungud sa bahinay sa bag-ung baláud,</i> The tenants are happy about the division of the crops under the new law. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> person with whom one shares s.t. <i>Kabáhin ka sa ákung kalípay ug <pb n=83>kasákit,</i> You share my happiness and sorrows with me. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>báhin</sc>, <ix>5.</ix></xr> <form>ka-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>inheritance</tr>. <i>Ang pinaangkan may katungud sa kabahinánan sa ílang ginikánan,</i> Illegitimate children have a right to an inheritance from their parents.

<p id=1692><form>bahirig</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>tilted</tr>, <tr>leaning</tr> to one side. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <tr>lean</tr> to one side. <i>Nagbahirig ang mga tanum tungud sa kusug nga hángin,</i> The plants are leaning because of the strong wind. <i>Ayaw ibahirig (bahiriga) pagtáud ang halígi,</i> Don&apos;t install the post in a leaning position.

<p id=1693><form>bahis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> go back and forth. <i>Nagbahis ang mga pulis sa dálan nga nangítà sa mga tulisan,</i> The policemen are going back and forth over the streets looking for the bandits. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> go back and forth without regard to anyone or anything else. <i>Nagbáhis na ang buáya; walà siyay gikahadlúkan,</i> The crocodile went about where he chose. He feared no one.

<p id=1694><form>bahista</form> <pos>n</pos> bass fiddle, guitar player. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> be a bass player.

<p id=1695><form>bahíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bay</tr>. <i>Ang bahíya sa Manílà,</i> Manila Bay.

<p id=1696><form>báhu<sub>1</sub></form> <tr>no wonder</tr>, it is not surprising considering that [subject] is what it is. <i>Báhu ning tapulan, diyútay rag ági,</i> No wonder this fellow doesn&apos;t accomplish anything. He&apos;s so lazy.

<p id=1697><form>báhu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bass singer</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>bass instrument</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> play, sing bass.

<p id=1698><form>báhu<sub>3</sub></form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>abáhu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1699><form>báhu<sub>4</sub>, bàhu</form> <xr>= <sc>baw-u</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1700><form>bahù</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>odorous</tr>, <tr>ill-smelling</tr>. <i>Limpiyúhi ang kasilyas kay bahù kaáyu,</i> Clean the toilet because it stinks. <number>2</number> having been &lsquo;it&rsquo; in a game for a long time. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>smell</tr>, <tr>odor</tr>. <i>Ang báhù sa litsun abut sa ámù,</i> The smell of the roast pig reaches our place. <formx>&mdash; nga</formx> <tr>smell</tr> of. <i>Báhung singut,</i> Smell of sweat. <formx>&mdash; nga paryinti</formx> having some sort of distant tie of kinship. <i>Walà miy báhù nga paryinti. Nagkaparíha lang ang ámung apilyídu,</i> We are not related. We just happen to have the same name. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> be, become <tr>smelly</tr>. <i>Mubahù ang banig kay giihían man sa bátà,</i> The mat will become smelly because the child urinated on it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> a <tr>smell</tr>. <i>Nakabahù ka ba átung humut nga rúsas?</i> Did you smell the fragrance of the roses? <number>b</number> <xr>= <sc>pani&N;-</sc>, <ix>3.</ix></xr> <number>3</number> <formx>(&rarr;)</formx> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; a]</itype> for meat and fruits to <tr>rot</tr>, <tr>spoil</tr>. <i>Nabahù ang karni kay walà nímu malútù gahápun,</i> The meat became spoiled because you did not cook it yesterday. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> cause coconut milk to ferment in making oil. <i>Bahúa úsà ang túnù unyà lanáha,</i> You first ferment the coconut milk, then make it into oil. <form>ti&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> perceive odor. <i>Nakatimahù ka ba ug patay nga ilagà?</i> Do you smell a dead rat? <form>pani&N;-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>emit odor</tr>. <i>Nanimáhù kang nangkà,</i> You smell of jackfruit. <number>1a</number> <formx>-ng kandílà</formx> death is near (lit. the odor of candles is being emitted&mdash;facetious usage). <i>Lúya na kaáyu ang masakitun. Nanimáhù nang kandílà,</i> The patient is weak. You can smell the funereal candles. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>smell</tr>, <tr>perceive odor</tr>. <i>Midágan ang lagsaw dihang nakapanimahù ug táwu,</i> The deer ran when it perceived the odor of man. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>find out</tr>, get wind of. <i>Nanimáhù ug unsang kumbiráha maáyu níyang suhútan,</i> He&apos;s finding out what party is good to attend. <i>Ag tuntu nakapanimahù (nakabahù) sa ámung mga plánu,</i> The fool got wind of our plans. <form>ig-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <formx>&mdash; nga paryinti</formx> be in any way a relative of. <i>Dílì ka igbáhù nga paryinti ni Títa. Makaminyù mu,</i> You are in no way related to Tita. You two can get married. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stench</tr>. <i>Ang kabahù sa yánang dílì maagwanta,</i> I can&apos;t endure the stench of the pool of mud.&dagger;

<p id=1701><form>báhud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> for wounds to swell and redden. <i>Mibáhud ang íyang núka kay hiinitan man,</i> His wound became swollen because it was exposed to the sun. <i>Ug musúd kag mintiryu mubáhud ang ímung kabahung,</i> If you go into a cemetery your wound might swell and redden.

<p id=1702><form>bahug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> put liquid or fat into the staple food. <i>Mubahug lang siyag mantíkà kay dì mukáun ug útan,</i> He mixes lard with his corn because he doesn&apos;t eat vegetables. <number>2</number> feed leftovers to. <i>Ibahug na lang ang pán ngadtu sa ítik,</i> Toss the bread to the ducks. <form>-in-, -in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> food mixed with soup, lard, or water. <i>Ang íyang binahug (binahugan) gikaun sa irù,</i> The dog ate his food mixed with soup. <form>bahugbáhug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. in large amounts. <i>Nagbahugbáhug kamig katáwa sa íla,</i> We had a barrel of laughs at their house. <number>2</number> have a free-for-all fight. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. done in plentiful quantities. <i>Bahugbáhug ang ínum sa kasal,</i> There was drinking done on a large scale at the wedding. <number>2</number> free-for-all fight.

<p id=1703><form>bahùlu</form> <xr>= <sc>bahuulu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1704><form>bàhun</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>bahà</sc>, <ix>v3.</ix></xr>

<p id=1705><form>bahut</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>boastful</tr>, talking about one&apos;s accomplishments or abilities in too obvious a manner. <i>Kadaghan ku nang nabátì kanang bahut nímung isturya,</i> How many times have I already heard your boastful stories! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become boastful.

<p id=1706><form>bahuulu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>crevally</tr>: <bio>Caranx melampygus</bio>.

<p id=1707><form>báid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a]</itype> <number>1</number> rub s.t. on s.t. else to sharpen <pb n=84>it to make it shiny. <i>Baírun ku ang sanggut,</i> I&apos;ll sharpen the scythe. <i>Ibáid sa simintu ang batu arun masínaw,</i> Rub the stone on the cement floor so that it will get shiny. <number>2</number> <tr>perfect</tr> s.t. <i>Nagbáid siya sa mananayaw sa hustung panlíhuk,</i> He helped the dancer perfect her steps. <i>Ang diksiyunaryu mauy nakabáid (nakapabáid) sa ákung ininglis,</i> The dictionary sharpened my English. <form>bairan</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. to sharpen s.t. <form>baidbáid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13C; c]</itype> brush or rub s.t. against s.t. lightly as if sharpening. <i>Nagbaidbáid siya sa íyang mga kamut,</i> He rubbed his palms together.

<p id=1708><form>baíid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> brush one&apos;s body or part of the body lightly against s.t. <i>Gibaiíran ku sa ákung iring,</i> My pet cat rubbed itself on me.

<p id=1709><form>bail</form> <pos>a</pos> for fruit or root crops to be hardened due to exposure to heat or mishandling. <i>Bail ang kamúti kay nabuwad sa ínit,</i> The sweet potatoes are hard because they were left in the sun. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> <tr>get hardened</tr>. <form>&mdash; ug náwung</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>shameless</tr>. <i>Bail ug náwung bayhána kay dì lang mubáli ug insultu,</i> That woman certainly is shameless because she doesn&apos;t mind insults. <form>pa-, pa-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6c1]</itype> do s.t. despite the shame it brings. <i>Nagpabail (nagpabáil) siyag pangáyug hinábang kay way kadangpan,</i> He swallowed his pride to ask for help because he has no one to turn to.

<p id=1710><form>bais</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large, edible fresh-water <tr>eel</tr> of brown color, growing to 4&prime; and more: <bio>Anguilla sp</bio>.

<p id=1711><form>baíwas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C3]</itype> for two persons to fail to meet because one had left when the other arrived. <i>Nagkabaíwas ta kay pag-abut nákù mu say paglakaw nímu,</i> We missed each other because when I arrived, you had left.

<p id=1712><form>baka</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>bleach</tr> clothing under the sun. <i>Gibakhan (gibakahan) níya ang mga hábul,</i> She spread the sheets under the sun to bleach.

<p id=1713><form>báka<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cow</tr>, <tr>beef</tr>. <form>-ng túru</form> <tr>bull</tr>. <form>bakahan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cattle ranch</tr>. <form>&mdash; (ng) litsíra</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> source of financial support. <i>Ang iyaan kung sapían mauy báka litsíra sa ákung pagtuun,</i> My rich aunt supported me in my studies. <number>2</number> one who constantly gives money to s.o. who is playing him for a sucker. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become a provider or be played for a sucker.

<p id=1714><form>báka<sub>2</sub></form> <number>1</number> it doesn&apos;t matter, never mind if. <i>Báka mu lang ug pilay magastu mu sa uspital basta maáyu ka lang,</i> It doesn&apos;t matter how much you will spend for your hospitalization, as long as you are cured. <i>Báka ug dì ka musugut nákù. Náa may daghang babáyi,</i> I don&apos;t care if you don&apos;t accept me. There are plenty of fish in the ocean. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>baláka</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1715><form>bákà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> walk with the legs apart. <form>bakàbakà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> walk with the legs apart.

<p id=1716><form>bakaang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> walk with legs spread apart. <i>Nagbakaang siya tungud sa hubag,</i> He walked with his legs spread apart because of his boil. <pos>a</pos> having legs spread apart in walking.

<p id=1717><form>bakabáka</form><xr>= <sc>kinalabaw</sc>, <bx>1</bx>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>kábaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1718><form>bakag</form> <xr>= <sc>baklag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1719><form>bakagan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. bony, reddish, flat fish, as wide as the palm and about 1&prime; in length. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> become thin and bony. <i>Nabakagan siya sa pagkapilian sa pagkáun,</i> She is thin and bony because she is choosy in her food.

<p id=1720><form>bakak</form> <pos>a</pos> be a <tr>lie</tr>, false. <i>Bakak kaáyu nang íyang diklarasiyun,</i> His allegation is a big lie. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> tell a lie.<i> Dì ku mubakak nímu,</i> I won&apos;t tell you a lie. <i>Ang mga numiru dílì mamakak,</i> Figures don&apos;t lie. <form>panghi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b15]</itype> <tr>deny</tr>, show s.t. to be false. <i>Mapanghimakak (kapanghimakakan) nákù ang ímung tabì,</i> I can prove your gossip false. <form>-un(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>liar</tr>.

<p id=1721><form>bakalaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>codfish</tr>. <form>panimáhung &mdash;</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> smell bad. <i>Nanimáhù kang bakalaw,</i> You smell terrible.

<p id=1722><form>bakáling</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ring-like contrivance used to steady round-bottomed pots when put s.w. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a]</itype> make into a steadying ring. <i>Bakalíngun nímu ang sáku arun katungtúngan sa kúlun,</i> We&apos;ll fix this sack so that you can put the round-bottomed pot on it.

<p id=1723><form>bakan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish. <form>bakanbákan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>goatfish</tr>.

<p id=1724><form>bákan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tree important for driving away the <ix>unglù:</ix> <bio>Litsea sp</bio>.

<p id=1725><form>bakanan</form> <xr>= <sc>balakanan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1726><form>bakang</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bowlegged</tr>. <number>2</number> deprecatory term for the Japanese. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become bowlegged. <i>Mabakang (mubakang) ang bátà kun punáyan ug tambid,</i> A child becomes bowlegged if he is always carried astride. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125]</itype> get tired out from looking for s.t. <i>Diin ka ba nga nabákang man kug pinangítà nímu?</i> Where have you been? I&apos;ve gotten so tired (lit. become bowlegged) looking for you.

<p id=1727><form>bakanti</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>vacancy</tr>. <i>Wà na mi manáwat ug bag-ung kawáni kay way bakanti,</i> We&apos;re not accepting new employees because there&apos;s no vacancy. <number>2</number> vacant place. <i>Nangítà mig bakanting lingkuránan,</i> We were looking for a vacant seat. <number>3</number> piece of land left to lie fallow. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126; b(1)]</itype> for a vacancy to open up, leave s.t. vacant. <i>Magubà ang balay nga bakantíhag dúgay,</i> A house that is left vacant for a long time will go to pieces. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> for a piece of land to lie fallow.

<p id=1728><form>bak-ap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> shoulder expenses. <i>Bak-apan (bak-apun) ku ang tanang balayran,</i> I&apos;ll <pb n=85>take care of all the expenses.

<p id=1729><form>bákas</form> <pos>n</pos> one who contributes capital to a venture. <i>Ang ákung bákas dakug gipuhúnan sa ámung nigusyu,</i> My partner has chipped in a sizeable capital to our partnership. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; ac]</itype> <tr>be partners</tr>. <i>Dílì na sila magkumpitinsiya. Bakásun níla ang ílang nigusyu,</i> They will join their businesses in a partnership. <i>Kanang ímu usa ka líbu ibákas na lang sa átung puhúnan,</i> Add your one thousand to our capital. <form>ka-</form> <xr>= <sc>bákas</sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr>

<p id=1730><form>bakasi</form> <xr>= <sc>balakasi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1731><form>bakasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vacation</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> take, spend vacation. <i>Adtu ku sa Hungkung bakasiyun,</i> I will spend my vacation in H. K. <form>-ista</form> <pos>n</pos> one who is taking a vacation. <i>Ang Bagyu nagsugwak sa mga bakasyunista,</i> Baguio is crowded with vacationers.

<p id=1732><form>bakat</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. hamper, a woven container about 2&prime; high with a top. <form>-in-</form> k.o. large, round, smooth <tr>tomato</tr>.

<p id=1733><form>bakatin</form> <pos>n</pos> wild <tr>pig</tr>.

<p id=1734><form>bakatya</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> subject s.o. to hard, severe treatment. <i>Kusug mubakatyag súgù nang agalúna,</i> That master drives (his servants) to work very hard. <i>Gibakatya siyag bukbuk sa mga buguy,</i> He was severely mauled by the roughnecks. <number>2</number> <tr>discipline</tr> s.o. wild, unruly. <i>Mabuútan ang irù ug dúnay makabakatya íni,</i> A dog will become meek if s.o. disciplines it.

<p id=1735><form>bakawan</form> <xr>= <sc>bakhaw<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=1736><form>bákay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> <number>1</number> move the line from which one starts, shoots, puts, etc. in a game. <i>Mubákay siya kay ang íyang dyúlin simpig man sa bungbung,</i> He moved his shooting line because his marble was right against the wall. <i>Ibákay lang níya ang búla sa gulp kay natambug man sa línaw,</i> He will just move his golf ball because it landed in a pond. <number>2</number> <tr>move</tr>, move s.t. from its place. <i>Mibákay siya dihang dihay miági,</i> He moved to make room when s.o. passed by. <i>Layù silag gibakáyan ug puyù,</i> The place they have moved to now is far away.

<p id=1737><form>bakaybakay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. dark brown and brittle <tr>starfish</tr> with narrow rays.

<p id=1738><form>bakbak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>frog</tr>, <tr>toad</tr>.

<p id=1739><form>bakbak<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> path of hardened dirt. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> harden from being trod upon. <i>Nabakbak ang tugkaran sa ímung pagbinalikbálik,</i> The yard got all trampled down the way you kept going back and forth through it.

<p id=1740><form>bakbak<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> abaca hemp made from the outer stalks of the abaca.

<p id=1741><form>bakbak<sub>4</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> piece of metal or precious stone used to ornament a surface, usually a comb. <number>2</number> sole of footgear. <i>Pánit ang bakbak sa íyang sapátus,</i> His shoes have leather soles. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> inlay with precious metal, stones. <i>Sudlayng binakbákan ug sinúbung,</i> A comb plated with gold. <number>2</number> put soles on footgear.

<p id=1742><form>bakbak<sub>5</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>balakbak</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1743><form>bakgráwun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>background</tr>, past experience, origin. <i>Sutáa únang íyang bakgráwun únà sugta,</i> Verify his background first before you accept his proposal. <i>Wà kaáyu siyay bakgráwun. Dì siya makaapas sa liksiyun,</i> He doesn&apos;t have a very good background. He cannot catch on to the lesson. <number>2</number> background of painting or picture. <number>3</number> one who is staying out of the limelight. <number>4</number> one who assists in a performance in a lesser role. <i>Mas maáyung mukanta ang bakgráwun kay sa istar,</i> The background sings better than the star. <number>5</number> attendant on a public performer, manager of a sportsman. <i>Gitunúlan ang buksiadur ug tualya sa íyang bakgráwun,</i> The manager gave the boxer a towel. <number>6</number> one who supports another in a fight, provides fire cover for another. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b1]</itype> be the background in performing, attending a public performer, support s.o. in a fight. <i>Bakgrawnan ta kag mukanta ka,</i> I&apos;ll accompany you if you sing. <i>Bakgrawni aku inigtabuk nákù,</i> Cover me when I cross over to the other side of the street. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> stay out of the limelight. <i>Pabakráwun lang siya kay maúlaw siya níla,</i> He will just stay in the background because he is shy.&dagger;

<p id=1744><form>bakgut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c]</itype> <tr>cut</tr> s.t. off with a motion in the direction of the agent, usually with a sickle. <i>Dì ka makabakgut sa búlig sa ságing,</i> You cannot cut the bunch of bananas down. <i>Bakgutan (bakgutun) ku nang líug sa irù,</i> I will slit that dog&apos;s neck. <pos>n</pos> <tr>stroke</tr>, action of <tr>cutting</tr>.

<p id=1745><form>bakhad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> for s.t. tied to get undone. <i>Mabakhad ang higut ug dì nímu ayúhun ug bángan,</i> The string will get undone if you don&apos;t tie it tight.

<p id=1746><form>bakhaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mangrove</tr> tree: <bio>Rhizophora spp</bio>.

<p id=1747><form>bakhaw<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. dish made of blanched greens or raw meat or fish garnished with onions, tomatoes, and vinegar. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make <ix>bakhaw.</ix> <form>-in-</form> <xr>= <sc>bakhaw<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=1748><form>bakhù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b36]</itype> <tr>sob</tr>. <i>Gibakhúan ku níya sa íyang mga kaguul,</i> She sobbingly poured out her sorrows to me. <pos>n</pos> sob. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> full of sobs. <i>Sa mabakhúung tíngug,</i> In a sobbing voice.

<p id=1749><form>bakhuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>doll</tr> of cloth or plastic.

<p id=1750><form>bakì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>frog</tr>.&dagger;

<p id=1751><form>bákid</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cavan</tr>, a measure for grain equivalent to 25 gantas (approximately three bushels).

<pb n=86>

<p id=1752><form>bakig</form> <pos>a</pos> very thin, <tr>emaciated</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become emaciated.

<p id=1753><form>bakik</form> joking euphemism for <xr><sc>bakak</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1754><form>bakikaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>awkward</tr>, <tr>graceless</tr>. <i>Ang walhun bakikaw tan-áwun nga manahì,</i> A left-handed person looks graceless when he sews. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a]</itype> become clumsy, do s.t. clumsily, awkwardly. <i>Bakikawun gánì nímug kúgus ang bátà mahúlug giyud nà,</i> You&apos;ll drop the child if you carry it in such a clumsy way.

<p id=1755><form>bakíki</form> <xr>= <sc>balakíki</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1756><form>bakilid</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>steeply sloping</tr>. <i>Bakilid kaáyu ang ámung gitúngas,</i> We&apos;re climbing a very steep slope. <pos>n</pos> <tr>slope</tr>. <form>kabakildan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>slopes</tr>.

<p id=1757><form>báking<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>backing</tr>, material put in back of s.t. to give it support. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> provide with a backing.

<p id=1758><form>báking<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>back up</tr>, put a vehicle in reverse. <i>Ibáking ang dyíp,</i> Back the jeep up.

<p id=1759><form>bakintul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> miss one&apos;s step, walk with a limp because s.t. is wrong with one&apos;s shoe or the path one is traversing. <i>Mibakintul ku kay nakatunub kug gamayng batu,</i> I missed my step because I stepped on a small rock. <i>Nagbakintul kug lakaw kay nawálà ang píkas kung tikud,</i> I walk unevenly because one of my heels got lost. <form>Culu-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> walk unevenly.

<p id=1760><form>bákir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>backer</tr> in an application, financial undertaking. <i>Bákir siya nákù sa ákung nigusyu,</i> He is my backer in my business. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b(1)]</itype> become a backer, back s.t.

<p id=1761><form>bakíru</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>pasture</tr>. <i>Gibakirúhan nákù sa uma ang kanding,</i> I pastured the goat in the fields. <pos>n</pos> <tr>shepherd</tr>, <tr>cowherd</tr>.

<p id=1762><form>bakíta</form> <pos>n</pos> plunger of a child&apos;s toy as, for example, of a popgun.

<p id=1763><form>bakíya</form> <pos>n</pos> young female carabao or cow ready to reproduce.

<p id=1764><form>baklà</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>homosexual</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be a homosexual. <i>Ug makig-uban-úban kag mga baklà, mabaklà sad ka,</i> If you pal around with fairies, you&apos;ll become one, too. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> engage in male prostitution.

<p id=1765><form>baklag</form> <pos>a</pos> having a putrid odor of rotten food or decayed flesh. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> become putrid. <i>Nabaklag na lang ang ilagà wà gayud níla ilubung,</i> They did not bury the rat even though it has become putrid.

<p id=1766><form>baklarit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stew</tr> made from dog&apos;s meat, spices, and vegetables. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, obtain dog stew. <i>Baklaritun ta nang inyung irù,</i> Let&apos;s butcher your dog and make him into stew.

<p id=1767><form>baklaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bracelet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, make into, get a bracelet.

<p id=1768><form>baklay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> go on foot. <i>Bakláyun ta lang ang piyir,</i> Let&apos;s just walk to the pier.

<p id=1769><form>bakliad, baklíad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> bend one&apos;s body far backward. <i>Mubaklíad gánì ang bátà hayan mahúlug,</i> If the baby bends too far back, it is likely to fall. <i>Ibaklíad (bakliára) ug maáyu ang ímung láwas,</i> Bend your body far back.

<p id=1770><form>baklid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> pin s.o.&apos;s hand behind his back. <i>Siyay mibaklid sa ákung kamut samtang gikuláta ku sa íyang mga kaúban,</i> He pinned my arms behind me while his companions pummelled me. <form>panghi&N;-, pani&N;-</form> <xr>= <sc>-in-</sc>, <ix>v</ix> <bx>1</bx>.</xr> <form>-in-</form> <pos>a</pos> folded behind the back. <i>Milakaw siya binaklid ang íyang mga kamut,</i> He walked away with his hands folded behind his back. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> fold one&apos;s hands behind one&apos;s back. <i>Mibinaklid (nanghimaklid, nanimaklid) siyang nagpasupásu sa hawanan,</i> He paced the courtyard with his hands folded behind his back. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> <xr>= <sc>baklid</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1771><form>baknal</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> too big for the thing it was put in. <i>Baknal kaáyu ang pistúla sa háwak,</i> There is no room for the pistol in the waist. <number>2</number> be too big for the situation. <i>Baknal ang kaniyun nga gigámit didtu sa Bitnam,</i> The cannons they use in Viet Nam are too big for the job they have to do. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; a2]</itype> <tr>bulge out</tr>, make s.t. bulge out. <i>Unsa man nang nagbaknal sa ímung bulsa?</i> What is making your pocket bulge? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put s.t. which juts up on a road to block it or cause passers-by to stumble. <i>Átung baknálan ang agiánan ug dakung batu,</i> We&apos;ll block the road with a huge stone. <number>3</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> consider s.t. too big. <pos>n</pos> s.t. bulging or which prevents easy passage. <form>-an</form> <xr>= <sc>bakal</sc>, <ix>a2.</ix></xr>

<p id=1772><form>baknit</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. wild, thorny vine with yellowish, inedible berries. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>thicket</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become a thicket. <i>Nakabaknitan ang uma nga gibyáan,</i> Our abandoned farm grew into a thicket.

<p id=1773><form>bakpi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>back pay</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> collect one&apos;s back pay.

<p id=1774><form>bakráyid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> ride at the back of a bicycle or motorcycle. <i>Gibakráyid níya ang íyang anak,</i> He carried his son on the back of his bicycle.&dagger;

<p id=1775><form>baksan</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>bakus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1776><form>baksidur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>boxer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> become a boxer. <i>Magbaksidur ka gánì kinahanglan lig-un kag túhud,</i> If you want to become a boxer, you must have strong legs.

<p id=1777><form>baksing</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>boxing</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> have a boxing match. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> box s.o. <i>Baksingun ta ka run,</i> I&apos;ll box you one now. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>boxing ring</tr>.

<p id=1778><form>baksir</form> <xr>= <sc>baksidur</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1779><form>baksiwà</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>contrary</tr>, <tr>nonconforming</tr>. <i>Baksiwà <pb n=87>nga pagkabátà,</i> A contrary child. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> be contrary to, be not in conformity. <i>Mubaksiwà giyud nà siya sa gustu sa ámung inahan,</i> She always does s.t. contrary to our mother&apos;s wishes. <i>Nagkabaksíwa ang ílang pangatarúngan,</i> Their reasons did not tally. <i>Baksiwaun (ibaksiwà) man gud nímug sabut ang ákung sulti,</i> You always place a wrong meaning on what I say. <number>2</number> put in a head to toe arrangement. <i>Nagbaksíwà sila paghigdà,</i> They lay down beside each other with their heads on opposite ends. <i>Ibaksiwà (baksiwáun) nákù ang pagpahimútang sa káhuy,</i> I will arrange the wood so that the bigger ends are next to the smaller ends. <number>3</number> <itype>[C13]</itype> pass by one another without seeing each other. <i>Wà sila magkítà kay nagkabaksíwà lang sila sa dálan,</i> They did not meet because they just passed each other on the road. <form>(&larr;)</form> <itype>[B]</itype> be intertwining. <i>Bágun nga nagbaksíwà,</i> Intertwining vines.

<p id=1780><form>baktas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>traverse</tr> on foot. <i>Taas pa ang ákung baktásun arun matúman ku ang ákung ginadamgu,</i> I still have a long road to traverse if my dreams are to be realized. <number>2</number> <tr>cut across</tr>. <i>Gibaktásan ku ang daruhan,</i> I took a short cut across the plowed field. <form>-ay(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>walkathon</tr>. <i>Siyay nakadaug sa baktasay,</i> He won the walkathon. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> have a walkathon.

<!-- pos v example out of order: fixed. -->

<p id=1781><form>baktin<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>piglet</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>children</tr>, <tr>kids</tr> (familiar usage). <i>Nag-iskuyla na ang ákung mga baktin,</i> My kids go to school now. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain piglet. <i>Nakabaktin kug duha pagbatun ku sa íyang anay,</i> I got myself two piglets for rearing his sow. <form>-ay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> bet with piglets. <i>Baktinay ta, kinsay mudaug,</i> Let&apos;s bet piglets as to who will win.

<p id=1782><form>baktin<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; b6]</itype> get a charley horse. <i>Namaktìn (mibaktin) ákung buktun,</i> My arms got a charley horse. <form>baktinbaktin</form> <pos>n</pos> bulging part of the calf or biceps.

<p id=1783><form>baktirya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bacteria</tr>.

<p id=1784><form>bakù</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>stoop-shouldered</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> become hunched. <i>Makabakù (makapabakù) nímu ang magsígig dúkù nga magsulat,</i> You&apos;ll become stoop-shouldered if you bend like that when you write.

<p id=1785><form>bakud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC2; c1]</itype> run in a gallop. <i>Mibakud ang kabáyù,</i> The horse galloped away. <i>Nakigbakud siya sa mga bátà,</i> He ran around with the children.

<p id=1786><form>bákud<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB25; ac1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>get up</tr> from lying position, make s.t. lying erect. <i>Mibákud siyag sayu,</i> He got up early. <i>Dì ku kabákud sa halígi,</i> I cannot raise the post. <i>Bakúrun sa nars ang masakitun,</i> The nurse will make the patient get up. <i>Wà ku ibákud (bakúra) ang halígi,</i> I did not raise the post. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; ug nigusyu</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> start a business. <i>Dì ta makabákud ug nigusyu ug way puhúnan,</i> We cannot start a business if we don&apos;t have capital. <number>3</number> <itype>[AP; a12]</itype> save one&apos;s name or honor from public humiliation. <i>Kamung mga anak mau na lay mubákud (mupabákud) sa átung apilyídu nga gihugawhugawan ug maáyu sa inyung amahan,</i> Only you, the children, can save our family name which your father has sullied.

<p id=1787><form>bákud<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>tie</tr> s.t. together, <tr>fasten</tr> to s.t. <i>Nakabákud na siya sa mga káhuy,</i> She has tied the firewood into bundles. <i>Gibákud siya sa halígi,</i> He was tied to the post. <i>Bakúra (ibákud) ang mga papil,</i> Tie the papers in bundles. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bond</tr>, <tr>fetters</tr>.

<p id=1788><form>bakudbakud</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>wrasse</tr>.

<p id=1789><form>bakukang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. large rhinoceros <tr>beetle</tr>, found in coconut trees. <number>2</number> name given to small brown beetles or to june bugs (<xr>= <sc>daging</sc></xr>). <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; sa úlu</formx> have difficulty in understanding. <i>Bakukang ang sulud sa ímung úlu kay dì ka kasabut,</i> Your head is full of beetles because you can&apos;t understand. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infested with beetles.

<p id=1790><form>bakúku</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>fish</tr>.

<p id=1791><form>bakúkun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> <tr>coil</tr>, <tr>roll</tr> into a loop. <i>Mibakúkun akug lukay arun dúna kitay ikasulù,</i> I coiled up some palm fronds to give us s.t. to use as a torch. <i>Mibakúkun ang baksan,</i> The python coiled itself up. <pos>n</pos> <tr>coil</tr>.

<p id=1792><form>bakul</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>crippled</tr> in the leg. <pos>v</pos> <form>(&larr;)</form> <itype>[B126]</itype> become crippled.

<p id=1793><form>bákul</form> <pos>n</pos> belt <tr>buckle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put a buckle on s.t.

<p id=1794><form>bakúlan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>mullet</tr> with small scales.

<p id=1795><form>bakulaw</form> <pos>n</pos> ugly-faced <tr>supernatural being</tr> said to abduct small children and hide them from their parents. <i>Ayaw pagsábà kay tingálig dad-un ka sa bakulaw,</i> Be quiet or the <ix>bakulaw</ix> will get you.

<p id=1796><form>bakulkul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>trap</tr> to catch wild fowl with a noose. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>catch</tr> chickens and birds with a <ix>bakulkul.</ix>

<p id=1797><form>bakulud</form> <pos>n</pos> rounded stone found in the sea and exposed at low tide.

<p id=1798><form>bakulung</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>loop</tr>, usually made of cloth, put under things carried on the head. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make into a <tr>buffer</tr>, put a buffer on the head.

<p id=1799><form>bákun</form> <xr>= <sc>bákud<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=1800><form>bakúna</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>vaccinate</tr>. <i>Akuy mubakúna sa mga bátà,</i> I will vaccinate the children. <pos>n</pos> <tr>vaccination</tr>. <form>-dur(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> one who administers vaccine. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be the one who innoculates.

<p id=1801><form>bakunáwa</form> <pos>n</pos> a monster that is said to swallow <pb n=88>the sun or moon during an eclipse. The <ix>bakunáwa</ix> is said to be disturbed by noise and will release the sun or moon if noise is made.

<p id=1802><form>bákung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. common <tr>rice</tr> with white grains of average length.

<p id=1803><form>bákung<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>pagiyun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1804><form>bakúngan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>sea cucumber</tr> (<ix>balat</ix>).

<p id=1805><form>bakúngun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <ix>talisáyun</ix>-colored <tr>cock</tr> with dark green feathers interspersed with yellow feathers on the wings, sides, and breast.

<p id=1806><form>bakus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>belt</tr>. <number>2</number> champion&apos;s title in sports like boxing. <i>Upat ka túig níyang kuput sa bakus pagkakampiyun,</i> He held the championship title for four years. <form>&mdash; sa amù</form> <pos>n</pos> a belt believed to be worn by female monkeys during pregnancy and shed after delivery. A woman who happens to find it should wear it during pregnancy to give her an easy delivery. <form>hugut sa &mdash;</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1C12; c1]</itype> take measures to meet a difficult situation, tighten the belt in the face of financial difficulties. <i>Hugtun (ihugut) nátù ang átung bakus, kay naapikihan ta sa kwarta,</i> Let&apos;s tighten our belts because we&apos;re short of money. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> wear a belt. <number>2</number> tie around the waist. <i>Gibakus níya sa háwak ang íyang bálun,</i> He tied his provisions around his waist. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> whip with a belt. <i>Baksun ka gayud ni Tátay,</i> Father will surely whip you with a belt. <form>baksan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>python</tr> with bands.

<p id=1807><form>bàkus</form> <pos>n</pos> small rope used to prevent a yoke from slipping. It is tied to both ends of the yoke and runs under the neck.

<p id=1808><form>bákut</form> <xr>= <sc>gipakaingun</sc> (dialectal).</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ingun<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=1809><form>bakutut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>stagger</tr> under a load that is too heavy. <i>Makabakutut (makapabakutut) man sad ang kabug-at niíning baskíta,</i> The weight of this basket can make one stagger. <number>2</number> stagger under the burden of debts.

<p id=1810><form>bakwì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> take back what one said. <i>Bakwía ang ímung gisulti,</i> Take back what you said. <pos>n</pos> retraction. <i>Ang bakwì ni Risal mahitungud sa tinuhúan,</i> Rizal&apos;s retraction of what he said about religion.

<p id=1811><form>bakwit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b2c]</itype> <tr>flee</tr> s.w. in war time. <i>Didtu mi mubakwit sa búkid,</i> We evacuated to the mountains. <pos>n</pos> <tr>war refugee</tr>. <i>Napunù sa bakwit ang kampu,</i> The camp is full of war refugees.

<p id=1812><form>bakyà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. <tr>slipper</tr> with wooden sole. <number>2</number> k.o. <tr>boxfish</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, make into wooden slippers. <i>Nagbakyà siya ngadtu sa tyanggihan,</i> She wore wooden slippers to the market. <i>Kining kahúya maáyung bakyáun,</i> This wood is good for <ix>bakyas</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> beat with a wooden slipper. <i>Bakyaun siya sa asáwa ug mahubug,</i> His wife beats him with wooden slipper when he&apos;s drunk.

<p id=1813><form>bakyà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> appealing to the <ix>bakyà</ix> crowd (the <tr>proletariat</tr>). <i>Bakyà kaáyung salidáha,</i> A movie very appealing to the proletariat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> get to be appealing to the <corr sic=proletariate>proletariat</corr>. <form>&mdash; krawud</form> <pos>n</pos> proletariat (those wearing <ix>bakyà</ix>).

<p id=1814><form>bakyánu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>skillful</tr>, <tr>adept</tr>. <i>Bakyánu nang batáa sa pamakak,</i> That child fibs pretty well. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> be skillful, adept. <i>Magbakyánu ka sa pagmakinilya arun makaimpliyar ka dáyun,</i> Get adept at typing so you can find a job right away.

<p id=1815><form>bakyaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>swing</tr> the arm to strike a blow.

<p id=1816><form>bala, bála<sub>1</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bullet</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>staples</tr>. <number>3</number> <tr>money</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> load gun, stapler. <i>Maáyu lang kang ibála sa kaniyun,</i> You are just good for cannon fodder. <number>2a</number> put s.t. in s.t. to make it appear bigger or weightier. <i>Ang kupras baláhag balas,</i> The copra was mixed with sand. <number>2b</number> <tr>mix</tr> s.t. in with s.t. else to hide it. <i>Ang pinaldung panaptun gibaláhag sigarilyu,</i> The bales of cloth had cigarettes hidden inside of them. <form>balahan</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>loaded</tr>. <i>Pagbantay kay balahan nang pistúla,</i> Be careful. That pistol is loaded.

<p id=1817><form>bála<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>carry</tr> s.t. on the back, not tied. <i>Akuy mubála nímu inigtabuk sa sapà,</i> I&apos;ll carry you piggy-back when we cross the river. <i>Baláha (balha) kanang sáku,</i> Carry that sack on your back. <form>gi- gilukdu</form> full of happiness, mischief, worries, and other emotions (lit. carried on the back and on the head). <i>Ang gwatsi ánang tawhána gibá gilukdu,</i> That man is chock-full of mischief.

<p id=1818><form>balà<sub>1</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> find out information about an event that has happened (who stole s.t., where s.t. stolen or lost is, who committed a crime, etc.) by means of an egg. The egg is made to stand on its end on the edge of a tumbler. Then a yes-no question is put to it. If the answer is yes, the egg remains upright. If the answer is no, the egg falls. <i>Balaun ang bábuy kay sigúrung gikáwat tu,</i> We&apos;ll <tr>divine</tr> information about the pig, because it surely was stolen. <form>balad-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>omen</tr>, a sign which prophesizes s.t. <i>Ang kumíta mauy usa ka bad-un nga may umaábut nga kagúbut,</i> A comet is a sign of a forthcoming war. <form>tiking balad-un</form> phrase used to address the gecko (house lizard) in asking him to foretell whether s.t. will happen. The question is put to the gecko before he sounds. After he sounds the question is repeated. If the gecko sounds <pb n=89>an odd number of times the answer is affirmative. If even, the answer is negative. <i>Tiking balad-un, muulan ugmà?</i> Prophet gecko, will it rain tomorrow?

<p id=1819><form>balà<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>balálà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1820><form>bálà</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> warn so as to prohibit certain actions. <i>Gibaláan na man mu,</i> You have been warned and prohibited. <i>Úsà ka mamusil sa háyup ibálà úsà,</i> Before you start shooting stray animals, make a warning prohibiting it. <pos>n</pos> warning that prohibits.

<p id=1821><form>baláan</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>holy</tr>, <tr>sacred</tr>. <i>Gahum sa mga baláan,</i> Power of the saints. <form>paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> considered sacred. <i>Gipakabaláan sa mga bumbay ang báka,</i> The Hindus considered the cow a sacred animal. <form>-un</form> <tr>saintly</tr>. <i>Balaánun ang ákung tingúhà kanímu,</i> I have noble intentions toward you.

<p id=1822><form>baláat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>tie</tr> s.t. around s.t. <i>Baátun ta ning sugnud,</i> Let&apos;s bundle the firewood. <i>Baáti íyang bàbà arun dì kasyágit,</i> Gag her mouth so she can&apos;t shout. <pos>n</pos> s.t. tied around s.t.

<p id=1823><form>balábag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[<corr sic=AA2S>A2S</corr>; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> lie across a path. <i>Balabágun (ibábag) nátù pagbutang ang káhuy,</i> Let&apos;s put the tree across the road. <i>Gibabágan ang agiánan sa mga batu,</i> The path was blocked by rocks. <number>2</number> block s.o.&apos;s way. <i>Ikaw ray nakabábag sa ákung kalípay,</i> You are the only one who stands in the way of my happiness. <number>3</number> for a fetus to be in a transverse position. <i>Naglísud siya pag-anak kay nagbalábag (nagbalabag) ang bátà,</i> She had a hard labor because the child was in a transverse position. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a piece of wood or metal which lies across s.t. <i>Ang balabag mauy naglambing sa duha ka kasku,</i> The crossbeam holds the two hulls of the boat together. <number>2</number> cross (not without <ix>l</ix> in this meaning). <i>Gilansang si Hisus sa balábag,</i> Jesus was nailed to a cross. <number>3</number> s.t. which bars the way. <i>Dílì balábag sa hangtúray nílang panaghigála,</i> It is not a bar to their eternal friendship. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>balábag</sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr> <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fishes</tr> with a transverse line, e.g., k.o. snappers.

<p id=1824><form>balabála</form> <pos>n</pos> a children&apos;s game played by hitting a ball one tosses himself with a stick. If another player catches the ball, he comes up to bat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> play this game.

<p id=1825><form>baladaw</form> <xr>= <sc>balaraw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1826><form>baladbad</form> <xr>= <sc>badbad<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=1827><form>baládin</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> wooden container for palm toddy in the shape of a tapered cylinder. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make a wooden container for palm toddy.

<p id=1828><form>balad-un</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>balà<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=1829><form>bálag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A123S; b8]</itype> find s.t. by running across. <i>Nakabalag silag mga ismaglir sa lawud,</i> They ran into some smugglers on the high seas. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC; a]</itype> go meet s.o. <i>Balága siya didtu sa piyir,</i> Go meet him at the pier. <form>balagbalag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> go around everywhere looking for s.o. or s.t. <i>Nagbagbág ang inahan ug pangítag kwarta,</i> The mother went around everywhere looking for money. <form>hi-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; ac]</itype> <tr>encounter</tr>, <tr>meet s.o.</tr> <i>Nahibálag ku na gayud siya,</i> At last I found him. <i>Maghibálag ra gayud ta,</i> We will certainly meet.

<p id=1830><form>balaghuy</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lanky</tr>, ungracefully tall and thin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be lanky. <i>Nagbalaghuy ang láwas sa tin-idyir,</i> Teen-agers have lanky bodies.

<p id=1831><form>balagsang</form> <pos>a</pos> for like things in a row to lack pieces, having pieces missing. <i>Balagsang ang mais kay pagawpaw ang gitamnan,</i> The ears of corn lacked grains because the land was infertile. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN]</itype> for pieces in a row to fall out, come out having pieces missing. <i>Kanang baratuhung klási sa sudlay dalì rang mamagsang,</i> It doesn&apos;t take long for the teeth to fall out of cheap combs. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> characterized by having members missing.

<p id=1832><form>balagtásan</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> contest of reasoning between two men consisting of spoken dialogue in high-flown language. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC2]</itype> hold such a contest.

<p id=1833><form>balagtuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rat</tr>.

<p id=1834><form>balagúlà, balagúlan</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> three quarters of a coconut shell used as container for water to wash the vagina.

<p id=1835><form>balágun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vine</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S46]</itype> grow like a vine.

<p id=1836><form>balag-ung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>animal trap</tr> that clasps, snares, or encloses the animal. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <number>1</number> catch with, set a <ix>balag-ung.</ix> <i>Ákung gibalag-úngan ang sawa, piru wà mabalag-ung,</i> I set a trap for the snake, but I did not catch it. <number>2</number> <tr>entrap</tr> s.o. into doing s.t. <i>Bantay kay balag-úngun ka sa pagpatug-an,</i> Watch out! You&apos;ll be trapped into revealing it. <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make s.t. into a <ix>balag-ung.</ix>

<p id=1837><form>baláhak</form> <pos>n</pos> deep festering <tr>sore</tr>, bigger than a <ix>kabahung.</ix> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a4]</itype> get to be, get a large sore. <i>Nabáhak ang íyang samad,</i> His wound became a festering sore. <i>Gibáhak siya kay wà níya tambáli ang íyang samad,</i> He developed a festering sore because he left his wound unattended.

<p id=1838><form>balahálà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gods and goddesses</tr> (poetic).

<p id=1839><form>balahíbu</form> <xr>= <sc>balhíbu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1840><form>bálak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>recite</tr> verses. <i>Balákun (ibálak) nákù ang ultimu adiyus ni Risal,</i> I am going to recite Rizal&apos;s &lsquo;Last Farewell&rsquo;. <pos>n</pos> poem. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> write poetry. <pos>n</pos> <tr>poetry</tr>. <form>mag-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>poet</tr>. <form>-nun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>poetic</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become poetic.

<pb n=90>

<p id=1841><form>baláka</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b3c5]</itype> be concerned, worried. <i>Ayaw kabaláka kay akuy mahibalu sa tanan,</i> Don&apos;t worry because I&apos;ll take care of everything. <i>Unsa may ímung gikabalak-an?</i> What are you worrying about? <form>mabalak-un, mabalakhun</form> <pos>a</pos> characterized by concern, worry. <i>Mabalakhung tíngug,</i> Worried voice. <form>&mdash; ku, ka</form> what do I care. <i>Baláka kug mabaklag siya. Dílì giyud aku muápas níya,</i> I don&apos;t care if she rots. I won&apos;t run after her.

<p id=1842><form>balakanan</form> <pos>n</pos> doorsill.

<p id=1843><form>balak-ang</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>balat-ang</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> stand, squat with the thighs apart. <i>Nagbalak-ang ang tindíra ug mani sa íyang paglingkud,</i> The peanut vendor squatted with her legs apart.

<p id=1844><form>balakasi</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small eel. <i>Husi balakasi, tadtárun muliksi. Tadtárun mukubul, paryintis tubul,</i> José is an eel, strike him with a knife and he will jump. If you strike him and he tautens up, he&apos;s akin to hard feces. (Teasing rhyme said to children named José, in reference to the actions of the <ix>balakasi</ix> when struck.)

<p id=1845><form>balakbak</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> cloth or similar material to lie, walk, sit on. <i>Duguun ang bakbak nga giangkan,</i> The sheets on which she lay when she gave birth are all bloody. <number>2</number> diaper. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put material under s.o. to be on. <i>Gibakbákan ug puting panaptun ang tumbanan sa bag-ung kinasal,</i> The newly-weds had a white cloth spread for them to walk over. <number>2</number> underlay, be the thing in which s.t. is rooted. <i>Ang íyang panáad gibakbákan ug mga pasálig,</i> His promises were backed up by assurances. <i>Lúhà ug singut ang gibakbak sa ákung paglampus,</i> My success is rooted in sweat and tears. <number>3</number> put a diaper on. <i>Bakbáki ang bátà,</i> Put a diaper on the baby.

<p id=1846><form>balakíki</form> <pos>n</pos> a chicken colored black with white speckles, and sometimes with other colors. <form>balakikíhun</form> <pos>n</pos> fish colored black with speckles (sharks, rays, et al.)

<p id=1847><form>balalà</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> slow to comprehend. <i>Balà kaáyu siya sa klási,</i> He is very dull in class. <number>2</number> very inferior in quality, roughly or hurriedly done. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> become dull. <i>Mubalálà (mabalálà) kag dì ka magtuun,</i> You&apos;ll become dull if you do not study. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1]</itype> get to be inferior in quality. <i>Nagkabalà ang íyang tinahian nga nagkadaghan ang íyang súkì,</i> Her sewing is getting to be more and more inferior in quality since she started to get lots of customers.&dagger;

<p id=1848><form>balalantì</form> <pos>n</pos> small tree, the leaves of which have a medicinal use. The wood is of magical importance, esp. in sorcery. If food cooked by its fire is stolen, the thief suffers.

<p id=1849><form>balalátuk</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>woodpecker</tr>.

<p id=1850><form>balalaw</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> stiff loop or hoop. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make, make into, put a loop.

<p id=1851><form>balanà</form> <pos>n</pos> crack in s.t. that has absolutely no give. <i>Walà na nay dáta ang íhi kay may balanà,</i> That axle is useless because it has a crack. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> get a crack in it. <i>Mubalanà (mabalanà) ang básu basta butangan ug ínit túbig,</i> The glass will crack if you put hot water in it. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having a crack.

<p id=1852><form>balának</form> <pos>n</pos> general name for large mullets: <bio>Mugilidae</bio>. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> flat-headed, like a mullet: term for fishes, snakes, people.

<p id=1853><form>balanban<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. half beak: <bio>Hemirhamphus spp</bio>.

<p id=1854><form>balanban<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a branching reed, the main stem of which is split and used in weaving and in sewing nipa shingles: <bio>Donnax cannaeformis</bio>.

<p id=1855><form>balandra</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> barrel with rounded sides. <number>2</number> large, flat-bottomed boat mainly used for carrying logs or rocks. <number>3</number> fat woman shaped like a barrel. <number>4</number> wooden slippers (<ix>bakyà</ix>) which are poorly made and clumsy to wear. <i>Balandra man nang ímung bakyà,</i> Your slippers are like a boat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN]</itype> become fat like a boat or barrel.

<p id=1856><form>bal-ang</form> <xr>= <sc>lab-ang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1857><form>balángas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mange</tr>, skin disease of dogs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> have mange. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>mangy</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125]</itype> become mangy. <i>Mabalangasun ang irù ug pakan-un ug alukabhang sa kasag,</i> The dog will become mangy if you feed it crab shells.

<p id=1858><form>balángaw</form> (from <ix>dángaw</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>rainbow</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> for there to be a rainbow. <i>Dílì na mag-ulan basta mamángaw (mubángaw),</i> It will not rain any more if there&apos;s a rainbow. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. leech with a rainbow-like stripe on its back. <number>2</number> <ix>bulinaw</ix> (anchovy) with a stripe through the middle.

<p id=1859><form>balángay</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>barrio</tr>, the smallest unit of self-government. <number>2</number> k.o. large boat. <form>-nun</form> <pos>n</pos> pertaining to the barrio. <form>tagi-</form> <pos>n</pos> resident of a barrio. <form>katagi-</form> <pos>n</pos> fellow resident of a barrio.

<p id=1860><form>balangbalang</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> pummel by several persons. <i>Gibalangbalang sa mga silíngan ang kawatan,</i> The neighbors pummelled the thief.

<p id=1861><form>balangbálang</form> <pos>n</pos> a child&apos;s game played by two groups whereby they try to capture each other by a process of guessing.

<p id=1862><form>balanghitaw</form> <pos>n</pos> small crocodile.

<p id=1863><form>balanghútan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. lizard fish, family <bio>Synodontidae</bio>.

<p id=1864><form>balanghuy</form> <xr>= <sc>bulanghuy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1865><form>balangúbang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. medium-sized soft wood tree, the bark of which is used for walling: <bio>Shorea negrosensis</bio>.

<pb n=91>

<p id=1866><form>balangus</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>eat voraciously</tr>. <i>Ayaw ibalangus ang ímung pagkáun arun dílì ka hituk-an,</i> Do not gobble your food or you&apos;ll choke.

<p id=1867><form>baláni<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> trunk of a banana or abaca plant. <number>2</number> pieces of the banana trunk.

<p id=1868><form>baláni<sub>2</sub></form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>batu<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=1869><form>balansi</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>accounting</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>balance</tr>. <i>Nawad-an siyag balansi,</i> He lost his balance. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make an accounting of. <i>Balansíhan ta ka sa ímung útang,</i> I&apos;ll make an accounting to you of your debts. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>2a</number> maintain one&apos;s balance. <number>2b</number> <tr>sway</tr> from side to side in keeping in an upright position. <i>Nagbalansi ang barku sa dakung balud,</i> The ship rocked back and forth in the high waves.

<p id=1870><form>balansíkul</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small <tr>tuna</tr>.

<p id=1871><form>balantak</form> <pos>n</pos> a small woven fish or eel trap with inwardly slanting tines to allow entrance but no exit. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> catch with a <ix>balantak.</ix> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make into such a trap. <number>3</number> <itype>[c]</itype> put out a <ix>balantak.</ix> <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> fish with a <ix>balantak.</ix> <i>Namantak sila sa sapà,</i> They are trapping fish in the river.

<p id=1872><form>balantì</form> <xr>= <sc>balalantì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1873><form>balantígun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>bird</tr>.

<p id=1874><form>balantíyung</form> <pos>n</pos> varieties of climbing squashes, long, sausage-shaped or jar-shaped: varieties of <bio>Lagenaria leucantha</bio>.

<p id=1875><form>balanus</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> <tr>mourn</tr>. <i>Kaming mahabilin magbalanus,</i> Those of us who are left behind will grieve. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> <tr>repent</tr>. <i>Magbalanus ka sa kaulahían,</i> You will repent in the end. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>grief</tr>, <tr>mourning</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>repentance</tr>.

<p id=1876><form>balaraw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>dagger</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into, strike with a dagger.

<p id=1877><form>balas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sand</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> put sand s.w. <number>2</number> <itype>[B3(1)]</itype> form sand-like particles. <i>Mubalas ang dugù ug dugáyun sa káyu,</i> Blood stew forms grains if you leave it over the fire too long. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> have sand all over it.

<p id=1878><form>balasbas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; cP]</itype> go along parallel to s.t. <i>Ibalasbas (ipabalasbas) pagdala ang káhuy sa asíras,</i> Go along the sidewalk when you carry the wood. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put s.t. in a row parallel to s.t. <i>Ibalasbas (balasbása) ug tanum ang kapáyas sa ímung kural,</i> Plant papayas along your fence. <pos>n</pos> ornamental planted along walks ( <xr>= <sc>atay-átay</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>atay</sc>.</xr>)

<p id=1879><form>balaslúkun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>naughty</tr>, <tr>mischievous</tr>. <i>Balaslúkun kaáyu ning batáa. Kusug kaáyung mupahílak sa íyang mga manghud,</i> The naughty child enjoys making his younger brothers and sisters cry. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become naughty.

<p id=1880><form>balasúbas</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> one who avoids meeting his obligations. <i>Balasúbas kaáyu siyang muswildu. Utsu ang sábut, dus ray báyad,</i> He is immoral in the way he pays wages. He promises eight pesos, but two is all you get. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be a person who avoids meeting obligations.

<p id=1881><form>balat</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sea cucumber</tr>. <number>2</number> one considered not to count for anything. <i>Ngánung wà man ku nímu bahíni? Unsa ku, balat lang?</i> Why didn&apos;t you give me any? Don&apos;t I count for anything? <form>&mdash; hanginan</form> k.o. sea cucumber that shrinks up when taken out of the water so much that it seems to disappear. <form>&mdash; úwak</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. black sea cucumber edible when dried.

<p id=1882><form>balat-ang</form> <pos>n</pos> the hips and pelvic region. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> have pains in the pelvic region. <i>Balat-ángun siya ug magrigla,</i> She has pains in the pelvic region when she menstruates. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having prominent hips.

<p id=1883><form>balátik<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>trap</tr> consisting of a trip rope which releases a spear. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> catch with, set a <ix>balátik.</ix> <i>Hingbalatikan ang irù,</i> The dog got speared in the trap. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> set a <ix>balátik.</ix> <i>Balatíkan nákù ag maisan,</i> I will put a trap in the cornfield. <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make a <ix>balátik.</ix>

<p id=1884><form>balátik<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> name of a constellation having three stars in a row.

<p id=1885><form>balátung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. string bean, reaching more than a foot and less than an inch around. The most commonly grown string bean: <bio>Vigna sesquipedialis</bio>. <form>sintas &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> a variety longer than ordinary <ix>balátung.</ix> <form>batungbatung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. wild vine with a bean similar to the <ix>balátung,</ix> but inedible. <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. banana the fruit of which is light yellowish green, long and thin, eaten raw when ripe.

<p id=1886><form>balatwánun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small sea fish: <bio>Gerres sp</bio>.

<p id=1887><form>baláud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> issue an order. <i>Gibalaúran kung Tátay sa dílì na pagtabakù,</i> Father ordered me not to smoke. <number>2</number> give a warning. <i>Gibalaúran tang may bagyung taliábut,</i> We have been warned that there&apos;s a typhoon coming. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <tr>law</tr>, <tr>rules</tr> and <tr>regulations</tr>. <i>Ayaw supáka ang baláud,</i> Do not break the law. <number>2</number> <tr>warning</tr>. <form>batakang &mdash;</form> <tr>constitution</tr>. <form>balauránan</form> <pos>n</pos> place where laws are passed. <i>Ubus, ibabaw balauránan,</i> Lower, upper house. <form>mag-r-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lawmaker</tr>, <form>-un(&rarr;), balaurun, balaudnun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bill</tr>, future law.

<p id=1888><form>balaúngun</form> <xr>= <sc>buluungun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1889><form>balaw</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a resinous preparation used to caulk and waterproof a boat, obtained from the sap of the <ix>apítung</ix> and <ix>almasíga.</ix> <number>2</number> k.o. timber tree, light species of trees called <ix>apítung.</ix> <number>3</number> reddish-brown color <pb n=92>in feathers of fowls. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> waterproof a boat with <ix>balaw.</ix> <i>Balawan nímu ang tibuuk kílid,</i> Caulk the seams and put resin all over the sides.

<p id=1890><form>bálaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> get tired of doing s.t. which takes a long time. <i>Nabálaw kug pinaábut nímu,</i> I got tired of waiting for you. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1]</itype> be satisfied to the point of not desiring any more, do as much as one wants to. <i>Magbálaw akug bayli karung gabíi,</i> I will dance to my heart&apos;s content this evening. <i>Nabálaw na kug kináug karni,</i> I got tired of eating meat. <form>ka-an, ka-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> ending up by being completely satiated. <i>Walay kabaláwan ang íyang kagútum,</i> There is no satisfying his hunger.

<p id=1891><form>balawbaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put s.t. over s.t. else. <i>Ang kík gibawbáwan ug aysing,</i> The cake was topped with icing. <i>Ibawbaw ang báhaw sa bag-ung kan-un,</i> Put the leftover rice on top of the newly-cooked rice. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> skim off the topmost portion of s.t. <i>Bawbáwun ku ang ispúma sa sabaw,</i> I&apos;ll skim off the foam from the soup.

<p id=1892><form>balay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>house</tr>. <form>&mdash; alampuánan</form> house of worship. <form>&mdash; sa lawàlawà</form> <tr>spiderweb</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa ligwan, putyúkan</form> <tr>beehive, hornet&apos;s nest</tr>. <form>&mdash; lungsud</form> <tr>city hall</tr>. <form>&mdash; patigáyun</form> <tr>business firm</tr>. <number>2</number> home base in games. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> build a house. <i>Nagbalay siya daplin sa baybáyun,</i> He built a house near the shore. <i>Balayan kung ímung lúti,</i> I&apos;ll build a house on your lot. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> form a thought, compose a song. <i>Mubálay kug bálak,</i> I&apos;ll compose a poem. <i>Baláya ang ímung tubag sa ímung hunàhúnà,</i> Work your answer out carefully in your mind. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> home base in a game of hide and seek or in baseball. <number>2</number> network of bamboo strips mounted like a platform for climbing plants. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> reach home in baseball, touch base in hide and seek. <i>Ug mubayan kag úna sa búang, libri ka,</i> If you reach the goal ahead of the one who&apos;s it, you&apos;re free. <form>-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> matchbox. <i>Isulud ang palítu sa bayanan,</i> Place the matchsticks in the matchbox. <number>2</number> shell of eggs, sea animals. <i>Bayanan sa itlug,</i> Egg shells. <i>Bayanan sa pawíkan,</i> Turtle shell. <i>Bayanan sa kinhasun,</i> Clam shell. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>-an</sc>. <bx>4</bx></xr> <form>&mdash; sa utut</form> female genitalia (humorous slang). <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> group of homes. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> housing project, group of homes. <i>Ang pruyiktu sa pamalay álang sa mga kabus,</i> The housing project for the poor. <number>2</number> s.t. used in the house. <i>Pamalay na lang ning sinináa,</i> This dress is only for house use. <number>3</number> roof framework of a house. <form>pani&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> household. <i>Buluhatun sa panimalay,</i> Household chores. <number>2</number> home. <i>Ang asáwa mauy hára sa panimalay,</i> The wife is the queen of the home. <form>tag-, tag-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> owner of the house. <form>tig-un(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>framework</tr> of a house. <i>Hápit na mahuman ang tigbáyun sa ákung balay,</i> The framework of my house is almost finished. <number>2</number> framework of one&apos;s thoughts. <i>Natumpag ang tigbáyun sa ákung mga damgu,</i> The framework of my dreams collapsed. <form>gam-(&larr;)</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>gambálay</sc>.</xr> <form>panum-</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tungbálay</sc>.</xr>&dagger;

<p id=1893><form>balaybay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>put in a row</tr>. <i>Balaybáyun (ibalaybay) nátù ang misitíra sa agiánan,</i> Let&apos;s put a row of flower tubs along the walk. <pos>n</pos> things put in a <tr>row</tr>. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> go in, along a certain <tr>line</tr>. <i>Namalaybay sila sa asíras,</i> They walked on the sidewalk.

<p id=1894><form>baláyung</form> <pos>n</pos> large hardwood tree with a short trunk and long branches. The wood is deep, dark cordovan and is very hard and highly resistant to deterioration.

<p id=1895><form>balbag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a12]</itype> <tr>break</tr> into pieces due to an impact. <i>Nabalbag ang bagul nga gimartilyu,</i> The coconut shell got smashed when I hammered it.

<p id=1896><form>balbakúwa</form> <pos>n</pos> dish composed of beef or carabao legs, tails, ears, and skin, stewed with bones and with spices and peas. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make beef, <tr>carabao stew</tr>.

<p id=1897><form>balbal</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>possessed person</tr> (<ix>unglù</ix>) that has a need to go after sick people&apos;s blood or livers. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> for the <ix>balbal</ix> to go out and perpetrate his evil deeds.

<p id=1898><form>balbangáan</form> <pos>a</pos> for fruits to be in the stage where they are just about to <tr>ripen</tr> but still hard. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> reach the <tr>ripening</tr> stage.

<p id=1899><form>balbas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>beard</tr>. <number>2</number> instrument for <tr>shaving</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>shave</tr> s.o. <i>Balbásan ta nang ímung bigúti,</i> Let&apos;s shave your mustache off. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> shave oneself. <i>Makabalbas kag way saminsámin?</i> Can you shave without a mirror? <form>pa&N;-, panghi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> shave oneself. <i>Wà pa ku mamalbas (manghimalbas),</i> I haven&apos;t shaved yet.

<p id=1900><form>balbíru</form> <xr>= <sc>barbíru</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1901><form>balbula</form> <xr>= <sc>barbula</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1902><form>balda</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>disable</tr>, <tr>maim</tr>. <i>Baldáha ang tiil arun dì kadágan,</i> Break his legs so he can&apos;t run away. <i>Gibaldáhan ang táwu nga misúkul sa pulis,</i> The man who resisted the policeman was maimed. <number>2</number> <tr>disturb</tr>, prevent s.o. from doing s.t. properly. <i>Ang mga tin-idyir mubaldag apil-apil sa sáyaw,</i> The teenagers that get into the act keep us from dancing properly. <i>Baldáhun ku sa makadiyut ang inyung panagsulti,</i> May I disturb your conversation a minute? <pos>n</pos> s.t. that disturbs. <form>-du</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>crippled</tr>, <tr>maimed</tr>. <i>Pagkatáwu níya, baldádu na siyag kamut,</i> He was <pb n=93>born with a crippled hand. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a]</itype> get maimed, maim. <i>Baldadúhun ta ka run,</i> I&apos;m going to cripple you, you damn ...

<!-- Fixed order of pos -->

<p id=1903><form>baldi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pail</tr>. <number>2</number> storm signal consisting of a cone made of canvas raised by day in combination with a ball. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> fetch water in a pail. <i>Magbaldi aku didtu ug túbig,</i> I&apos;ll go there to fetch a pail of water.

<p id=1904><form>baldíyu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>flood</tr> with water for the purpose of cleaning. <i>Nagbaldíyu mi sa kusína,</i> We flushed water over the kitchen.

<p id=1905><form>baldúsa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tile</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make s.t. of tile. <i>Baldusáhun ta ning átung salug,</i> Let&apos;s have a tile floor.&dagger;

<p id=1906><form>balhas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>perspiration</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>prickly heat</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B24; a4]</itype> <tr>perspire</tr>. <i>Mubalhas ku ug mulampásu sa sawug,</i> I&apos;ll perspire if I scrub the floor. <i>Gibalhas ku human pag-inum sa aspirin,</i> I sweated after taking aspirin.

<p id=1907><form>balhíbu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hair</tr> on the body, but not pubic hairs, hair of animals, feathers. <i>Bagà ang balhíbu sa íyang íluk,</i> He has thick hair in his armpits. <i>Hámis ug balhíbu ang iring,</i> The cat has soft fur. <i>Putì ang balhíbu sa ákung hiniktan,</i> My fighting cock has white feathers. <form>sámag, paríhug &mdash;</form> similar in traits. <i>Ang mga táwung susámag balhíbu magkaúyun giyud,</i> Birds of a feather flock together. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> <number>1a</number> better in feather coloration. <i>Ang tubaung parísag buyugun makabalhibu,</i> Toddy-colored feathers win <corr sic="o-over">over</corr> honey-colored ones. <number>1b</number> <tr>beat</tr> invariably in a competition. <i>Nabalhibuan mung mga tagabaryu námung mga tagasyudad,</i> We city people can outdo you country people. <number>2</number> <tr>overawe</tr>, <tr>impress</tr> s.o. to the extent that he gets flustered or completely eats out of one&apos;s hands. <i>Nabalhibuan ku niánang bayhána. Dílì ku makabungat sa ákung túyù,</i> I was overawed by that woman. I couldn&apos;t say what I wanted to. <number>3</number> for one&apos;s heart to <tr>soften</tr> to one. <i>Nabalhibuan ku ánang tihíka. Aku ray makapangáyù níyag kwarta. Way láin,</i> That old skinflint has a soft spot in his heart for me. I can ask him for money, but no one else can. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <number>1a</number> select fighting cocks on the basis of feather coloration. <i>Mamalhíbu ku sa ímung bayungbáyung kay maghukut kug igtalarì,</i> I&apos;ll make a selection from your young cocks to raise into a fighting cock. <number>1b</number> size up an opponent&apos;s cock by the feathers. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2S]</itype> grow feathers. <i>Namalhíbu na ang kuyabug,</i> The nestlings are growing feathers now. <form>lúpig sa balhibuay</form> come off the worse when it comes to comparing feathers. <i>Lúpig ka sa balhibuay kun itárì nímu ang ugis sa tubaun,</i> Don&apos;t pit your white cock against a toddy-colored one because you lose just from the color combination. <form>balhibuun</form> <pos>a</pos> hairy. <form>-un ug dílà</form> tending to backbite. <form>-un ug kamut</form> tending to swipe things.

<p id=1908><form>balhin</form> (from <ix>halin</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1a</number> <tr>move</tr> s.t. from one place to another. <i>Balhínun (ibalhin) ta kini didtu sa kusína,</i> Let&apos;s transfer this to the kitchen. <number>1b</number> move domestic animals to the shade, to a new grazing area. <i>Talina, ang kábaw balhína (ibalhin),</i> Move the carabao, Talina. <number>2</number> <itype>[AP]</itype> move, <tr>emigrate</tr> from one place to another. <i>Mibalhin kami sa dakbayan,</i> We moved to the city. <number>3</number> <itype>[B]</itype> become changed. <i>Nabalhin (mibalhin) ang íyang taras sa nagkadakù siya,</i> His character changed as he grew older. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> change. <i>May kabalhínan ang íyang kinaíya sa nadátù na,</i> His character changed after he became rich. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> changeable. <i>Ang babáyi mabalhínun sáma sa bagyu,</i><i></i> Women are fickle like typhoons. <form>-un(&rarr;), balhinbalhin</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. movable fish corral.

<p id=1909><form>balhug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> insert s.t. long in a place under s.t. or between s.t. <i>Akuy mibalhug niánang linipak ngadtu sa binugkus,</i> I inserted those bamboo slats into the bundle. <i>Ibalhug iláwum sa katri ang malíta,</i> Slip the valise under the bed. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; a]</itype> put into an enclosure. <i>Akuy mibalhug sa manuk sa tangkal,</i> I put the chicken in the cage. <i>Gibalhug siya sa karsil,</i> He was thrown in jail.

<p id=1910><form>balhun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> rope tied from one end of the yoke to the other end, passing below the neck, so the yoke won&apos;t slip off. <number>2</number> bellyband of harness. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> apply, use as bellyband or yoke rope.

<p id=1911><form>bali<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>reversed</tr>, <tr>backwards</tr>. <i>Bali ang pagkasul-ub nang ímung sapátus,</i> You put your shoes on backwards. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> turn s.t. over. <i>Balihun nátung sinugbang isdà,</i> Let&apos;s turn the fish we&apos;re broiling over. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> plow the field the second time to turn the clods over (in place of harrowing&mdash;<ix>pagkaras</ix>). <i>Magbali ta run arun kapugas ta ugmà,</i> Let&apos;s plow the field the second time so we can plant tomorrow. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> for wind to change direction, switch party loyalty. <i>Mibali ang hángin,</i> The wind changed direction. <i>Kun wà ku makabali sa Libiral, pildi ku,</i> If I hadn&apos;t changed to the Liberal Party, I would have lost. <number>4</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> be reversed, wrong side out, backwards. <i>Dì na mabali ang ákung hukum,</i> My decision cannot be reversed. <i>Nabali na ang kalibútan kay ang babáyi mau nay mangulitáwu,</i> The world has turned upside down because it&apos;s the women who court the men now. <i>Nabali na <pb n=94>ba nímu ang punda?</i> Have you turned the pillow cases inside out? <number>5</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> <formx>&mdash; ug pangutána</formx> respond to a question with another question instead of answering it. <number>6</number> <itype>[C; a]</itype> be placed in opposite directions from each other. <i>Nagbáli silag higdà,</i> They were lying head to foot. <i>Balíhun nátù pagbutang ang sapátus sa kartun,</i> Let&apos;s put the shoes tip to toe in the box. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> put clothes on wrong side out or shoes backwards. <i>Namali ka man sa ímung sinínà,</i> You have your clothes on inside out. <number>2</number> turn cloth wrong side out. <i>Namali ku sa mga linabhan arun dílì hilubaran,</i> I turned the wash inside out so it wouldn&apos;t fade. <form>balibáli</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> do first on one side and then on the other. <i>Ang íyang amahan mauy mibalibálig sagpà níya,</i> Her father slapped her on both cheeks. <i>Gibalibáli níyag pas-an ang sag-ub,</i> As he carried the water container he kept shifting it from shoulder to shoulder. <form>&mdash; ug kasábà</form> scold severely. <i>Balibalíhun bítaw siyag kasábà wà katíngug,</i> He never said a word when he was scolded severely. <pos>a</pos> reversible. <i>Ang ákung dyákit balibáli,</i> I have a reversible jacket. <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> speak in secret code, way. <i>Antígu ka ba nga mubinali?</i> Do you know how to speak Hog Latin?&dagger;

<p id=1912><form>báli</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> be worth it (not used negatively). <i>Písus ang palit nímu sa isdà? Báli sad,</i> You paid a peso for the fish. It was worth it. <form>&mdash; walà</form> unimportant, worth ignoring. <number>2</number> serves one right. <i>Nadagmà ang bátà. Báli,</i> The child fell. Serves him right. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; ug</formx> worth, in the amount, quantity, duration of. <i>Bálig písus nga bugas,</i> One peso&apos;s worth of rice. <i>Pabukálag bálig tungà sa taknà,</i> Boil it for half an hour. <number>4</number> <formx>&mdash; nga</formx> <ix>with exclamation:</ix> how very much! <i>Báling buánga nímu,</i> How very naughty of you. <form>mas &mdash; nga</form> it would be better if. <i>Mas báli nga mamatay,</i> It would be better to die. <form>walay &mdash;</form> it doesn&apos;t matter. <i>Way bálig mahal, basta maáyung klási,</i> It doesn&apos;t matter if it costs a lot, as long as it is good. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> <number>1a</number> <formx>dílì, walà, ayaw &mdash;</formx> not pay s.t. any mind. <i>Ayaw balíha ang mga tabì,</i> Don&apos;t pay attention to the gossip. <number>1b</number> <formx>gi- walà</formx> ignored, treated as insignificant. <i>Gibáli walà na siya ni Armi,</i> Armi just ignored her from then on. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ab1]</itype> <number>a</number> sign a chit for goods taken in a store. <i>Mubáli lang kug bugas,</i> I&apos;ll just sign a chit for some rice. <number>b</number> ask for an advance. <i>Si Uskar ang átung balíhan,</i> Let&apos;s ask for an advance from Oscar. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a chit signed for goods taken in a store. <number>2</number> amount taken in advance from wages. <i>May báli kung trayinta písus sa ákung ámu,</i> I had an advance of thirty pesos from my boss.&dagger;

<p id=1913><form>bálì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>break</tr> s.t. long. <i>Mibálì siyag sanga,</i> He broke off a twig. <i>Nabálì ang ákung buktun,</i> I broke my arm. <i>Túhud lay ibálì ánà,</i> Break it off with your knee. <form>&mdash; ang súngay</form> put s.o. in his place. <i>Balían ku siya sa íyang súngay arun dílì na mag-abusar,</i> I&apos;ll put her in her place so she won&apos;t be so abusive any more. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for an elongated thing to be <tr>broken</tr>. <number>2</number> s.o. who is new at s.t., <tr>ignorant</tr>. <i>Balì ka pang mumaníhu,</i> You&apos;re still just learning how to drive. <i>Balì siyag linaktan,</i> He carries himself like a greenhorn. <number>3</number> <tr>foolish</tr> in trying to do s.t. one doesn&apos;t even know how to do. <i>Balì ning tawhána. Midrayib sa dyíp, unyà dì diay kamau,</i> He&apos;s a fool. He tries to drive the jeep when he doesn&apos;t even know how to. <form>balìbálì</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. rifle that is bent when cocked, usually a double-barreled gun. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>bulinaw</sc>.</xr>&dagger;

<p id=1914><form>baliad</form> <pos>a</pos> in a motion with the back bent. <i>Baliad na run ákung daybing,</i> Now I will do a back dive. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3; c1]</itype> <tr>bend</tr> one&apos;s body backward with a rapid motion, do s.t. on one&apos;s back. <i>Nagbaliad siya paglanguy,</i> He was swimming on his back.

<p id=1915><form>baliálà</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> the Malaysian fantail, a small bird that moves its tail up and down while perched: <bio>Rhipidura javanica</bio>. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> characterized by constant moving around or changing positions, <tr>fidgety</tr>.

<p id=1916><form>balíbad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S; c]</itype> <tr>refuse</tr> s.o. or s.t. <i>Balibáran gánì ku nímu, patyun ta ka,</i> If you turn me down, I&apos;ll kill you. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN2]</itype> give an excuse for not doing s.t. <i>Mibalíbad (namalíbad) siyang dì musulti kay pagaw siya,</i> He got out of giving the speech with the excuse that he was hoarse. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>refusal</tr>. <i>Ang ímung balíbad way kapuslánan kun tiúnan kag pusil,</i> No use trying to refuse when s.o. points a gun at you. <number>2</number> <tr>excuse</tr>. <i>Nakadawat mig balíbad níya nga dì siya makaanhi,</i> We already received his excuse that he couldn&apos;t come. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> say s.t. is not the case. <i>Namalíbad siya nga wà siya mahigugma kaníya,</i> She said she did not love him. <form>balibaran</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of giving excuses.

<p id=1917><form>balibag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>throw</tr> s.t. away, get rid of, throw. <i>Ayaw nag ibalibag. Magámit pa man,</i> Don&apos;t throw it away. We can still use it.

<p id=1918><form>balibay</form> <xr>= <sc>balibag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1919><form>balíbud<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; ab16(1)]</itype> <tr>wind</tr> s.t. around s.t. <i>Ibalíbud (balibúra) ang hílu sa káhuy arun dì magubut,</i> Wind the thread around the stick so it will not get tangled up.

<p id=1920><form>balíbud<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>scatter</tr> grains, small solids over an area. <i>Balibúrig sibúyas ang sabaw,</i> Sprinkle onions on the soup. <i>Ibalíbud ning <pb n=95>pulbus sa salug,</i> Sprinkle this powder on the floor.

<p id=1921><form>balibul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>volleyball</tr>. <number>2</number> volleyball style of playing billiards: the table is divided into two territories, and each player must make a carom inside his territory. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> play volleyball. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> volleyball court.&dagger;

<p id=1922><form>balibung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> cover the space between the upper edges of the <tr>roof</tr> at the ridge. <i>Sín ang maáyung ibalibung sa atup,</i> Galvanized iron is a good material to put over the ridge of the roof. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> ridge of the roof. <number>2</number> the material which covers the ridge.

<p id=1923><form>balidbid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>trickle</tr> down in drops, <tr>clinging</tr> to s.t. <i>Íyang gipahíran ang lúhà nga mibalidbid sa íyang áping,</i> She wiped the tears that trickled down her cheeks.

<p id=1924><form>balidikturyan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>valedictorian</tr>. <number>2</number> one who excels in s.t. <i>Basta mahitungud na gánì sa babáyi, balidikturyan siya ánang buháta,</i> He&apos;s an expert when it comes to women. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3; a12]</itype> become the valedictorian.

<p id=1925><form>balighù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>different</tr> from the expected. <i>Dakung balighù, gipusil siya apan wà dutli,</i> How strange! He was shot but was not hurt. <i>Siya ray anak nga balighù sa ginikánan,</i> He is the parent&apos;s problem child.

<p id=1926><form>balighut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bow</tr>, <tr>loop</tr>, that can be easily untied by pulling one end of the string. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>tie</tr> a knot on s.t. <i>Akuy mubalighut sa listun sa bátà,</i> I&apos;ll tie the child&apos;s shoelace. <i>Balighúti ang kumingking arun dì malímut,</i> Tie a string around his little finger so he won&apos;t forget.

<p id=1927><form>baligkawang</form> <xr>= <sc>balat-ang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1928><form>baligkus</form> <xr>= <sc>balighut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1929><form>baligsálà</form> <xr>= <sc>balinsálà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1930><form>baligtad</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> wrong side out, up. <i>Baligtad nang pagkatahì kay nailáwum ang karaygan,</i> It was sewed with the wrong side out because the material that was meant to face is on the inside. <number>2</number> <tr>contrary</tr> to what is expected. <i>Baligtad ang nahitabù kay inay silútan, gigantíhan na hinúun,</i> Just the opposite happened: instead of being punished, he was rewarded. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put wrong side up or out. <i>Nagbaligtad ang kahun ay, básig mahùhù ang sulud,</i> The box is upside down. The contents might fall out. <i>Ayaw ibaligtad (baligtára) pagladlad ang mga magasin,</i> Do not display the magazines upside down.

<p id=1931><form>baligtus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> tight <tr>knot</tr> that won&apos;t come undone. <number>2</number> thumb-sized bundle of sorted abaca fiber for weaving, knotted at one end. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>tie</tr> in a knot. <i>Baligtúsa (ibaligtus) makaduha arun masigúru,</i> Tie the knot twice to make it secure. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> tie abaca fiber into a bundle as thick as one&apos;s thumb by knotting the end. <i>Baligtúsa ang sinudlay nga iskuhídu,</i> Bundle the sorted fine abaca fiber.

<p id=1932><form>baligwat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; c6]</itype> use s.t. as a <tr>crowbar</tr> to move s.t. else. <i>Ayaw ug ibaligwat ang páyung sa ríhas,</i> Don&apos;t use the umbrella as a crowbar to move the grill. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> break one&apos;s arm or leg by moving it accidentally after it has been wedged tight in place (i.e. having it act like a crowbar). <i>Nabálì íyang tiil kay nabaligwat sa pagkabulásut níya sa bangag,</i> He broke his leg when he stepped into the hole because when he fell, his leg was wedged on the edge of the hole. <pos>n</pos> crowbar.

<p id=1933><form>baligyà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>sell</tr>. <i>Gibaligyáan ku níyag sigarilyu,</i> He sold me some cigarettes. <pos>n</pos> <tr><corr sic=merchandize>merchandise</corr></tr>, <tr>wares for sale</tr>. <i>Nagpátad ang daghang baligyà sa asíras,</i> The sidewalks are teeming with things for sale. <i>Dílì kini baligyà. Ákù ni,</i> This is not for sale. It&apos;s mine. <form>palit &mdash;</form> buying and selling. <i>Nanginabúhì ku sa palit baligyà,</i> I make my living by buying and selling. <form>ma&N;-ay, ma&N;-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> one who sells for a living.

<p id=1934><form>bálik</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b5]</itype> go, <tr>come back</tr>, come back to get s.t. <i>Kanus-a ka man mubálik?</i> When will you come back? <i>Balíkun (balíkan) nákù ang ákung nahikalimtan,</i> I&apos;ll come back for the things I forgot. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> put, give s.t. back. <i>Ibálik ra ni ngadtu,</i> Put this back. <number>2</number> <itype>[B23; b6]</itype> return to his former state. <i>Mibálik (nabálik) na ang kangayà sa íyang panagway,</i> Her happy expression returned to her face. <i>Balíkan ang yútà sa íyang katambuk kun abunúhan,</i> The soil will regain its fertility if you add fertilizer. <number>3</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> have a <tr>relapse</tr>. <i>Gibalíkan siya sa íyang sakit kay nangalsag bug-at,</i> He had a relapse because he carried s.t. too heavy for him. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b5c]</itype> [do] again. <i>Balíki (balíka) nig tahì,</i> Sew this over again. <i>Balíkun ku ikaw ug pangutána,</i> I will ask you again. <i>Maúlaw ku ug ibálik nag pangutána,</i> I would be embarrassed if that question were asked a second time. <number>4a</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> <tr>revive</tr>. <i>Naghandum sila nga untà balíkun ang pilikulang Binisayà,</i> They&apos;re thinking about reviving Visayan movies. <pos>n</pos> subject repeated in school. <form>balikbálik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; ac2]</itype> <number>1</number> do again. <number>2</number> come back again. <i>Balikbálik unyà mu, ha?</i> Bye. Come back and see us again, will you? <form>balikbalik</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. small tree used in countersorcery because of its magical powers to cause evil to return to the perpetrator. <number>2</number> k.o. small bird. <form>sum-(&rarr;), tum-(&rarr;)</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>sumbalik</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=96>

<p id=1935><form>balíkas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>curses</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1c]</itype> <tr>curse</tr>. <i>Mubalíkas giyud aku nímu ug mahitabù,</i> I&apos;ll curse you if it happens. <i>Ayawg balikása (balikasa) ang mga binatunan,</i> Don&apos;t curse the servants. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>foul-mouthed</tr>, fond of uttering indecent words. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become foul-mouthed.

<p id=1936><form>balikawang</form> <xr>= <sc>balat-ang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1937><form>balikhaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>collarbone</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN2]</itype> have prominent collarbones. <i>Namalikhaw siya pagguwà níya sa uspital,</i> You could see his collarbones when he got out of the hospital.

<p id=1938><form>balikid</form> <xr>= <sc>balilikid</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1939><form>balikig</form> <number>1</number> euphemism for <xr><sc>balikug</sc>, <ix>2</ix></xr> (<xr>= <sc>balikù</sc>, <ix>2</ix></xr>). <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>balikù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1940><form>balíkis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>coil</tr>, put around s.t. else. <i>Mibalíkis ang baksan sa bábuy,</i> The python coiled around the pig&apos;s body. <i>Nakabalíkis ang íyang kamut sa ákung háwak,</i> He managed to put his arm around my waist. <i>Ayaw ug ibalíkis ang písì sa halígi,</i> Don&apos;t coil that rope around the post. <pos>n</pos> k.o. itchy and fast-spreading skin disease which spreads around the body in the area of the hips.

<p id=1941><form>baliktad</form> <xr>= <sc>baligtad</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1942><form>baliktus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>baligtus</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> be wrapped around, <tr>coil</tr> oneself around. <i>Mibaliktus (nabaliktus) ang hálas sa sanga,</i> The snake was coiled around a branch. <i>Ang íyang mga buktun nagbaliktus sa líug sa kawatan,</i> He wrapped his arms around the thief&apos;s neck. <pos>n</pos> <tr>bundle</tr>. <i>Paliti akug usa ka baliktus káhuy,</i> Buy me a bundle of wood.

<p id=1943><form>balikù</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>crooked</tr>, not straight. <number>2</number> crooked, <tr>dishonest</tr>. <i>Balikung pulitiku,</i> Crooked politician. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; a12]</itype> be, make s.t. crooked. <i>Balikuun ta ning túbu,</i> Let&apos;s bend this water pipe. <form>&mdash; nga lyábi</form> <pos>n</pos> wrench with a socket head to fit over a bolt.

<p id=1944><form>balíkud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b6c1]</itype> <tr>coil</tr>, make a circular loop of. <i>Ibalíkud (balikúra) ang alambri,</i> Coil the wire up.

<p id=1945><form>balikug</form> <xr>= <sc>balikù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1946><form>balikugkug</form> <pos>a</pos> for wires or string-like things to be <tr>curled</tr> or <tr>twisted</tr> inwards at the end. <i>Balikugkug ang udlut sa paku,</i> The fern frond is curled at its tip. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB; a]</itype> <tr>curl</tr> or <tr>twist</tr> s.t. at the tip with a general direction pointing to the base, be curled or twisted at its end. <i>Mibalikugkug (nabalikugkug) ang dáhun sa túmang kaínit sa adlaw,</i> The leaves curled in the intense heat of the sun.

<p id=1947><form>balíkus</form> <xr>= <sc>balíkis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1948><form>balikutkut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB3; a]</itype> <tr>bunch</tr>, <tr>fold</tr>, <tr>curl</tr> up in an irregular way, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Ang úlud nga gihíkap mibalikutkut,</i> The worm curled up when s.o. touched it. <i>Ayaw balikutkúta ang písì. Ibalibud ug káhuy,</i> Don&apos;t just bunch up the rope. Wind it around a stick. <pos>a</pos> folded up in an irregular way. <i>Dì ku mupalit niánang balikutkut nga sín,</i> I won&apos;t buy that wrinkled galvanized iron sheet.

<p id=1949><form>balikutsa</form> <pos>n</pos><i></i> candy made of the hardened syrup obtained from coconut milk and sugar. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make <ix>balikutsa.</ix>

<p id=1950><form>balikwaut</form> <pos>a</pos> lacking in grace, balance, euphony. <i>Balikwaut pamináwun ang litiral kaáyung pagkahúbad,</i> A literal translation lacks euphony. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; a2]</itype> be <tr>awkward</tr>. <i>Mibalikwaut (nabalikwaut) ang linaktan sa dalágang gitihulan sa kalakin-an,</i> The girl walked awkwardly when the boys whistled at her. <i>Balikwautun ku pagtágik unyà han-áyag maáyu,</i> I&apos;ll compose it in a rough way, then rearrange it well.

<p id=1951><form>balikwit</form> <xr>= <sc>bakwit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1952><form>balíla</form> <pos>n</pos> wolf herring: <bio>Chirocentrus dorab</bio>.

<p id=1953><form>balíli</form> <pos>n</pos> general name for <tr>grasses</tr> that do not grow tall. <form>&mdash; tsína</form> k.o. purple ornamental <tr>grass</tr> grown popularly in hanging pots. <form>kabalilinhan</form> <pos>n</pos> grassy area.

<p id=1954><form>balilikid, balilíkid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> turn around, <tr>look back</tr>. <i>Gibalilíkid (gibalilikdan) nákù ang táwung mitawag nákù,</i> I turned back to the man who was calling me. <number>2</number> look back to one&apos;s past or people behind, below in rank. <i>Ug masapían ka na, dílì ka na mubalilikid sa ímung gigikánan,</i> When you become rich, you won&apos;t turn back to where you came from.

<p id=1955><form>balimbúgay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>bivalve</tr>.

<p id=1956><form>balimbing</form> <xr>= <sc>balingbing</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1957><form>báling</form> <pos>n</pos> large fish <tr>net</tr> operated by several people. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> catch fish with a large net. <i>Makúhà ang bansíkul ug balíngun,</i> Mackerel can be caught with a net. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> catch in a police dragnet. <i>Sa katapúsan nabalingan ra gayud ang tulisan,</i> At last the robbers were caught in the dragnet. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2N3PC; a1]</itype> trap, capture by stratagem. <i>Ang ímung sinultihan mauy makabáling (makapabáling) kanímu,</i> Your speech will entrap you. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A3SN; a12]</itype> for two parties to make a secret agreement in gambling in order to bilk a third player. <i>Dakù ang ákung pildi kay nabáling man ku,</i> I lost heavily because they duped me. <number>4</number> <itype>[A23PC; ab2c]</itype> capture one&apos;s attention, affections. <i>Nagkabáling ang ílang tinan-awan,</i> Their eyes met. <i>Balíngun níya ang ímung pagtagad,</i> He will capture your attention. <i>Wà níya ibáling ang íyang pagtagad ngadtu sa uban,</i> He did not turn his affections to the others. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>báling</sc>.</xr> <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> fish with nets. <pos>n</pos> fishing with nets. <form>hi&N;-, ma&N;-r-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos><i></i> one who likes to ensnare people. <i>Dalì rang ikítà <pb n=97>ug áway, himáling (mamamaling) tuhù,</i> She looks for trouble. She likes to ensnare people. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fish caught with nets. <number>2</number> s.t. captured by stratagem.

<p id=1958><form>balingag</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>careless</tr>, inattentive to what one is about.<i> Balingag ka man gud, mu nang nakalimtan nímu ang malíta,</i> You&apos;re careless. That&apos;s why you forgot the suitcase. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> <number>1</number> be careless and forget s.t. <number>2</number> mistake s.o. for s.o. else. <i>Nabalingag ku nímu kang Husi, maung gisampit ta ka,</i> I mistook you for José. That&apos;s why I called you.

<p id=1959><form>balingay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc1]</itype> hook s.t. at the back of the shoulder, esp. the bamboo palm-toddy container (<ix>kawit</ix>). <i>Balingaya (ibalingay) ang kawit,</i> Carry the toddy tube hooked on your shoulder.

<p id=1960><form>balingbing</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>carambola</tr>, a small cultivated tree with oblong fruit having longitudinal angular lobes. The fruit is fleshy and <corr sic=acid>acidic</corr> and consumed fresh or pickled: <bio>Averrhoa carambola</bio>.

<p id=1961><form>balíngit</form> <xr>= <sc>tukaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1962><form>balingkágas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> become skinny because of overindulgence in vice. <i>Makabalingkágas (makapabalingkágas) nang pagsilábig pamutakal,</i> Overindulgence in women can make one skinny.

<p id=1963><form>balingkawang</form> <xr>= <sc>balat-ang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1964><form>balingkút</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>hard to please</tr>. <i>Pagkabalingkút bayang tawhána. Dílì madalag paayun-áyun,</i> How stubborn he is. No matter how hard you try, you can&apos;t persuade him. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become hard to please.

<p id=1965><form>balingug</form> <xr>= <sc>balingag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1966><form>balinsalà, balinsálà</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small edible bivalve clam.

<p id=1967><form>balinsay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. game of tossing a handful of small objects, usually cowries, to be caught by the back of the hand, and then tossed again caught on the palm. The pieces that fall to the floor are paired off. In each pair one is made to hit the other by flicking it. If the player misses or hits more than one piece, he&apos;s burnt (<ix>pasù</ix>) and loses his turn. The object is to get rid of the pieces without losing one&apos;s turn. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C2; ac]</itype> play <ix>balinsay.</ix> <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> toss things in the air as if playing <ix>balinsay.</ix> <i>Dì balinsáyun ang kwarta kay makagábà,</i> Don&apos;t flip money in the air because it will bring you divine retribution.

<p id=1968><form>balinsáyaw</form> <xr>= <sc>sayaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1969><form>balinsiyána</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> Arroz a la Valenciana. <number>2</number> type of stitch whereby the seam is sewn twice in such a way that it won&apos;t frazzle and is invisible. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> make into Arroz a la Valenciana. <number>2</number> sew with a double stitch.

<p id=1970><form>balinsuguan</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>súgù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1971><form>balinsúngag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; c1]</itype> be placed with the ends in a random disorderly way. <i>Ayaw balinsungága (ibalinsúngag) pagbutang ang mga sugnud arun dílì muílug ug lugar,</i> Don&apos;t stack the firewood in any old way so it won&apos;t occupy too much room. <form>ka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be completely topsy-turvy. <i>Nagkabalinsúngag ang mga patayng sundálu sa nataran sa panggubátan,</i> The soldiers were lying about in every which way on the battlefield.

<p id=1972><form>balintang</form> <xr>= <sc>balintung<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=1973><form>balintawak</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a woman&apos;s dress consisting of a blouse with puffed butterfly sleeves, a long striped skirt, and a piece of cloth overlaid. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, make into a <ix>balintawak.</ix> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>linambid</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>lambid</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1974><form>balintayins</form> <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s Valentine on Valentine&apos;s day. <form>&mdash; dí</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Valentine&apos;s Day</tr>. <form>&mdash; kard</form> Valentine&apos;s greeting card. <form>&mdash; parti</form> Valentine&apos;s party. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c6]</itype> hold a Valentine&apos;s party.

<p id=1975><form>balintung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>mackerel</tr> or <tr>tuna</tr>.

<p id=1976><form>balintung<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1B2; c1]</itype> get knocked down, fall down from a standing position with force. <i>Mibalintung (nabalintung) siyang naigù sa ákung kúmù,</i> He came down with a crash when I hit him with my fist. <i>Kinsay nagbalintung sa mga síya?</i> Who knocked the chairs down? <form>Culu-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <number>1</number> turn over writhing. <i>Unsa bay nakáun mung nagbulubalintung ka man dihà?</i> What did you eat that makes you writhe? <number>2</number> <tr>somersault</tr>.

<p id=1977><form>balintúwad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> <number>1</number> fall headlong on the face. <i>Pagkasángit sa ákung tiil sa bágun, nabalintúwad ku,</i> My foot tripped on a vine, and I tumbled forward. <number>2</number> <itype>[a]</itype> pick s.o. up by the feet and hold him upside down. <i>Musúkul ka gánì balintuwárun ta ka,</i> If you defy me, I&apos;ll turn you upside down.

<p id=1978><form>balirung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> fishing trap of tidal flats consisting of stones piled waist-high arranged in a large rectangle, with a hole for entrance but no easy <corr sic=exist>exits</corr>, such that when the tide goes out the fish are bunched in the tidal pools. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a <ix>balirung.</ix> <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b1]</itype> catch fish with the <ix>balirung.</ix>

<p id=1979><form>balirung<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> throw a stick such that it spins in flight. <i>Ug dílì nímu maabut ang búnga, balirunga lang,</i> If you cannot reach the fruit, throw a stick at it to get it down. <i>Ibalirung kining putput sa irù,</i> Throw this stick at the dog. <pos>n</pos> stick used for throwing at s.t.

<p id=1980><form>balirúsu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>stubborn</tr>, not open to advice and reproach. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become stubborn; consider s.o. as such. <i>Nabalirúsu nang batáa kay way disiplína,</i> That child became wilful because of lack of discipline.

<p id=1981><form>bal-is</form> <pos>n</pos> hand tool used to strip abaca. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make an abaca stripper.

<pb n=98>

<p id=1982><form>balísa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b3(1)c5]</itype> <corr>be </corr><tr>anxious</tr>, <tr>apprehensive</tr>. <i>Ang wà níya pag-ulì nakabalísa (nakapabalísa) nákù,</i> His failure to come home worried me.

<p id=1983><form>balisádà, balisálà</form> <xr>= <sc>balinsálà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1984><form>*balisbis</form> <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>eaves</tr>, overhanging portion of a roof. <number>2</number> place beneath the eaves where rain drops to. <i>Kanali ang balisbísan,</i> Make a canal beneath the eaves where rain drops to. <number>3</number> narrow yard close to the house. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> walk along the sides of a house. <i>Mamalisbis lang ta arun dílì mahumud sa ulan,</i> Let&apos;s walk along the sides of the houses so we won&apos;t get wet. <form>pa&N;-an</form> <xr>= <sc>pa&N;-</sc>.</xr>&dagger;

<p id=1985><form>balísing</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>transfer</tr> an activity elsewhere. <i>Ibalísing (balisíngun) ni nátung átung ínum,</i> Let us move our drinking spree s.w. else. <number>2</number> <tr>move</tr> a piece in a game of marbles from an obstructed place to s.w. else the same distance from the goal. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b4(1)]</itype> have s.o. take a base in baseball. <i>Nagbalísing ba ang ampáyir sa bátir?</i> Did the umpire tell the batter to take a base? <i>Nabalisíngan ang ílang pitsir ug upat ka bátir,</i> That pitcher had four batters take a base on him. <number>4</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> for a husband to turn his attention elsewhere. <i>Hustis sa nayitklab ang gibalisíngan sa bána,</i> The husband turned his attentions to a night club hostess. <form>hi&N;-, hi&N;-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> inclined to move one&apos;s piece in a game.

<p id=1986><form>baliskad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> turn inside out. <i>Akuy mibaliskad sa linabhan,</i> I turned the wash inside out. <i>Binaliskad ang baráha,</i> Cards, face up on the table. <number>2</number> undo a knot. <i>Baliskára ang higut,</i> Untie the knot.

<p id=1987><form>baliskug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> become <tr>curled up</tr>, <tr>rolled</tr>. <i>Ang ínit ang nakabaliskug (nakapabaliskug) sa pláka,</i> The heat has caused the record to curl.

<p id=1988><form>balista</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26; a]</itype> <tr>flip</tr> over backward. <i>Mibalista siya pagkaigù sa ákung kúmù,</i> He fell over backward when he got the full force of my blows. <i>Balistáha siya, makahímù ka ba,</i> Flip him over backward if you can do it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> turn s.t. inside out. <i>Bisag balistáhun (ibalista) pa ning ákung bulsa, wà giyuy tayà,</i> You may turn my pocket inside out, but you won&apos;t find a penny.&dagger;

<p id=1989><form>balísung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> exactly the <tr>contrary</tr>. <i>Balísung kanà sa ákung nadungug,</i> That is just the opposite of what I heard. <i>Balísung ang ílang paghigdà,</i> They were lying head to foot. <i>Dakung balísung: ang babáyi magkarsúnis ug ang laláki magbistída,</i> It&apos;s completely backwards: the women wear pants and the men wear dresses. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> become just the opposite, turned around; turn s.t. around. <i>Kun mubalísung ang íyang buut, dì siya muanhi,</i> If he changes his mind, he won&apos;t come. <i>Mubalísung ang dáut sa nagpadala niíni,</i> The sorcery will boomerang on the person who sent it. <i>Ayaw balisúnga (ibalísung) ang húnus sa lamísa,</i> Don&apos;t put the drawer in the table backwards.

<p id=1990><form>balísung<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jackknife</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a]</itype> make into a jackknife, <tr>stab</tr> with a jackknife. <i>Gibalísung siya sa íyang asáwa,</i> His wife stabbed him with a jackknife.

<p id=1991><form>balità</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>news</tr>. <number>2</number> bad omen, esp. portending death. <number>2a</number> <ix>oath:</ix> it is true (lit. may it be a bad omen). <form>dakù nga &mdash;</form> sensational news. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> tell news. <i>Ikaguul mu kining ákung ibalità,</i> You will feel sad about the news that I&apos;m going to tell you. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> receive news. <i>Nakabalità ka nga minyù na ku?</i> Have you heard that I&apos;m married now? <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> appear as a bad omen. <i>Nagbalità si Pidru kay sa walà pa mi masáyud sa íyang kamatáyun dihay nagpat-akpat-ak nga dugù sa salug,</i> Pedro appeared to us with a bad omen, because before we learned of his death, we saw spots of blood on the floor.&dagger;

<p id=1992><form>balit-ad</form> <pos>a</pos> inside out, belly-side up, front-side back. <i>Balit-ad pagkasul-ub ang ímung kamisin,</i> You have your undershirt on backwards (or inside out). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ABN; a]</itype> be, make wrong-side up, out. <i>Ang hiwing pulitiku mubalit-ad sa tinúud,</i> The crooked politician twists the truth. <i>Mibalit-ad (nabalit-ad, namalit-ad) ang atup sa kusug nga hángin,</i> The wind turned the roof upside down.

<p id=1993><form>balitang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> short piece of wood or metal. Also the name given to pieces of wood which serve a purpose. <number>1a</number> whippletree of a plow. <number>1b</number> wood used in stripping abaca, around which the end of the abaca is wound and which is pulled to force the abaca through the stripper. <number>1c</number> wood used in fishing with a net that is pulled: the people who pull the net hold on to the <ix>balitang</ix> and hold it in a vertical position so that the top edge is directly above the bottom edge of the net. <number>2</number> piece of bone, vein, or tendon supposed to lie across the vagina which obstructs the easy birth of a child. <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> hurl a short stick at. <i>Balitanga ang manuk,</i> Hurl the stick at the chicken. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make into wood used as whippletree, net holder, etc. <number>3</number> <itype>[A123P; a4b4]</itype> have an obstructing bone in the vagina. <i>Gibalitang (gibalitangan) man si Títa, galisud ug anak,</i> Tita had an obstruction in her vagina so that she had a difficult delivery. <number>4</number> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> make a whippletree for a plow or piece of wood for a <pb n=99>net.

<p id=1994><form>balítang</form> <pos>n</pos> female sexual organ.

<p id=1995><form>balítaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> an improvised courtship song consisting of stanzas sung alternately by a boy and the girl he is asking the hand of (in practice by their spokesmen). The stanza consists of four rhymed lines, in any rhyme scheme, with the last two repeated. Each line ideally consists of twelve syllables, though this number is often not strictly adhered to. In modern times the <ix>balítaw</ix> is not used in courtship, but for social occasions where people show their skill at improvisation. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>bítaw</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> sing a <ix>balítaw.</ix>

<p id=1996><form>balíti</form> <xr>= <sc>dalakit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=1997><form>balituk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> do a back <tr>somersault</tr>, <tr>flip</tr> over backwards. <i>Maáyung mubalituk ang sirkadur,</i> An acrobat flips over backwards with ease. <number>2</number> go back on a promise. <i>Mibalituk siya sa íyang sáad,</i> He took back his promise. <number>3</number> <tr>switch</tr> party loyalty. <i>Ang Nasyunalista mauy íyang balitukan,</i> He&apos;ll defect from (or defect to) the Nacionalista Party. <number>4</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> for a contribution to be returned to the author. <i>Mibalituk ang íyang tampu,</i> His article was rejected.

<p id=1998><form>balitùtù</form> <pos>a</pos> very tightly <tr>tied</tr>. <i>Bugtúa na lang kay balitùtù pagkabaligtus,</i> Just cut it because it is knotted tight. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a knot very tight. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> knot tied in such a way that it is hard to undo.

<p id=1999><form>baliug</form> (from <ix>líug</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear s.t. around the neck. <i>Nagbaliug siyag panyù,</i> He wore a handkerchief around his neck. <pos>n</pos> band around the neck.

<p id=2000><form>balíus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C13; c3]</itype> pass one another going in different directions. <i>Nagkabalíus mi kay pag-abut nákù mu say íyang paglakaw,</i> We missed each other because when I arrived, he had just left.

<p id=2001><form>baliw</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. tall <tr>pandanus</tr>, the leaves of which are used for coarse mats and baskets: <bio>Pandanus copelandii</bio>. <number>2</number> mat made from this pandanus.

<p id=2002><form>báliw</form> <pos>n</pos> divine <tr>punishment</tr>, usually for incest, consisting of being struck by lightning and turned into stone. <i>Báliw ímung maánig pahimuslan mung ímung anak,</i> You&apos;ll earn divine wrath if you make love with your daughter. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> <number>1</number> be struck with lightning and turned into stone. <number>2</number> be hit by lightning. <i>Gibáliw ang lubi,</i> The coconut was hit by lightning. <number>3</number> be <tr>crazy</tr>. <i>Wà ka balíwa. Tigúwang ka na makigminyug diyisisayis?</i> Are you out of your mind? At your age you want to marry a sixteen-year-old?

<p id=2003><form>baliwag, balíwag</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>inverted</tr>, <tr>inverse</tr>, in the opposite direction, not straight. <i>Baliwag man kag tinan-awan,</i> You are shifty-eyed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> shift, turn to opposite direction, be shifted. <i>Nagbaliwag ang íyang tubag sa ámung gipanagsultíhan,</i> Her answer was far from the subject of what we were talking about. <i>Baliwagun (ibaliwag) ta ning láyag,</i> Let us shift the sails.

<p id=2004><form>balíwas</form> <xr>= <sc>balíus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2005><form>baliwliw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB3; ac1]</itype> turn around on itself in the air, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Mibaliwliw (nabaliwliw) ang ayruplánu sa hángin sa pagkamatay sa makina niíni,</i> The plane spun in the air when its engine stopped. <i>Ibaliwliw (baliwlíwa) nang káhuy,</i> Throw that stick so that it whirls. <i>Baliwlíwun tika,</i> I will throw a stick at you. <pos>n</pos> stick thrown in a game of <ix>sátung.</ix>

<p id=2006><form>baliyug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> crooked, not straight. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a2]</itype> be, become crooked, not straight. <i>Nagkabaliyug na ang punúan sa lubi samtang nagkataas,</i> The coconut tree trunk is getting more and more crooked as it grows taller.

<p id=2007><form>baliyug<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> necklace (coined word). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> wear a necklace. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a necklace.

<p id=2008><form>balkun</form> <pos>n</pos> front porch. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> put a front porch to s.t.

<p id=2009><form>balkunáhi</form> <xr>= <sc>balkun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2010><form>balkuni</form> <pos>n</pos> balcony in a moviehouse.

<p id=2011><form>balsa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sled consisting of a shaft hitched to a draft animal and a platform dragged along the ground. <number>2</number> raft. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac1]</itype> bring s.t. with a sled or raft. <i>Balsáha ang mabdus sa lungsud,</i> Let the pregnant woman ride the sled to town. <i>Ibalsa (balsáha) ang lubi sa tabuk,</i> Send the coconuts across on a raft (or by tying them together into a raft). <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> do work with a sled or raft. <number>3</number> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> go s.w. on a sled, raft. <i>Mabalsa ba ang tabuk?</i> Can you reach the other side with a raft? <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> carry or lift a load. <i>Makabalsa giyug daghang makáun si Tátay basta makadaug sa búwang,</i> Father brings home a load of goodies when he wins at the cockfights. <i>Gibalsa sa bána ang asáwa ug gibundak sa katri,</i> The husband lifted his wife and threw her on the bed.

<p id=2012><form>balsamu</form> <pos>n</pos> ointment for the muscles of the type sold through SE Asia under the brand &lsquo;Tiger Balm&rsquo;.

<p id=2013><form>balsi</form> <pos>n</pos> waltz. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> waltz.

<p id=2014><form>balu</form> I don&apos;t know. <i>Balu lag háin siya,</i> I don&apos;t know where he is. <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>hi-</sc></xr>/<xr><sc>ha-</sc>.</xr> <form>hi-/ha-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1236; b]</itype> know s.t., how to do s.t. <i>Kahibalu ka bang mulanguy?</i> Do you know how to swim? <i>Nakahibáwu ku nga nagdaut ka,</i> I found out you were sick. <i>Dì ku gustung <pb n=100>hibaw-an (hibal-an) ang tinagúan,</i> I don&apos;t want the secret to be known. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1236]</itype> take care of a problem. <i>Akuy mahibalu sa tanan,</i> I&apos;ll take care of everything. <form>hibal-anay, hibaw-anay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c3]</itype> know s.t. about each other. <i>Naghibaw-anay kami sa ámung sikrítu,</i> We know each other&apos;s secrets. <form>pahi-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>inform</tr>, <tr>announce</tr>. <pos>n</pos> <tr>announcement</tr>. <i>May pahibalu nga walay klási,</i> There&apos;s an announcement that there&apos;ll be no classes. <form>kahi-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>knowledge</tr>. <i>May kahibalu aku sa makina,</i> I have knowledge about engines. <form>manggihibalúun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>learned</tr>.

<p id=2015><form>bálu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>widow</tr>, <tr>widower</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> lose one&apos;s spouse. <form>manggibalúhan</form> a widow or widower that tends to lose her or his spouse.

<p id=2016><form>bálu<sub>2</sub>, balù<sub>1</sub>, bálù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> feel shame and hurt from not being given s.t. <i>Nabálù ku kay aku ray wà tagái,</i> You hurt me because you gave some to everybody but me. <form>ka-</form> feeling of shame and hurt for not being given s.t.

<p id=2017><form>balù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> garfish with upper and lower beaks of approximately the same size: <bio>Ablennis hians, Tylosurus crocodilus</bio>.

<p id=2018><form>balù<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a knot that easily comes undone by pulling at one end of the string. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> tie into a slip knot. <i>Baluun kug higut ang listun,</i> I&apos;ll tie the lace in a slip knot.

<p id=2019><form>bálù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> for supernatural beings, or persons acting like such to appear suddenly to frighten people. <i>Baw-un nátù siya sa may dákit,</i> Let&apos;s scare him near the banyan tree.

<p id=2020><form>baluarti</form> <xr>= <sc>balwarti</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2021><form>balubálu</form> <number>1</number> [so-and-so] seemed unlikely, but that is what happened. <i>Maáyu nátung libak níya. Balubálu dinhà ra sa átung luyu,</i> We were talking about him. We didn&apos;t expect it, but there he was in back of us. <number>2</number> actually, when in fact, the truth is otherwise. <i>Pasukùsúkù kaáyu, balubálu nahigugma diay,</i> She pretends to be angry when in fact she&apos;s in love. <i>Kusug kaáyung manulti, balubálu talawan,</i> He talks big, but actually he is a coward. <number>3</number> despite the fact. <i>Balubálung dakug grádu way batásan,</i> You might be highly-educated, but you are ill-mannered.

<p id=2022><form>balùbalù, balùbálù</form> <xr>= <sc>balubálu</sc>, <ix>3.</ix></xr>

<p id=2023><form>balud</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>waves</tr>. <pos>a</pos> <tr>curved</tr>, <tr>curled</tr> in a single upward curve. <i>Balud siyag piluk,</i> She has curly eyelashes. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a]</itype> be struck by waves. <i>Malúnud nang sakayánag balurun ug kusug,</i> That boat will sink if it is struck by big waves. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> curl s.t. upwards. <i>Balura ang ímung kamut,</i> Make your fingers bend upwards. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> having high waves. <i>Bálud run kay dúnay bagyu,</i> There&apos;s a huge surf because there&apos;s a storm. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for there to be huge waves. <i>Magbálud kag maglínaw manágat giyud siya,</i> He goes to sea, whether there are huge waves or whether it is calm. <number>2</number> <itype>[a4]</itype> be caught in high seas. <i>Gibálud kami didtu sa kinalawran,</i> We were overtaken by high seas far out from shore.

<p id=2024><form>bálud</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. cream-colored wild pigeon: <bio>Ducula bicolor</bio>.

<p id=2025><form>balug</form> <pos>a</pos> s.t. elongated that is bent or curved. <i>Bawug kanang tubúha,</i> That water pipe is bent. <i>Ang balug mung piluk,</i> Your curly eyelashes. <pos>n</pos> s.t. that is characteristically bent: a bow, the crosspiece of a kite, spring for a trap. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB3(1); a]</itype> bend into a curve, be bent. <i>Magbáwug ku ug uway,</i> I&apos;ll bend some rattan. <i>Mubáwug (mabáwug) ang káhuy basta hibug-atan sa búnga,</i> The tree becomes bent if the fruits on it are too heavy. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, use a bow or crosspiece of a kite, spring for a trap.

<p id=2026><form>balugbug</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small tree bearing pods with three to six marble-sized and shaped seeds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN5]</itype> be like marbles in size. <i>Namawugbug ang íyang singut sa pagtinarbáhu,</i> He was sweating marbles from working so hard.

<p id=2027><form>báluk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> layer of fluffy fibrous material that sticks to the lower end of the palm frond, used as a compress for open wounds or tinder. <number>2</number> tinder consisting of this material and charred coconut husks. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> put <ix>báluk</ix> on s.t.

<p id=2028><form>balúkag</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bristle</tr> from plants or animals. <i>Balúkag sa bábuy,</i> Pig&apos;s bristle. <number>2</number> <tr>pubic hair</tr> (vulgar). <number>3</number> <tr>corncobs</tr>.

<p id=2029><form>balukanad</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. forest tree.

<p id=2030><form>balúkat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>lúkat</sc>, <ix>v</ix>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> dig into one&apos;s past. <i>Dílì ku gustung mubalúkat (mamalúkat) sa ímung mapait nga kagahápun,</i> I do not like to dig into your bitter past.

<p id=2031><form>balukbáluk</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. shade tree of the seashore.

<p id=2032><form>balukbuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> dig up the soil around the lower portions of a small plant. <i>Bukbúki ang rúsas,</i> Dig up the soil around the roses. <pos>n</pos> soil dug up around a plant.

<p id=2033><form>balukbuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> pound s.t. into <corr sic="a "></corr>very fine particles or powder. <i>Bukbúkun ku ning bugas nga iamirul,</i> I&apos;ll pound the rice for starch. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> maul, rain blows on s.o. <i>Hibukbukan siya sa mamarigla,</i> The hoodlums mauled him.

<p id=2034><form>balukbuk<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. weevil that bores in grains, like corn. <number>2</number> k.o. worm that bores into root crops. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a42]</itype> be infested with these insects. <form>-un</form> of a type infested with these insects. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become infested with <ix>balukbuk.</ix>

<p id=2035><form>balukbuk<sub>4</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> finishing touches. <i>Balukbuk <pb n=101>na lang ning átù kay human na ang trabáhu,</i> All we have to do is the finishing touches because the work is done. <number>2</number> <tr>seasoning</tr> for foods. <i>Mulamì ang sud-an bísan way balukbuk kun maáyu kang mulútù,</i> Food tastes good even without seasoning if you are a good cook. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; b(1)]</itype> do finishing touches. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; b(1)]</itype> add a little to s.t. to enrich it or season it. <i>Balukbúkan tag balas ang simintu kay húmuk da,</i> Let&apos;s add sand to the cement because it&apos;s too watery.

<p id=2036><form>baluktut</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>hunchbacked</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> make, become hunchbacked. <number>2</number> be overly <tr>burdened</tr>. <i>Nabuktut akug pinangítà ug inyu rang inúmun,</i> I have been staggering under the burden of earning money, and all you do is drink it up.

<p id=2037><form>balúkun</form> <xr>= <sc>bakúkun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2038><form>balúkut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>wrap</tr> up in a blanket, mat, or the like. <i>Nagbúkut kug hábul kay tugnaw,</i> I wrapped myself in a blanket because it was cold.<i> Balukúti ug bakbak ang bátà,</i> Wrap the child in a diaper. <number>2</number> for darkness, silence, and the like to <tr>surround</tr> or cover one entirely. <i>Gibukútan sa kahílum ang sam-ang,</i> The cemetery was enveloped in silence.

<p id=2039><form>balúlang</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> breed of fighting cock which runs away when wounded. <pos>a</pos> one who quits when hurt. <i>Balúlang nang baksidúra kay muundang ug masámad,</i> That boxer is chicken because he quits when he is hurt. <form>mistísu &mdash;</form> ugly person of mixed blood.

<p id=2040><form>balun<sub>1</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>balloon</tr>. <number>2</number> wide bicycle tire of American type bicycles. <form>&mdash; tayir</form> <xr>= <sc>balun</sc>, 2.</xr>

<p id=2041><form>balun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pad</tr> of paper.

<p id=2042><form>bálun</form> <pos>n</pos> food, money to take along on a trip. <i>Ma, ambi na ang bálun, bi,</i> Mom, can I have my spending money for school? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> take along food or money. <i>Mubálun ku sa trabáhu,</i> I bring my lunch to work. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> harbor emotions. <i>Balúnun ku sa lubngánan ang átung gugma,</i> I&apos;ll carry our love to the grave. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <number>1</number> give s.t. to s.o. to take along. <number>2</number> give s.t. in addition to s.t. else which was already sufficient. <i>Humag sagpà gipabalúnan pag kasábà,</i> Not only was he slapped, he was administered a sound scolding as well. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> thing given to s.o. who leaves, or to a retiring employee. <i>Ang pabálun sa tigúlang bayinti mil písus,</i> The old man was given twenty thousand pesos as retirement pay. <number>2</number> prayer said for the soul of the dead on the night of the day of burial. <number>3</number> food brought by the Chinese to the cemetery at funerals or on special days for the use of the departed soul. <form>balunbálun</form> <xr>= <sc>pa-an</sc>.</xr> <form>-anan(&rarr;), -anan</form> <pos>n</pos> lunch box, picnic basket. <form>r-an, pa-an, -anan(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sides of the monkey&apos;s mouth where food to be chewed later is stored, crop of fowls. <number>2</number> stomach (slang). <form>balunbalúnan</form> <pos>n</pos> Adam&apos;s apple.&dagger;

<p id=2043><form>balunábid</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. dwarf herring: <bio>Dussumieri sp</bio>.

<p id=2044><form>balúnas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>clean</tr> s.t. by flushing water on it and scrubbing it. <i>Ákung gibalunásan ang banig nga giihían,</i> I washed the mat that the child wet.

<p id=2045><form>balunbalúnan</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>bálun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2046><form>balungag</form> <pos>n</pos> hunk of s.t. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> mouth a large hunk of food. <i>À! Ipamungag man lang nímu ang karni!</i> My! You sure eat your meat in large hunks.

<p id=2047><form>balúngan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>banana</tr> similar in flavor to the <ix>bángan</ix> but longer and green when ripe: <bio>Musa sapientum var. suaveolens</bio>.

<p id=2048><form>balungbálung</form> <pos>n</pos> shanty, roughly built wooden house. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> build a shanty. <i>Nagbalungbálung sila daplin sa dálan,</i> They built a shanty at the edge of the street.

<p id=2049><form>balúngus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pubic hairs</tr>. <form>kuskus &mdash;</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>kuskus<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr> <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>adult</tr>, big enough to have pubic hair.

<p id=2050><form>balúnus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. forest liana, the bark of which is used as shampoo: <bio>Entada phaseolides</bio>. <number>2</number> name also given to other vines which have bark containing saponin.

<p id=2051><form>balur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>value</tr>. <i>Pilay balur ning singsínga?</i> How much is this ring worth? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> be worth [so-and-so] much. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> show off. <i>Ipabalur dáyun nang íyang pagkaabyadur,</i> He boasts about his ability as an aviator.&dagger;

<p id=2052><form>bálus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3S; b1c]</itype> do back to s.o. what he did to the agent. <i>Mibálus akug pahiyum,</i> I smiled back at her. <i>Wà pa ku makabálus (makabalus) sa ímung suwat,</i> I haven&apos;t had the chance to answer your letter. <i>Balúsan (baslan) ku ang ímung kaáyu,</i> I will repay your goodness. <i>Balúsan (baslan) ku ikaw,</i> I will repay you. <i>Pagka walay igabálus mu,</i> How ungrateful (repaying nothing) you are! <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> for s.t. to happen one way and then the opposite way. <i>Balúsa pagtahì ang kílid,</i> Sew the seams twice: once inverted and then the right way around. <i>Ang kalípay balúsan (baslan) ug kasákit,</i> Happiness is followed by sorrow in turn. <number>3</number> <itype>[C3]</itype> for a brother and sister to marry people that are also brothers and sisters. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> thing done in return or response to s.t. <number>2</number> person whose sibling of the opposite sex is married to a sibling of the spouse. <form>pani&N;-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> take vengeance on, <tr>avenge</tr>. <i>Panimaslan ku <pb n=102>ang kamatáyun sa ákung igsúun,</i> I&apos;ll avenge my brother&apos;s death. <pos>n</pos> revenge. <form>pamalusbálus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23S; c]</itype> return a favor, repay a moral obligation. <form>balaslan, baslanan, pamaslan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> things to be done to repay a debt. <number>2</number> days owing in the <ix>aláyun.</ix> <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> plaid in design. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> hind toe of a fowl which is bent backwards. <i>Ang langgam nga way pamálus dì makabátug,</i> A bird that has no hind toe cannot perch.

<p id=2053><form>balusbus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> rip, slit s.t. open. <i>Nabusbus ang sáku kay gidasuk ang sulud,</i> The sack burst open because it had been stuffed too full. <i>Busbúsi ang sáku, gilit ang ibusbus,</i> Slit the sack with a blade. <pos>n</pos> place s.t. has been ripped open.

<p id=2054><form>baluskag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> unravel, loosen s.t. <i>Kinsa ang mibaluskag niíning putus?</i> Who untied this bundle? <i>Nagbaluskag mi ug midiyas arun gamítun ug usab ang hílu,</i> We unraveled socks to use the thread again. <i>Baluskagun nátù ang íyang bakus,</i> Let&apos;s loosen her girdle. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> for flowers to blossom forth.

<p id=2055><form>balut</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> duck eggs that have been allowed to develop, but not hatch, and then cooked. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> cook, make into <ix>balut.</ix>

<p id=2056><form>balúta</form> <pos>n</pos> ballot for election, contest.

<p id=2057><form>balútu</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <xr>= <sc>barútu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2058><form>baluybuy</form> <pos>n</pos> general name for olive shells.

<p id=2059><form>balúyut</form> <pos>n</pos> bag made of straw (<ix>buli</ix> or <ix>tíkug</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a]</itype> make into a straw bag.

<p id=2060><form>balwarti</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> political stronghold, place where a politician gets most of the votes. <number>2</number> territory of a gang, turf. <i>Balwarti sa mga buguy,</i> Territory belonging to the ruffians.

<p id=2061><form>balyákag</form> <pos>n</pos> wild vine with a tuberous, edible root, in the same genus as <ix>apáli,</ix> said to be the food of supernatural people that inhabit the forest: <bio>Dioscorea esculenta</bio>. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> gather <ix>balyákag.</ix> <i>Ang mamalyákag maghílum,</i> When you gather <ix>balyákag</ix> keep silent.

<p id=2062><form>balyína</form> <pos>n</pos> whale.

<p id=2063><form>balyu</form> <xr>= <sc>baylu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2064><form>bám</form> <pos>n</pos> bomb. <form>atúmik, haydrudyin, kúbalt &mdash;</form> atomic, hydrogen, cobalt bomb.

<p id=2065><form>bamba</form> <pos>a</pos> for women to be fat. <i>Bamba kaáyu nà siya kay way tihiktíhik nga mukáun,</i> She is very stout because she eats without restraint. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> for a woman to become very stout.

<p id=2066><form>bamban</form> <xr>= <sc>banban<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=2067><form>bambu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> bamboo, one of the suits in mahjong that has a design consisting of two bamboo nodes, colored green.

<p id=2068><form>bam-i</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. dish made of fine noodles, chicken, shrimps, and spices. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make <ix>bam-i.</ix>

<p id=2069><form>báming</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> rain blows on s.o. <i>Bamíngun nátù ang kawatan,</i> Let&apos;s rain blows on the thief.

<p id=2070><form>bámir<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> one whose position in a volleyball game is to spike the ball. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; c6]</itype> be the spiker.

<p id=2071><form>bámir<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bomber</tr>. <pos>a</pos> for a woman to be extremely obese like a bomber (humorous). <i>Bámir kaáyu ang íyang trátu,</i> His sweetheart is extremely obese. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> be, become extremely obese.

<p id=2072><form>bampir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bumper</tr> of a motor vehicle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make into, put a bumper.

<p id=2073><form>bampíra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vampire</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> become a vampire.

<p id=2074><form>bámus</form> come on, let&apos;s go. <i>Bámus mga bátà, adtu ta sa simbahan,</i> Come on, children. Let us go to church.

<p id=2075><form>bána</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>husband</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123S; a12]</itype> get, take for a husband. <i>Si Dína nakabana ug Nigru,</i> Dina was married to a Negro. <i>Usa ka hingpit nga laláki ang ákung banáhun,</i> If I get married, it will have to be a complete gentleman. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23S; a]</itype> for women to get married. <i>Uy Pilar, mamána ka na,</i> Pilar, you should get married now! <form>pamanhunun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>husband-to-be</tr>. <form>banabána</form> <pos>n</pos> common-law husband. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; c1]</itype> have, take a common-law husband.

<p id=2076><form>*banà<sub>1</sub></form> <form>ka-, paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> <formx>dílì, walà &mdash;</formx> fail to pay attention, remain unconcerned. <i>Walà siya magkabanà (magpakabanà) sa ákung mga prublíma,</i> He did not pay any attention to my problems. <i>Walà giyud níya ikabanà (ipakabanà) ang nahitabù nákù,</i> He remained unconcerned about what happened to me. <form>banàbánà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>estimation</tr>. <i>Sa ímung banàbánà, maáyu ba siyang táwu?</i> Do you size him up as a good man? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make an estimate. <i>Banàbanáa kun pila,</i> Estimate how much it will cost.&dagger;

<p id=2077><form>banà<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>balanà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2078><form>banáag</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ray of light</tr>. <i>Ang banáag sa adlaw,</i> The sun&apos;s rays. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; c]</itype> give a bright light. <i>Sulù ang gibanáag níya sa dálan,</i> He lighted the way with a torch. <pos>a</pos> <tr>bright</tr>. <i>Banáag kaáyu ang síga sa pitrumaks,</i> The petromax gave off a bright light.

<p id=2079><form>banaba</form> <pos>n</pos> medium-sized tree of the secondary forest, also planted for its lilac or pink flowers. The leaves are commonly used as a tea for kidney and stomach disorders: <bio>Lagerstroemia speciosa</bio>.

<p id=2080><form>banag</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. woody, spiked vine found in thickets, the tips and fruit of which are used medicinally: <bio>Smilax bracteata</bio>.

<pb n=103>

<p id=2081><form>banagan</form> <pos>n</pos> lobster. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> catch lobsters.

<p id=2082><form>banagbánag</form> <pos>n</pos> daybreak. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN]</itype> <number>1</number> daybreak. <i>Mibanagbánag (namanagbánag) nang kabuntágun,</i> The day broke. <number>2</number> for a solution to dawn upon one. <i>Mibanagbánag (namanagbánag) nang kasulbáran sa ákung suliran,</i> The solution of the problem dawned on me.

<p id=2083><form>banáhaw</form> <xr>= <sc>anáhaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2084><form>banahían</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> entrails of a human. <number>2</number> human genitalia (coarse term).

<p id=2085><form>bának</form> <xr>= <sc>balának</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2086><form>banal</form> <pos>a</pos> hardened, pressed solid. <i>Banal na ang dálan nga kanúnayng agiagíag sakyanan,</i> The road that the vehicles keep passing over has been pressed down hard. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> be hardened, pressed solid and firm. <i>Banala ang ímung láwas sa bug-at nga trabáhu,</i> Harden your body by heavy work.

<p id=2087><form>banásay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small, brightly-colored fish.

<p id=2088><form>banáta</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> section, flat piece cut from a whole. <i>Nanglatas kami sa lagpad nga banáta sa pilapilan,</i> We traversed the wide sections of the rice field. <number>2</number> division in a cabinet or room. <i>Sa kinaubsang banáta sa aparadur,</i> On the lowest shelf of the cabinet. <i>Ang banáta nakapangitngit sa kwartu,</i> The partition made the room dark. <number>3</number> sheet of woven cloth, a fathom wide. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> divide into sections, partition. <i>Arun way sámuk ibanáta (banatáha) ang yútà,</i> So there will be no disagreement, divide the land. <number>2</number> do s.t. by pieces. <i>Banatáhun (ibanáta) ku pagpalit ang panaptun,</i> I will buy the cloth cut into pieces. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put a shelf, section.

<p id=2089><form>bánaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB; c]</itype> for liquids to be spread over an area, spread liquids. <i>Daghang dugù ang mibánaw sa kalsáda,</i> The road was streaming with blood. <i>Kinsay nagbánaw (nagpabánaw) sa túbig sa salug?</i> Who poured the water over the floor? <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> container of water for fowl to drink or bathe in.

<p id=2090><form>banawug, banáwug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. coral that looks like a leafless shrub. The body is sponge-like in consistency and tough. The color varies: black, red, orange, dark brown.

<p id=2091><form>banáwug<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> strand of hair that grows by itself in a place where there is no other hair. <number>2</number> a similar characteristic of chickens, a wire-like feather that is said to give a cock special fighting abilities. <number>3</number> the vine of the <ix>balyákag</ix> which climbs up bamboos and other tall plants. <form>banawgan</form> <pos>a</pos> possessing a <ix>banáwug.</ix>

<p id=2092><form>bánay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> tassel of plants. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> growing tassels. <i>Namánay na ang mais,</i> The corn is growing tassels now.

<p id=2093><form>bánay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> immediate <tr>family</tr> consisting of parents and their children. <number>2</number> family consisting of ascendants, descendants, and lateral relations as well. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> one who is related by blood. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> group of people related by blood.

<p id=2094><form>bánay<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>ubánay</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>uban</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2095><form>banban<sub>1, 2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>balanban<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=2096><form>banbánun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> a white and brown striped color of cats. <number>2</number> <tr>cats</tr> tending to steal food. <number>3</number> persons going to parties and taking as much food as they can get at. <i>Banbánun sad nímug simud! Wà may pistang palabyun,</i> You sure are greedy! You don&apos;t miss a fiesta. <number>4</number> be greedy for women. <i>Banbánun sad nang lakíha. Bísan kinsa man lang,</i> What a sex maniac he is. Anyone will do.

<p id=2097><form>banbánun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>centipede</tr> with a light green body.

<p id=2098><form>banda<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); c1]</itype> for s.t. heavy to strike and <tr>bounce</tr> off s.t. <i>Nabanda (mibanda) ang batu sa bungbung,</i> The stone bounced off the wall. <form>tris bandas</form> <pos>n</pos> shot in billiards in which the ball bounces three times against the edges of the table before hitting the ball aimed at. <form>bandabanda</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> bounce back and forth, reverberate. <i>Nagbandabanda ang íyang tíngug sa dapit nga mamíngaw,</i> His voice reverberated in the lonely place.

<p id=2099><form>banda<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> band of <tr>musicians</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a2]</itype> make a band.

<p id=2100><form>banda<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>band</tr>, strip of <tr>cloth</tr>. <number>1</number> cloth worn diagonally in front of one as a mark of having obtained a certain honor or rank. <number>2</number> band wound around a sack filled with s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put a band on s.t. <form>binandáhan</form> <pos>n</pos> banded sack full of copra.

<p id=2101><form>bandála</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> similar items <tr>stacked</tr> neatly, usually in staggered fashion. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12c]</itype> <tr>stack</tr> into neat piles. <i>Ibandála ning tabakúa didtu sa iskína,</i> Stack this tobacco up at the corner.

<p id=2102><form>bandána</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bandana</tr> or <tr>scarf</tr> worn over the head as a protection. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, make into a bandana.

<p id=2103><form>banday</form> <xr>= <sc>bangday</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2104><form>bandì</form> <pos>n</pos> large, closely woven bamboo <tr>hamper</tr> with or without a cover for clothes or farm produce. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a hamper.

<p id=2105><form>bandída</form> <xr>= <sc>bandídu</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=2106><form>bandídu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bandit</tr>, <tr>highwayman</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> be, become a bandit.

<p id=2107><form>bandíha</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> food or drinks brought to a party. <i>Magdala giyud kag bandíha sa pagpangunggu,</i> <pb n=104>You must bring food when you go to ask for a woman&apos;s hand. <number>2</number> food given to the leader of prayers by the family sponsoring the prayers. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>bandihádu</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> contribute food to a feast, give food to a prayer leader. <i>Píkas sa bábuy ang ílang gibandíha sa katapúsan,</i> They brought half of a pig to the feast concluding the novena. <form>-du</form> large platter, large shallow serving dish. <form>-wu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> precious stone, oval in shape (like a platter). <i>Bandiháwu ang íyang singsing brilyanti,</i><i></i> The diamond in her ring is shaped like a platter. <number>2</number> one who receives the food offering after leading prayers for a family. <i>Bandiháwu giyud ang mananabtan,</i> The person who leads a novena receives some gifts.

<p id=2108><form>bandi klak</form> <pos>n</pos> time <tr>clock</tr>.

<p id=2109><form>bandílà</form> <xr>= <sc>bandíra</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2110><form>bandilyu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> cry out an announcement. <i>Nagbandilyu ang písi nga kurpyu alas nuybi,</i> The P.C. announced that the curfew was at nine. <pos>n</pos> public announcement.

<p id=2111><form>bandíra</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>flag</tr>, <tr>banner</tr>. <number>2</number> s.t. flapping like a flag, <tr>visible</tr> for all to see. <i>Bitára ang ímung kamisun kay nagdayag ang ímung bandíra,</i> You pull your slip up because it (lit. flag) shows. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a]</itype> make into a flag, put a flag on. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB6; c]</itype> put s.t. in view; <tr>brandish</tr> a weapon, be in full view. <i>Bandiráhan ku bítaw sa pinútì, dágan lagi,</i> He ran away when I brandished my sword at him. <i>Ímu mang gibandíra ang ímung kadautan,</i> You are brandishing your wickedness for all to see. <number>2a</number> <itype>[B6]</itype> be very much above, <tr>ahead</tr> of everyone else. <i>Labihan siyang namandíra (mibandíra) sa indigay,</i> She was very much in the lead in the contest.

<p id=2112><form>bandíra ispanyúla</form> <pos>n</pos> ornamental tuberous plant, name given to species of <ix>sagingsaging</ix> (<bio>Canna spp</bio>.) which have large orange, red, or white flowers.

<p id=2113><form>bandíyu</form> <xr>= <sc>bandyu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2114><form>bandmidyurit</form> <pos>n</pos> band <tr>majorette</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> become a band majorette.

<p id=2115><form>bandu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> spin a top, throw a spinning top. <i>Ayaw bandúha ang ákung kumagkù,</i> Don&apos;t throw the top on my toe.

<p id=2116><form>bandu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> group of people united for a common purpose.&dagger;

<p id=2117><form>bandul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bundle</tr> of things tied together. <i>Tagpíla ang bandul sa rilip?</i> How much does a bundle of second-hand clothing cost? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> tie in a bundle. <i>Bandúlun tang sugnud,</i> Let&apos;s bundle the firewood. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> bank roll.

<p id=2118><form>bandung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> large <tr>boat</tr> to bring the net and fishermen out to the fishing grounds, consisting of a pair of smaller boats or a wide boat so made that a platform can be placed across it.

<p id=2119><form>bandung<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. spotted sea <tr>eel</tr>.

<p id=2120><form>bandurin</form> <xr>= <sc>banduríya</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2121><form>banduríya, bandurya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> stringed instrument with 4 to 8 pairs of strings, played with a plectrum, with a long neck, a round steel-rimmed sound box covered with skin, and with a wooden resonator. <number>2</number> k.o. fish. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> play a <ix>banduríya.</ix> <form>banduryáhun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. shark that resembles a <ix>bandurya</ix> when viewed from above.

<p id=2122><form>banduy</form> <xr>= <sc>bagduy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2123><form>bandyu</form> <pos>n</pos> musical instrument similar to the <tr>banjo</tr>, but with 6 double strings and a shorter neck, about 10&Prime; long. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> play this instrument. <form>bandyubandyu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish with long spines and a roundish body that resembles a banjo: <bio>Argyrops spinifer</bio>.

<p id=2124><form>bang</form> <pos>n</pos> word used in writing to indicate the sound of an explosion.

<p id=2125><form>banga</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>boring</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1246; a4b4]</itype> become bored, be fed up. <i>Makabanga ning búhat nga mau ra gihápun adlaw-adlaw,</i> Doing the same thing day after day makes one bored. <i>Gibanga (gibanghan) na kaáyu kug kináun niíning isdà sa tibuuk simána,</i> I am fed up eating this same fish the whole week long. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> boredom, weariness.

<p id=2126><form>bangà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> slow in comprehension, <tr>incompetent</tr>. <number>2</number> poor in quality. <i>Bangà ning awtúha,</i> This car is no good. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be of poor quality. <i>Ngánung mibangà (nabangà) man ang íyang inawayan karun?</i> Why is his style of fighting lousy today?

<p id=2127><form>bangà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. water <tr>jar</tr> with an obovate body and a narrow neck.

<p id=2128><form>bangáag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S]</itype> <tr>cry</tr> loudly with the mouth wide open. <i>Mibangáag ang bátà nga giindiksyunan,</i> The child howled when he was given a shot.

<!-- Sub entry or example confused -->

<p id=2129><form>bángag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2; a]</itype> make a hole, have a hole in it. <i>Nabángag (mibángag) ang íyang ngípun kay sígig káug karmilítus,</i> He got lots of holes in his teeth because he keeps eating hard candies. <i>Mibángag ang ilagà sa bungbung,</i> The rat made a hole in the wall. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> hole into s.t. or through s.t. <number>2</number> woman&apos;s genitalia (coarse). <formx>&mdash; sa ímung ina, ubù</formx>, Damn you! (Lit. You are your mother&apos;s cunt.) <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having holes.

<p id=2130><form>bángal<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> come across s.t. in the sea. <i>Hibangalan ang mga pasahíru sa barkung nalúnud,</i> They came across the survivors of the ship that sunk. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> go to the sea to look for s.t. <i>Namángal silag lubi human sa bahà,</i> They went to the sea to look for coconuts after the flood. <i>Mamángal tag sud-anun,</i> Let&apos;s meet the fishermen <pb n=105>to buy s.t. for dinner (lit. look for s.t. on the sea for dinner).

<p id=2131><form>bángal<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>shove</tr> s.t. big into the mouth. <i>Ibángal lang níya ang usa ka buuk kamúti,</i> He will just shove a whole sweet potato into his mouth.

<p id=2132><form>bangalga</form> <xr>= <sc>bagalnga</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2133><form>bángan<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>tie</tr> a bunch of long things together. <i>Bangánun nátù ang lipak arun sayun pas-ánun,</i> Let&apos;s tie a string around the bamboo slats to make them easy to carry. <i>Bangáni ang ímung buhuk kay hángin,</i> Tie s.t. around your hair because it&apos;s windy. <number>2</number> tie s.t. around s.t. long. <pos>n</pos> long things tied together. <i>Tagpíla ang bángan sa káhuy?</i> How much does a bundle of wood cost? <form>(&rarr;)</form> <tr>string</tr> used to tie around s.t. <i>Ang bangan nga ímung gibugkus nabugtù,</i> The string you tied it with snapped. <form>bangnanan</form> <pos>n</pos> makeshift roofed shed into which small boats are placed.

<p id=2134><form>bángan<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. sweet yellow <tr>banana</tr>, longer than <ix>alitundan,</ix> very much like those sold in the States. It is eaten raw and more difficult to digest than the <ix>alitundan:</ix> <bio>Musa sapientum var. lacatan</bio>.

<p id=2135><form>bangánga</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> <tr>open</tr> one&apos;s mouth wide. <pos>n</pos> distance the mouth opens. <i>Dakù siyag bangánga kun manghuy-ab,</i> He opens his mouth wide when he yawns.

<p id=2136><form>bángas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hair</tr> on the chest, arms, and cheeks. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> get hair on these parts. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> hairy.

<p id=2137><form>bángas<sub>2</sub></form> <number>1</number> interjection directed at s.o. who does s.t. disgusting or annoying, said good-naturedly. <i>Bángas ka! Nasakpan na hinúun ta niíni dà!</i> Darn! Now we&apos;re caught. <number>2</number> good-natured expression of disbelief. <i>Bángas ka! Ikaw na lay mupasar sa bár?</i> What! The likes of you pass the bar exam?

<p id=2138><form>bangáti</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. wild tree.

<p id=2139><form>bángaw<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>balángaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2140><form>bángaw<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>party</tr> with lots of food. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2N; a2]</itype> attend a <tr>feast</tr>. <i>Ása man ka mamángaw (mubángaw) inigpista?</i> What parties are you going to during the fiesta? <number>2</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> hold a feast. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> place or house where a feast is held.

<p id=2141><form>bangawug</form> <pos>n</pos> a small <tr>valley</tr> with an easy slope, a low, flat area between hills. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be at a valley.

<p id=2142><form>bangaybángay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> <tr>dilly-dally</tr>, work slowly and lazily. <i>Daghan ang mga buluhatun unyà bangaybangáyun pa,</i> There is so much work to do, but you are only dilly-dallying. <form>-an(&rarr;), -un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> slow and lazy.

<p id=2143><form>bangbang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>control</tr> s.t. <i>Dílì na mabangbang ang íyang kahimabayi,</i> His fondness for women cannot be controlled. <number>2</number> come face to face with s.t. in hopes of overcoming it. <i>Mubangbang giyud siya sa kasukù sa íyang amahan,</i> He&apos;ll stand up to his father&apos;s anger. <i>Bangbángun ba ninyu ang bagyu?</i> Will you go out in the storm?

<p id=2144><form>bangday</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB]</itype> be placed, <tr>place</tr> s.t. transversely across s.t. or <tr>pile up</tr> in criss-crossing fashion. <i>Inig-abut níya mubanday dáyun siya sa kátri,</i> As soon as she arrives she throws herself across the bed. <i>Nagbanday siya sa íyang tiil sa silya,</i> He is putting his foot across the chair. <form>bangdaybangday</form> <pos>n</pos> snack consisting of fried sliced bananas (<ix>kardába</ix> or <ix>sab-a</ix>) laid one over the other with a thick dough. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make <ix>bangdaybangday.</ix> <number>2</number> be criss-crossing.&dagger;

<p id=2145><form>banggà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>contest</tr> of any sort for a winner. <i>Akuy midaug sa banggà sa áwit,</i> I won the singing contest. <number>2</number> <tr>crash</tr> of vehicles bumping into each other. <i>Duhay patay sa banggà dihà sa iskína,</i> Two people died in the crash on the corner. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C; a]</itype> hold a contest. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC; ab2]</itype> <tr>bump</tr> into s.t. with force. <i>Mibanggà ang bátà níya,</i> The child bumped into her. <i>Ang barku nakabanggà ug búya,</i> The ship crashed into a buoy. <number>3</number> <itype>[AN2; a2]</itype> meet goods before they reach the market to get them cheaper. <i>Adtu ta sa paradahan kay mamanggà ta ug utanun,</i> Let&apos;s go to the bus stop and get vegetables. <form>ma&N;-r-, ma&N;-ay</form> <pos>n</pos> buyers who meet and buy from a source before the goods reach the market.

<p id=2146><form>banggì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; a]</itype> <tr>break</tr> s.t. off with a snap. <i>Mibanggì siyag sanga,</i> He broke a branch. <i>Nabanggì ang íyang lápis,</i> His pencil broke in two.

<p id=2147><form>banggiítan</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>notorious</tr>. <i>Banggiítang magdadaut sa mga panágat,</i> A notorious destroyer of fishing traps. <number>2</number> <tr>well-known</tr> for some skill. <i>Banggiítang abugádu,</i> Well-known lawyer. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become notorious, well-known for a skill.

<p id=2148><form>banggíra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>projection</tr> in the window which holds the eating utensils in daily use. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> make, provide with a <ix>banggíra.</ix> <form>banggirahan</form> <xr>= <sc>banggíra</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2149><form>banggis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>scrape</tr>, <tr>scrub</tr> s.t. off a surface. <i>Kutsilyu ang íyang ibanggis sa húgaw sa lamísa,</i> She&apos;ll use a table knife to scrape the dirt off the table.

<p id=2150><form>banggud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>rub</tr> s.t. with pressure against s.t. else causing it to get <tr>chafed</tr>, <tr>shredded</tr>, <tr>grated</tr>. <i>Akuy mubanggud sa mais,</i> I will shred the corn. <i>Nabanggud ang ákung abága pagkasalibay nákù sa mutur,</i> My shoulder got chafed when I was thrown off my motorcycle. <form>banggúran, bangguran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shredder</tr>.

<pb n=106>

<p id=2151><form>banggun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. blight that infests banana and cacao fruits. The fruit gets hardened with brown spots all over, rendering it unfit for consumption. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infested with this blight. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <ix>banggun</ix>-infested.

<p id=2152><form>banggun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>idiotic</tr>.

<p id=2153><form>banggus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> rub s.t. against a rough surface, but not with great pressure. <i>Magbanggus ku sa kapáyas nga salárun,</i> I&apos;ll shred the papayas to make into a salad. <i>Nabanggus ang ákung túhud sa ákung pagkadagmà,</i> My knee got chafed when I stumbled. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> scrub to clean. <i>Ákung gibanggúsan ug lugud ang buling sa íyang likud,</i> I scrubbed the dirt off his back with a stone.

<p id=2154><form>banghag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> snap at s.o. <i>Mamanghag nang irúa ug duúlun,</i> That dog will snap if you approach it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>snap</tr>, speak sharply and curtly. <i>Ayaw siyag duúlag may trabáhu kay banghágun (banghágan) ka,</i> Don&apos;t go near him when he&apos;s doing s.t. because he&apos;ll snap at you.&dagger;

<p id=2155><form>banghat</form> <xr>= <sc>hangbat</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2156><form>banghaw</form> <pos>a</pos> having the sour smell which develops in cooking starches which are waterlogged, e.g., corn which has been ground without being fully dried, yams which got waterlogged in rain-soaked ground, etc. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> have this sour smell. <i>Mibanghaw (nabanghaw) ang kamúti kay nahúmul ug tulu ka adlaw,</i> The sweet potatoes developed a rotten smell because they soaked for three days.

<p id=2157><form>banghilig, banghílig</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sloping</tr> (sharply or not sharply). <i>Lugsánay makasáka ang trák kung banghilig,</i> The truck hardly can make it up a slope. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be sloping. <i>Nagkabanghilig ang ámung gibaktásan,</i> The place where we hiked slopes gradually.

<p id=2158><form>banghitaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>balanghitaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2159><form>banghutin, banghuting</form> <xr>= <sc>balanghutan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2160><form>bángì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; abc3]</itype> be on bad terms with each other. <i>Nagbángì mi mahitungud sa kwarta,</i> We had a misunderstanding about money. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> reason for bad feelings.

<p id=2161><form>bángig</form> <xr>= <sc>bángì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2162><form>bángil</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5c]</itype> put s.t. beneath or next to s.t. to keep it from jiggling, rolling, sliding, etc. <i>Bangíli (bangíla) ang ligid sa trák,</i> Put a block against the wheels of the truck. <number>2</number> <itype>[a]</itype> eat s.t. before a drinking bout (prop up one&apos;s stomach). <i>Unsay ímung gibángil únà muinum?</i> What did you eat before you drank? <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> use a charm to insure success in business or gambling. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> induce s.o. with a bribe. <i>Bangílun (bangílan) ta siyag tubà arun maabtik sugúun,</i> Give him some toddy to get him to work a bit faster. <number>5</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>trip</tr> a player while running or jumping. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. placed beneath to keep a thing steady or in position. <i>Butangig bangil ang silya arun mupundu,</i> Put a prop beneath the chair so it will be steady. <number>2</number> food to stave off hunger. <number>2a</number> food taken before drinks (slang). <number>2b</number> <formx>&mdash; sa tinggutum</formx> food eaten in place of rice or corn in famine times. <number>3</number> <tr>charm</tr> for gambling or business. <number>4</number> s.t. given as an inducement to goad s.o. into action. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> use a charm in gambling or in business. <form>bangilbángil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>support</tr>, <tr>fill in</tr> the gaps. <i>Ang kamúti ibangilbángil sa pagkáun,</i> Sweet potatoes aren&apos;t the principal food. They are s.t. extra to fill in when there isn&apos;t enough other food. <pos>n</pos> s.t. that supports. <i>Bangilbángil nà siya nákù sa trabáhu,</i> He is my helper in my job.

<p id=2163><form>bangilid</form> <xr>= <sc>bakilid</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2164><form>bángin</form> [so-and-so] might just happen. <i>Ayaw paglihuk bángin mabughat ka,</i> Don&apos;t move. You might have a relapse.

<p id=2165><form>bangingi</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>nagging</tr>, <tr>scolding</tr> repeatedly. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> <tr>nag</tr>, keep making the same complaints. <i>Mubangingi dáyun siyag higabhian kug paúlì,</i> She starts nagging the moment I arrive home late.

<p id=2166><form>bangíngi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> turn back to bite or fight with s.o. <i>Mubangíngig páak ang iring ug gunítan sa íkug,</i> The cat will turn its head to fight if you hold it by the tail. <i>Ayaw lang nà siya pahunúnga arun dì ka bangingíhun ug áway,</i> Don&apos;t try to stop her or she&apos;ll turn on you, too.

<p id=2167><form>bangis</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>fierce</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b4]</itype> become fierce. <i>Mubangis (mabangis) ang irù ug higtan,</i> A dog becomes fierce if it is kept tied. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> of a fierce sort. <form>ma-</form> <pos>a</pos> very fierce. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> be fierce. <i>Nagmabangis ang kapaláran kaníya,</i> Fate was very cruel to him.

<p id=2168><form>bangitaw</form> <xr>= <sc>balanghitaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2169><form>bangka</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>treat</tr>, pay the bill for entertainment or food consumed in entertainment. <i>Bangkáhan ta mu ug panihápun,</i> I&apos;ll treat you to dinner. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>deal</tr> cards, throw dice, or act as a banker in a gambling game. <i>Bangkáha ang baráha,</i> Deal the cards. <pos>n</pos> banker or dealer in a gambling game. <form>-dur(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>bangka</sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr>

<p id=2170><form>bangkà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>banca</tr>, a one-piece dug-out between 5 to 15 meters optionally with one or two masts and/or a motor, and/or outriggers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; ac1]</itype> <number>1</number> ride a banca. <i>Bangkáa lang ang Líti,</i> Just take a banca to Leyte. <i>Bangkáa (ibangkà) ang karga,</i> Take the cargo in the banca.

<p id=2171><form>*bangkáag</form> <form>hi-an/ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>knowledge</tr> about <pb n=107>a certain field or skill. <i>Wà kuy hibangkaágan (kabangkaágan) sa radiyu,</i> I have no understanding of radios. <number>2</number> <tr>awareness</tr>. <i>Wà kuy hibangkaágan sa súnug gabíi,</i> I have no knowledge about the fire last night. <form>hi-an</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be learned, found out about. <i>Wà siyay nahibangkaágan sa íyang tulu ka túig nga paglangyaw,</i> He didn&apos;t learn a thing from his three years abroad.

<p id=2172><form>bangkal</form> <pos>n</pos> large tree of the secondary forest, hollow in the lower portion of the trunk: <bio>Nauclea orientalis</bio>.

<p id=2173><form>bangkarúta</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bankrupt</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a2]</itype> be bankrupt. <i>Nabangkarúta siya pag-intra sa pulitika,</i> He became bankrupt when he entered politics.

<p id=2174><form>bangkarúti</form> <xr>= <sc>bangkarúta</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2175><form>bangkat</form> <xr>= <sc>bakat</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2176><form>bangkaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> spear which is thrown. <number>2</number> piece in mahjong with the image of a dagger. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> throw, thrust a spear at. <i>Bangkáwun ta ang usa,</i> I&apos;ll throw a spear at the deer. <i>Hibangkawan ang kawatan,</i> The thief was hit with a spear. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> hunt with a spear.

<p id=2177><form>bangkaw<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>bangkal</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2178><form>bangkawbangkaw</form> <pos>n</pos> end of the spinal column. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> hit s.o. at the end of the spinal column.

<p id=2179><form>bangkay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>corpse</tr> (slang). <i>Bangkay na dihang nakit-an si Pidru,</i> Pedro was a corpse by the time they found him.

<p id=2180><form>bangkbuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bankbook</tr>.

<p id=2181><form>bangkil</form> <pos>n</pos> canine tooth, fangs. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> with prominent fangs. <i>Bangkilan na ang bábuy nga ámung giíhaw,</i> The pig that we slaughtered had long fangs.

<p id=2182><form>bangkiling</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small, deciduous, cultivated tree which has a rounded, light green fruit, fleshy and sour, used as a flavoring for vinegarized dishes or eaten pickled: <bio>Cicca acida</bio>.

<p id=2183><form>bangkilya<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> percentage of the amount won, given to the owner of a gambling place or equipment after each game. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> give the owner of a gambling equipment a percentage of the winnings for each game.

<p id=2184><form>bangkilya<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>helper</tr>, <tr>assistant</tr> in doing s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> serve as helper, assistant in s.o.&apos;s work. <i>Bangkilyáhun (ibangkilya) tikaw sa pag-asal ug bábuy,</i> You will be my assistant in roasting the pig.

<p id=2185><form>bangkíru<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>bangka</sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr> <number>2</number> <tr>banker</tr>. <i>Mga bangkíru ang naghuput sa puhúnan sa nigusyu,</i> The bankers hold the capital in business. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> be a banker.

<p id=2186><form>bangkíru<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> one who operates a banca. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> be a banca operator.

<p id=2187><form>bangkíti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>banquet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC12; b6(1)]</itype> hold a banquet. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> go to a banquet.

<p id=2188><form>bangkítu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stool</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a stool.

<p id=2189><form>bangkíwà</form> <pos>n</pos> stem of a boat.

<p id=2190><form>bangkiwag</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>awkward</tr>. <i>Bangkiwag nga linihukan,</i> Awkward movement. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be awkward. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN3PB; a]</itype> put things s.w. awkwardly such that they stick out or are in s.o.&apos;s way; be awkwardly put s.w. <i>Nagbangkiwag ang mga palítu pagkahúlug,</i> The toothpicks fell so that they were sticking out every which way.

<p id=2191><form>bangkíyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>toilet seat</tr>. <number>2</number> toilet seat for children to sit on or to put on a toilet. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a toilet seat.

<p id=2192><form>bangkiyud</form> (from <ix>kíyud</ix>) <xr>= <sc>baliálà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2193><form>bangkrap</form> <xr>= <sc>bangkarúta</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2194><form>bangku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bank</tr>. <form>papil di-</form> bank notes, paper money. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> deposit money in the bank. <i>Ibangku (bangkúhun) ku ning ákung pinangitáan,</i> I&apos;ll deposit my earnings in the bank. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> banking activities.&dagger;

<p id=2195><form>bangkù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bench</tr>, three-, four-legged <tr>stool</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a bench. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> keep a player on the bench. <i>Bangkuun (ibangkù) lang siya kanúnay kay dì man pirs páyib,</i> He&apos;s always kept on the bench because he is not one of the top five players.

<p id=2196><form>bangkulísan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish.

<p id=2197><form>bangkulíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>despondency</tr> over love. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> be despondent over love. <i>Gibangkulíya ang babáying wà makasulay ug trátu,</i> The woman became despondent because she had never had a lover.

<p id=2198><form>bangkung<corr><sub>1</sub></corr></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> dry, thinly sliced bananas, sweet potatoes, cassava, and other root crops. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> sun-dried slices of banana and root crops.

<p id=2199><form>*bangkung<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> gone <tr>crazy</tr>. <i>Muiskuyla kang Duminggu karun, gibangkung ka?</i> Have you gone crazy? Going to school when it&apos;s a Sunday!

<p id=2200><form>bangrus</form> <xr>= <sc>bangus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2201><form>bangs</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bangs</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> wear, form into bangs. <i>Angayan kang magbangs,</i> You look beautiful with bangs.

<p id=2202><form>bangsi</form> <pos>n</pos> general name for various k.o. <tr>flying fish</tr>. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> go fishing for flying fish.

<p id=2203><form>bangu</form> <xr>= <sc>banga</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2204><form>bangúbang</form> <xr>= <sc>balangúbang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2205><form>bangug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>groggy</tr>, <tr>drunk</tr>. <i>Bangug pa ang buksiyadur sa kastígung nadáwat,</i> The boxer is groggy from the punishment he received. <number>2</number> <tr>stupid</tr>, unable to understand, no matter how carefully explained to. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a12]</itype> get groggy, drunk. <i>Nabangug (mibangug) ang isdà sa butu sa dinamíta,</i> The fish got groggy from the dynamite explosion. <i>Gustu ba <pb n=108>ku ninyung bangugun niíning tubà?</i> Do you want to make me groggy with this toddy?

<p id=2206><form>bangug<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>hog cholera</tr>, an infectious disease of swine. <number>2</number> epithet or curse word. <i>Bangug! Unsa ba ni!</i> Damn! What is this! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> <number>1</number> suffer from hog cholera. <i>Gibangug nang babúya,</i> That pig is suffering from hog cholera. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> damn you! <i>Bangugun ka pa untà,</i> I hope you go to hell.

<p id=2207><form>bang-ug</form> <pos>a</pos> foul smell of liquids that have stagnated or food that has spoiled because it has not been freely exposed to air. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> become smelly due to stagnation. <i>Mabang-ug ang kík ug dúgay nga gitaklúban,</i> Cake which has been left covered tight too long develops a bad smell. <i>Nagbang-ug ang túbig sa akwaryum,</i> The water in the aquarium is stagnant and smelly. <number>2</number> be pent up too long and thus get rotten. <i>Nabang-ug na lang ang íyang pagbátì kay wà níya ikapaháyag,</i> She kept her feelings bottled up inside too long (lit. till they rotted).

<p id=2208><form>bangun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <ix>úbi.</ix>

<p id=2209><form>bangun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> main floor beams of a house to which the joists (<ix>busaug</ix>) are nailed.

<p id=2210><form>bángun</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b2]</itype> <tr>get up</tr> from a lying position. <i>Mubángun kug sayu,</i> I&apos;ll get up early. <i>Hibangunan ta gánì ka, búnal giyud,</i> As soon as I can get up I&apos;ll spank you. <number>2</number> <itype>[AP; c1]</itype> make s.t. lying erect. <i>Mabughat kag mubángun (mupabángun) ka ánà,</i> You&apos;ll have a relapse if you lift that. <number>3</number> redeem one&apos;s honor. <i>Bangúna (ibángun) ang kanhing kadunggánan sa átung kalíwat,</i> Redeem the former honor of our race. <number>4</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> <tr>revive</tr> the name of a deceased relative by naming s.o. after him. <i>Bangúnun ku ang ngálan ni anhing lúlu pinaági sa ákung anak,</i> I will bring grandfather&apos;s name to life again through my son. <form>(&rarr;)<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put a boat on a small elevated platform or wedges when it is beached to prevent it from getting rotten or infested with shipworms. <pos>n</pos> wedge used to put a boat on.

<p id=2211><form>bangúngut</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>nightmare</tr> which is said to frighten its victim to death. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> have an attack of <ix>bangúngut.</ix>

<p id=2212><form>bangus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>milkfish</tr>: <bio>Chanos chanos</bio>.

<p id=2213><form>bangut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>tie up</tr> s.o. or s.t.&apos;s mouth or the lower part of the face. <i>Bangútan ku ang kábaw arun dílì makakaun sa mais,</i> I&apos;ll tie up the carabao&apos;s mouth so it can&apos;t get at the corn. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>muzzle</tr>, rope tied around an animal&apos;s mouth, <tr>gag</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>face covering</tr>. <i>Ayaw siya kuhái sa bangut arun dílì makasinggit (mailhan),</i> Don&apos;t take off her gag (<tr>mask</tr>) so she cannot shout (be recognized). <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be in mourning. <i>Nagbangutan ang bánay sa namatay,</i> The family of the deceased was in mourning.

<p id=2214><form>bangyaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>spread information</tr>, <tr>publicize</tr> s.t. <i>Siya ang nagbangyaw nga si Linda gilúgus,</i> She told the whole world that Linda was raped. <i>Gibangyáwan níla ang mga pagánu mahitungud sa Ginúu,</i> They preached about God to the pagans.

<p id=2215><form>bangyáw</form> <pos>n</pos> sound made by children in war games to imitate the sound of bullets.

<p id=2216><form>banhà</form> <number>1</number> <tr>noisy</tr> in a loud way. <number>2</number> exclamation telling s.o. to shut up or to stop making noise. <i>Banhà! <corr sic="Di">Dì</corr> ni mirkádu,</i> Be quiet! This is not the market, you know. <i>Banhà! Wà kay lábut,</i> Shut up! It&apos;s none of your business. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> make noise, consider s.t. noisy. <i>Dì ta magbanhà sulud sa simbahan,</i> Let&apos;s not make noise inside the church. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; c]</itype> divulge s.t. <i>Wà ku magbanhà ning sikritúha sa uban,</i> I never said a word about this secret to anyone. <pos>n</pos> loud voice. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>banhà</sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr>

<p id=2217><form>banhal</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. <tr>machete</tr> about 20&Prime; long with a blade, the top and bottom of which curve together into a point. On the top edge about three-quarters of the way toward the end there is a hook.

<p id=2218><form>banhaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; a2]</itype> bring back to life. <i>Kanang awíta mibanhaw sa ákung kabatan-un,</i> That song brings me back to my youth. <i>Si Kristu ang nagbanhaw ni Lasarus,</i> Christ resurrected Lazarus.

<p id=2219><form>banhig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> lie in wait to kill or maul. <i>Ug Bitkung ang makabanhig way mabúhì,</i> When the Vietcong <tr>ambush</tr>, no one survives. <number>2</number> waylay s.o. bringing produce to the market to buy from him directly. <i>Way mulapus mangga dinhi basta hibanhigan sa babaw,</i> No mangoes reach here if s.o. buys them on the way. <number>3</number> lay in wait for one&apos;s girl to take her home. <number>4</number> ask to join s.o. in his food or s.t. else he has bought s.w.

<p id=2220><form>banhud</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>numb</tr> from loss of circulation or anesthesia. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN; a4b4]</itype> become numb, for limbs to fall asleep. <i>Mibanhud (nabanhud, namanhud, gibanhud) ákung samput pagliningkud,</i> My buttocks became numb from sitting too long. <i>Nagbanhud pa ákung lagus,</i> My gums are still anesthetized. <i>Gibanhúran ku,</i> Part of me is numb.

<p id=2221><form>banhutin, banhuting</form> <xr>= <sc>balanghutan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2222><form>báni</form> <xr>= <sc>baláni<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=2223><form>ban-id</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>band-aid</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> put a band-aid on.

<p id=2224><form>banidad</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> indulgement in personal vanity, usually in a conceited manner. <i>Subra ra ang banidad ánang bayhána bísag pubri, magpakadátù,</i> That girl puts on too much. She pretends to be rich though she&apos;s poor. <number>2</number> a <pb n=109>woman&apos;s self-respect.

<p id=2225><form>banig</form> <pos>n</pos> woven straw sleeping <tr>mat</tr>. <form>higdà, lígid sa &mdash;</form> be bedridden (lit. lie on the mat). <i>Dúgay na si Ilisabit Tílur nga naglígid sa banig,</i> Elizabeth Taylor has been bedridden for a long time. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> spread, make a mat. <i>Maáyung banigun ang tíkug,</i> <ix>Tikug</ix> is good for making mats. <i>Gibanigan ang bátà,</i> The child had a mat spread for him. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> form a layer, spread profusely over an area. <i>Mibanig sa yútà ang dáhung layà,</i> The leaves formed a layer on the ground.

<p id=2226><form>banika</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> area suited for dry farming, not for wet rice cultivation. <number>2</number> rural region. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> engage in dry farming, cultivate into a farm. <i>Banikahun níya ang bakilid,</i> He will cultivate the slope. <form>banikanhun</form> <pos>a</pos> rural, from the country. <form>kabanikahan</form> <pos>n</pos> fields.

<p id=2227><form>baníku</form> (from <ix>abaníku</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a <tr>sailboat</tr>, usually used for fishing, the sail of which is rolled and unfurled like a fan. <number>2</number> a boat like a landing barge, one end of which opens and closes like a fan. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)c1]</itype> make a boat of the <ix>baníku</ix> type.

<p id=2228><form>banílad</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large tree.

<p id=2229><form>banilya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vanilla</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> put, use vanilla.

<p id=2230><form>banitlung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. hardwood tree.

<p id=2231><form>baniug</form> <pos>a</pos> very much of public knowledge. <i>Baniug kaáyu ang pag-adtu níla sa búwan,</i> Their trip to the moon is very well known. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1PB; c]</itype> become, make s.t. of public knowledge. <i>Ang tabì mubaniug (mabaniug) sa tibuuk lungsud,</i> The gossip has become known throughout the town. <i>Wà ikabaniug dinhi ang ímung kaminyúun,</i> Your marriage was not made public here. <xr><ix>see also</ix> <sc>tíug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2232><form>bankil</form> <xr>= <sc>bangkil</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2233><form>bankíyu</form> <xr>= <sc>bangkíyu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2234><form>banlag</form> <pos>n</pos> small but for temporary <tr>shelter</tr> or rest. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> build a rest hut.

<p id=2235><form>banlas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c16]</itype> <number>1</number> for water to carry s.t. <i>Kusug baháa kay nakabanlas (nakapabanlas) ug payag,</i> It was a bad flood. It washed a hut away. <number>2</number> wash away (figuratively). <i>Banlásun (ibanlas) niánang awíta ang ákung kaguul,</i> That song will wash away my grief. <pos>n</pos> s.t. washed up. <i>Kining mga batúha banlas kini sa ibabaw,</i> These rocks have been washed down from above.

<p id=2236><form>banlaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>rinse</tr>, clean with water. <i>Nakabanlaw na ku sa kusína,</i> I have rinsed the kitchen floor. <i>Banláwun ku na ang linadlad,</i> I will rinse the clothes which have been bleached. <form>panghi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b7]</itype> rinse oneself off with water. <i>Humag kalígù manghimanlaw ka,</i> After bathing, rinse yourself off. <i>Ímung túbig ákung gipanghimanláwan,</i> I took some of your water to rinse myself off. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> vessel used for rinsing clothes in. <form>-anan(&rarr;), -unun(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> things to be rinsed.

<p id=2237><form>banlud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c]</itype> <number>1</number> put, toss s.t. into an enclosed space. <i>Akuy nagbanlud sa kargamintu sa ráning burd,</i> I dumped the baggage into the space under the floor boards. <number>2</number> put s.o. into a difficult situation or condition. <i>Ang kapalahúbug mauy nagbanlud (nagpabanlud) níya sa kadáut,</i> His alcoholism got him into trouble.

<p id=2238><form>banlun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ban-lon</tr>. <number>2</number> shirt made of ban-lon. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> wear, get a ban-lon shirt.

<p id=2239><form>banlus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>rub</tr> s.t. on or against s.t. <i>Kinsay nagbanlus ug batu sa bildu nga nagaras man?</i> Who rubbed a stone against the glass? There&apos;s a scratch on it. <i>Bíks ang gibanlus níya sa dughan sa bátà,</i> He rubbed Vick&apos;s ointment on the child&apos;s chest. <i>Ibanlus (banlúsa) nang buling sa lamísa ug basang panaptun,</i> Get the dirt off the table by rubbing it with a wet cloth. <pos>n</pos> rubbing oil, <tr>ointment</tr>.

<p id=2240><form>banlut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> clean the skin of a dressed chicken of prickles or slimy substance. <i>Asin ang ibanlut niánang manúka,</i> Use salt to clean the chicken&apos;s skin. <number>2</number> <itype>[a4]</itype> have the sickness <ix>banlut.</ix> <pos>n</pos> k.o. skin disease where a white crust is formed which peels off, exposing red skin and leaving a scar, commonly affecting the feet and hands.

<p id=2241><form>bansa<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. half beak (fish).

<p id=2242><form>bansa<sub>2</sub>, bansà</form> <pos>n</pos> a territorial unit, <tr>state</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> be a state. <i>Sukad mabansà ang Haway,</i> Ever since Hawaii became a state. <form>Tinípung &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> United States.

<p id=2243><form>bansag</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>name</tr>. <i>Kandalaw ang bansag sa ámung baryu kaniadtu,</i> Our village was formerly named Kandalaw. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; c]</itype> call s.t. or s.o. with a certain name. <i>Gibanságan siyag bakì,</i> He was nicknamed &lsquo;frog&rsquo;. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> having the same family name. <i>Markus ang íyang ngálan, kabansag sa ámung pangúlu,</i> Marcos is his name, the same name as the President&apos;s. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c3]</itype> be of the same family name. <form>-un</form> <pos>n</pos> family name. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> have the surname. <i>Nagbanságun siyag Ríyis,</i> His family name is Reyes.

<p id=2244><form>bansalan</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>rudder</tr> of a boat.

<p id=2245><form>bansay</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>skillful</tr>, <tr>proficient</tr>. <i>Bansay kaáyu siyang mudúlag ahidris,</i> He plays chess expertly. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AP; a]</itype> <tr>train</tr> s.o. <i>Akuy mubansay sa buksidur,</i> I&apos;ll train the boxer. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>practice</tr>, <tr>rehearse</tr>. <i>Nagbansay siya sa áwit,</i> She is practicing the song. <form>paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> make oneself adept at s.t. <i>Nagpakabansay siya sa karáti tungud sa trabáhu níyang kuyaw,</i> She made herself an expert in karate <pb n=110>because of her dangerous job. <form>bansaybansay</form> <pos>n</pos> annual military training. <form>ma-in-un</form> <pos>a</pos> in an expert way.

<p id=2246><form>bansíkul</form> <xr>= <sc>balansíkul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2247><form>bansil</form> <pos>n</pos> gold <tr>cap</tr> on a tooth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put, make into a gold cap on a tooth.

<p id=2248><form>bansíli</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; ac]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>swap</tr>, <tr>barter</tr>. <i>Magbansíli ta. Ímu ring lápis, ákù ang bulpin,</i> Let&apos;s swap. Take the pencil and give me the ball-point pen. <i>Ayaw ipúnang átung hiraminta arun dílì magkabansíli,</i> Don&apos;t put our tools together so they won&apos;t get mixed up. <i>Bansilíhan nákug mais ang isdà,</i> I&apos;ll barter corn for fish. <number>2</number> put s.t. in the place of s.t. else. <i>Ibansíli ning lamísa adtung pasistur,</i> Let&apos;s put this table where the small table is.

<p id=2249><form>bansiwag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B346; c1]</itype> for long things to <tr>stick out</tr> prominently. <i>Mibansiwag ang báraw sa íyang bulsa,</i> The knife stuck out prominently from his pocket. <i>Ayaw bansiwaga (ibansiwag) ímung síku iniglayat nímu,</i> Don&apos;t stick out your elbows when you jump.

<p id=2250><form>bantà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>warn</tr> s.o. not to do s.t. <i>Ang pahibalung &lsquo;pagbantay sa irù&rsquo; mauy mubantà sa mga táwu,</i> The notice &lsquo;beware of dogs&rsquo; will warn the people off. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b4]</itype> plan to do harm to s.t. <i>Gibantáan nga sunúgun ang lungsud sa mga Húks,</i> The Huks are planning to burn the town. <form>bantàbantà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make an <tr>estimate</tr> of a quantity. <i>Bantàbantáun kug makaganansiya ba ku,</i> I will make an estimate of whether I&apos;ll make a profit or not. <pos>n</pos> estimate, calculation.

<p id=2251><form>bantáaw</form> <pos>a</pos> be situated in clear <tr>view</tr> from the distance. <i>Bantáaw kaáyu ang syudad didtu sa búkid Manunggal,</i> You get a good view of the city from Mount Manunggal. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3]</itype> be, become clear in view from the distance. <i>Ihigut ang kábaw niánang nagbantáaw nga lubi,</i> Tie the carabao to the coconut tree which we can see clearly from here. <pos>n</pos> the clear view of s.t. from a distance. <i>Sa bantáaw lang sa liyun mahadluk aku,</i> Just the sight of a lion from the distance scares me.

<p id=2252><form>bantak</form> <xr>= <sc>balantak</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2253><form>bantal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>bundle</tr> s.t. <i>Bantála ang mga bulingun,</i> Bundle the dirty clothes. <i>Písing lig-un ang ibantal sa magasin,</i> Use a strong string to bundle the magazine. <pos>n</pos> <tr>bundle</tr>.

<p id=2254><form>bantam</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bantam</tr>, compact car. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> consider a car a bantam.

<p id=2255><form>bantam wit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bantamweight</tr>.

<p id=2256><form>bantang</form> <pos>a</pos> in plain <tr>view</tr> and <tr>recognizable</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3; c1]</itype> come into view. <i>Kablítang gátu ug mubantang (mabantang) ang langgam,</i> Pull the trigger when the bird comes into clear view. <i>Nagbantang ang páa sa babáyi,</i> The woman&apos;s thighs are in full view. <pos>n</pos> <tr>bearing</tr>. <i>Gidáyig ku ang bantang sa íyang hinigtan,</i> I admire the bearing of his fighting cock.

<p id=2257><form>bantawan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stage</tr> or <tr>platform</tr>.

<p id=2258><form>bantay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>watch</tr> s.t., keep watch over. <i>Wà siyay ági, nagbantay lang sa úras,</i> He doesn&apos;t work. He just watches the clock. <i>Pag-iskápu sa binilanggù kinsay nagbantay?</i> When the prisoner escaped, who was on guard? <i>Dílì siya kasiyut ug daghan ug akuy makabantay,</i> He can&apos;t shoot the ball if I guard him. <i>Bantayi ang linung-ag,</i> Watch the rice. <number>1a</number> take care of plants, esp. coconuts. <i>Nagbantay sila sa kalubihan,</i> They were tending their coconut plantation. <number>2</number> notice, be aware of s.t. impending. <i>Nadunggaban siya kay walà siya makabantay sa usa ka handus,</i> He got stabbed because he was not aware of the thrust. <number>3</number> watch out for, beware of. <i>Pagbantay sa mangunguut,</i> Watch out for pickpockets. <i>Bantayi ni nga dílì maumgan,</i> Take care so it won&apos;t get wet. <number>4</number> watch for s.t. to pass. <i>Ibantay kug taksi,</i> Watch for a cab for me. <pos>n</pos> <tr>guard</tr>. <i>Namúga ang mga prísu kay natúlug ang bantay,</i> The prisoners escaped because the guard fell asleep. <form>bantaybantay, &mdash; sa balutbut, talikud</form> various species of colorful fish that lurk in the reefs and snap at prey: e.g. <bio>Diploprium bifascatium</bio>. <form>-l-an</form> <pos>n</pos> guardhouse, guard post. <i>Butangig bantay kanúnay ang balantayan (bantayan),</i> Always keep a guard in the guardhouse. <form>-l-an, -anan</form> <pos>a</pos> needful of careful watching. <i>Ang bátang bag-u pang mulakaw bantayánan kaáyu,</i> A child who is still starting to walk needs careful watching. <form>hi&N;-un</form> <pos>a</pos> minding other people&apos;s business. <form>ma-in-un, ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> watchful. <i>Ang mabinantáyung (mabantáyung) mata sa Diyus,</i> The watchful eyes of God. <form>mag-r-, mag-l-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> one who watches over s.t. <i>Magbalantay sa tindáhan,</i> Storekeeper. <i>Magbalantay sa sam-ang,</i> Cemetery caretaker. <number>2</number> sergeant-at-arms. <form>anghil &mdash;</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>anghil</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; sa kalínaw</form> guardian of peace.

<p id=2259><form>bantáyan</form> <xr>= <sc>batáyan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2260><form>bantáyug</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>monument</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b]</itype> put a monument s.w.

<p id=2261><form>bantì</form> <xr>= <sc>balalantì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2262><form>bantigì</form> <pos>n</pos> good-luck charm. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> use a good-luck charm. <i>Ang síngin nga lísu sa nangkà mabantigì sa paninda,</i> Twin seeds from jackfruits can be used as a good-luck charm when one sells things.

<p id=2263><form>bantílis</form> <pos>n</pos> hard, fine-grained stone with a smooth surface, gray in color and spots of white. <i>Bantílis kag kasingkásing,</i> You have <pb n=111>a heart of granite.

<p id=2264><form>banting</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> rope or chain tied to s.t. to steady it, hold it down. <i>Hugti ang banting sa balay kay talibagyu,</i> Tighten the rope holding the house because a typhoon is coming. <number>2</number> fetter placed on the feet of prisoners. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> secure or steady s.t. by fastening s.t. to it; make into a fastening rope. <i>Ug nakabanting ka pa sa bungsud, dílì untà maánud,</i> Had you secured the fish corral, it wouldn&apos;t have been washed away. <i>Lambu ang ibanting sa tabánug,</i> Use a string to balance the kite.&dagger;

<p id=2265><form>bantingbanting</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> for boats to rock from side to side, rock like a boat. <i>Magbantingbanting siyag lakaw kun hubug,</i> He walks with a rocking gait when he is drunk.

<p id=2266><form>bantíyung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> oval-shaped squash, a variety of <bio>Lagenaria leucanthea</bio>. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>balantíyung</sc></xr><sc></sc>. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> have sagging breasts like oval-shaped squash.

<p id=2267><form>bantug</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>famous</tr>, <tr>notorious</tr>. <i>Bantug kaáyung ngálan sa nátad sa pulitika ang Usminya,</i> Osmeña is a well-known name in the field of politics. <form>&mdash; ra</form> no wonder [such-and-such] a particular thing happened. <i>Bantug rang dílì kasulti kay amang diay,</i> No wonder he couldn&apos;t talk. He&apos;s a deaf-mute. <form>&mdash; na man</form> just because. <i>Bantug na mang nagkinahanglan kug kwarta patas-an nímug tantu,</i> Just because I need money you increase the interest. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> become famous, notorious. <form>pasi-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> boast about one&apos;s ability, skill. <i>Maúlaw ku magpasibantug sa ákung kadátù,</i> I&apos;m ashamed to brag about my wealth. <pos>n</pos> bragging. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> fame, honor. <i>Ang kabantug ni Ilurdi sa pamuksing,</i> Elorde&apos;s fame as a boxer. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> famous, notorious. <i>Bantúgan nga mananambal,</i> A well-known doctor. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become famous, notorious.

<!-- Order of sub-entries / phrases -->

<p id=2268><form>bantuk</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> hard and compact. <i>Bantuk kaáyung unud sa gábi,</i> Taro meat is very firm. <number>2</number> for muscles to be firm. <i>Bantuk kaáyu siyag kaunuran,</i> He has firm muscles. <i>Bída, bantuk giyung busúga,</i> My, I&apos;m filled to bursting! <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; sa dughan</formx> filling the breast. <i>Kalípay nga bantuk sa dughan,</i> Happiness that fills the breast. <form>&mdash; ug nawung</form> shameless, hardened to others&apos; opinions. <form>&mdash; ug úlu</form> <number>a</number> thick-skulled. <i>Bantuk kag úlu. Kápuy itudlù nímu,</i> You are thick-skulled. It&apos;s terrible to try to teach you. <number>b</number> <tr>stubborn</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB3; a]</itype> <number>1</number> make s.t. harden, harden. <i>Mibantuk (nabantuk) ang basakan sa kataas sa húlaw,</i> The rice field hardened because of the long drought. <i>Bantúkun nátù ang nataran kay himúung baylihan,</i> Let&apos;s tramp the yard down so we can use it as a dance floor. <number>2</number> inure, get inured to s.t. <i>Nagbantuk na ning ákung nawung sa mga biaybíay,</i> I have become hardened to their taunts. <i>Nagkabantuk na ang ákung dughan sa kaguul,</i> My heart has become hardened to grief.&dagger;

<p id=2269><form>bantul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small, excellent eating <tr>fish</tr> with poisonous spines, not deadly but very painful, and a frog-like face.

<p id=2270><form>*bantul<sub>2</sub></form> <form>gi-</form> has [subject] <tr>gone crazy</tr>! <i>Gibantul ka ba dihà?</i> Have you gone crazy?

<p id=2271><form>bantúlay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>pound</tr> buri palm strips in a wooden trough-like mortar to get the starch out. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>trough</tr> in which strips of buri palm are laid lengthwise and pounded.

<p id=2272><form>bantulinaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> daytime weather conditions where there is a light cloud cover: the sun shines but its heat is mitigated. <number>2</number> for the sea to be rippling slightly, but on the whole calm. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> be, become lightly overcast. <i>Nagkabantulinaw na man, maáyu nang iduwà,</i> Now that it is gradually clouding over lightly, it is a good time to play. <number>2</number> for the sea to be rippling slightly.

<p id=2273><form>bantulínaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. shiny black or greyish-black olive <tr>shell</tr>, or a species with jet-black speckles.

<p id=2274><form>bantut</form> <pos>n</pos> light <tr>thudding</tr> sound of a falling object. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> <number>1</number> make a light thudding sound in falling. <i>Nahúlug nga pútut tung mibantut,</i> That thudding sound was a coconut bud that fell. <number>2</number> for a top to <tr>fail</tr> to spin. <number>3</number> <itype>[B2; c1]</itype> for a business to <tr>fail</tr>. <i>Ang súgal makapabantut sa nigusyu,</i> Gambling can cause a business to fail. <form>-un(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having tendency not to spin well. <i>Bantutun ang kasing gaan,</i> Light tops tend not to spin well. <number>2</number> having a tendency to fail in business.

<p id=2275><form>bánu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> for work or an undertaking to come out <tr>good</tr>. <i>Nabánu tingáli ang íyang pagpaninda kay midakù man ang íyang tindáhan,</i> Her business must have been successful because she has enlarged her store.

<p id=2276><form>banug</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large <tr>hawk</tr> with chocolate-brown feathers and a white-colored breast. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> consider a hawk. <form>(&larr;)</form> call to drive away chickens. <form>-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> brown and white combination of chicken feathers. <number>2</number> name given to rays with wide wing-like extensions of the body which flap as they move through the water, esp. the eagle ray: <bio>Aetobatus narinari</bio>. <form>banugbánug, tala-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> kite. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2SN; a2]</itype> fly, make into a kite. <i>Magbanugbánug (magtalabanug) ta sa plása,</i> Let&apos;s fly a kite in the plaza.

<p id=2277><form>bánug, ban-ug</form> <pos>a</pos> for fruits to be <tr>bruised</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>soften</tr> fruits, for fruits to get bruised. <i>Muban-ug (maban-ug) ang kapáyas <pb n=112>ug sigíhag híkap,</i> The papaya will get bruised if you keep touching it. <number>2</number> bruise by pounding. <i>Ban-úgun giyud nang tulisag hisakpan,</i> They will beat up that robber if they catch him.

<!-- TODO: removed superfluous word at end -->

<p id=2278><form>ban-uk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> sickness caused by a spirit of the woods (<ix>banwaánun</ix>) which intrudes sand, feathers, and hairs into the body. The sickness results from bathing in streams or bathing anywhere on Tuesdays and Fridays or may be on the instigation of a sorcerer. The symptoms are stomach pain followed by intense itchy rashes. The cure is <ix>túub.</ix> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a4b4]</itype> cause to get <ix>ban-uk.</ix> <!-- <i>Ban-úkun</i> -->

<p id=2279><form>ban-uk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lush</tr>, plentiful in growth. <i>Ban-uk kaáyu ang sagbut sa ákung pilapilan,</i> Weeds are growing lush in my rice field. <number>2</number> for a mass to be well-packed. <i>Pwirting ban-úka sa baráha sa kahun. Maglisud ta paghulbut ug usa,</i> The cards are very tightly packed into the box. We&apos;ll have a hard time taking one. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26; c1]</itype> get packed in tight. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; aPb]</itype> become lush. <i>Nagkaban-uk ang buhuk ni Bal nga nagkadakù,</i> Bal&apos;s hair is becoming thicker as he is growing bigger.

<p id=2280><form>banus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> implanted close to each other. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; c16]</itype> for standing things to be implanted close to each other. <i>Mibanus (nabanus) ang humayan nga giabunúhan,</i> The field which was fertilized grew densely. <i>Banusun (ibanus) gánì pagtanum ang mga lubi dílì mubúnga,</i> Coconut trees planted too close to each other will not bear fruit.

<p id=2281><form>banus<sub>2</sub>, bánus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> for s.t. to happen after s.t. else happened. <i>Mibanus ang kaínit human muulan,</i> The sun shone after the rain shower. <i>Bansun gánì ang tímug, mukalma ang bagyu,</i> The typhoon abates when the east wind lets up. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> take over after s.o. <i>Bansi ku dinhi sa kusína kay gikápuy ku,</i> Take my place in the kitchen because I&apos;m tired. <number>3</number> <itype>[AN; b5]</itype> put on or wear s.t. which belongs to s.o. else. <i>Mamanus ku sa ímung tráhi kay wà kuy ikapatahì,</i> I&apos;ll wear your suit because I don&apos;t have money to have one made. <i>Maluag ang midiyas ug bansan (bansun) sa dakug tiil,</i> The socks will loosen if s.o. with big feet wears them first. <form>banusbánus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C; b5]</itype> take turns in doing s.t. <i>Magbanusbánus tag dala sa baskit,</i> Let&apos;s take turns in carrying the basket. <i>Banusbanúsi (banusbanúsa) ninyug pas-an ang kawáyan,</i> Take turns in carrying the bamboo on your shoulders. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> occur repeatedly one after the other. <i>Magbanusbánus ang kalípay ug kasákit,</i> Joys and sorrows follow one another repeatedly.

<p id=2282><form>banúut</form> <pos>n</pos> sheath of a coconut blossom.

<p id=2283><form>banwa<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>thicket</tr>. <i>Adtu ta maggapud ug igsulugnud sa banwa,</i> Let&apos;s cut firewood in the woods. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1PB; a2]</itype> become a <tr>thicket</tr>, let s.t. revert to the forest. <i>Nagbanwa (nagpabanwa) kug usa ka iktarya,</i> I purposely allowed a hectare of my farm to revert to thicket. <form>banwaánun</form> <number>1</number> from the forest. <i>Banwaánung sunuy,</i> Wild rooster. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>tagabanwa</sc>.</xr> <form>taga-, tagi-, banwaánun</form> <pos>n</pos> supernatural beings which inhabit woodlands, victimize people by rendering them invisible, and are capable of inflicting diseases. Sometimes they show themselves and even make love to women.

<p id=2284><form>banwa<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fatherland</tr>. <i>Pilipínas ang ngán sa ámung banwa,</i> Our country is called the Philippines. <number>2</number> <tr>town</tr>, <tr>village</tr>. <i>Ang banwa sa Mandáwi mauswágun,</i> The town of <corr sic=Mandawe>Mandaue</corr> is progressive.

<p id=2285><form>banwag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>illuminate</tr> a place. <i>Banwágan kung agiánan sa súlù,</i> I&apos;ll light the way with a torch. <number>2</number> <tr>enlighten</tr> s.o. <i>Ang ímung tambag mu ray makabanwag sa íyang kaisípan,</i> Only your counsel can enlighten his mind. <pos>n</pos> illumination.&dagger;

<p id=2286><form>banwági</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>tree</tr>.

<p id=2287><form>banwas</form> <xr>= <sc>balúnas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2288><form>banyágà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rascal</tr>, <tr>scoundrel</tr>. <i>Pangitáun kung banyágà nga nag-ílad nákù,</i> I&apos;ll look for the rascal who swindled me. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be a scoundrel.

<p id=2289><form>banyak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>kick</tr> or <tr>shove</tr> with the sole of a foot. <i>Banyáka (banyáki) ug kusug ang bisiklíta,</i> Pedal the bicycle hard.

<p id=2290><form>banyira</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tub</tr> or big <tr>basin</tr> for children to take a bath in or for washing clothes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a tub or big basin.

<p id=2291><form>banyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bathroom</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> construct, add a bathroom. <form>&mdash; publiku</form> <pos>n</pos> public bath.

<p id=2292><form>banyumaríya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>double boiler</tr>.

<p id=2293><form>banyus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>medicine</tr> rubbed on one. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> rub medicinal materials on s.o. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> rub medicinal materials on oneself.

<p id=2294><form>bápul, bápuls</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>baffle</tr> in a loudspeaker.

<p id=2295><form>bapur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>steamship</tr> or any large <tr>ship</tr> propelled by machinery. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b4]</itype> take a boat. <i>Nagbapur ku padúlung sa Sibu,</i> I took a boat in going to Cebu. <form>&mdash; digíra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>battleship</tr>. <form>&mdash; mirkantil</form> <pos>n</pos> merchant ship. <form>bapurbápur</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> smoke cigars. <number>2</number> <itype>[C]</itype> have sexual intercourse (riding on each other like on a boat) (humorous).

<p id=2296><form>bár<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bar</tr> examination for would-be lawyers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> take the bar examination.

<p id=2297><form>bár<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the B.A.R., Browning automatic rifle.

<p id=2298><form>bár<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cocktail lounge</tr>, usually of the sort which have bar-girls of ill-repute.

<p id=2299><form>bara<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> put a boat in dry-dock. <number>2</number> <pb n=113><itype>[B12; a2]</itype> run aground. <i>Nabara sa píliw ang barku,</i> The boat ran aground in shallow waters. <form>-díru</form> <pos>n</pos> be in <tr>dry dock</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> put a boat in dry dock. <form>baradiruhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dry dock</tr>.

<!-- Order of subentries -->

<p id=2300><form>bára</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>steel bar</tr>, <tr>rod</tr>. <form>&mdash; dikabra</form> <tr>crowbar</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>frame</tr> of a bicycle. <number>3</number> <tr>measurement</tr>, the span from the shoulder to the tip of the opposite hand with the arm extended. <number>4</number> <formx>&mdash; i &mdash;</formx> <tr>eye for an eye and tooth for a tooth</tr>. <i>Pamaslan tikaw bára i bára sa ímung gibúhat kanákù,</i> I will repay you eye for an eye and tooth for a tooth for what you have done to me. <number>4a</number> <tr>punishment</tr> sent to a philanderer that his daughter falls victim to a philanderer. <i>Bára nà níya nga gipaangkan ang íyang anak kay himabáyi man,</i> It&apos;s his punishment for being a philanderer that his daughter was made pregnant. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make into a bar. <number>2</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> for a girl to suffer at the hands of a philanderer as a punishment to her father. <i>Baráhan ang átung anak ug magsígi kag pamabáyi,</i> Our daughter will become a victim herself if you keep chasing women. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2C; c1]</itype> for a brother and sister in one family to marry a brother and sister in another. <i>Gibára sa mga Kurtis ug Sansis ang ílang mga anak,</i> A son and daughter of the Corteses&apos; married a son and daughter of the Sanchezes&apos;. <form>barabára</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shaft</tr> for a horse carriage. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a]</itype> make into a shaft for a carriage, put a shaft on. <form>barabara</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shaft</tr> in a pressurized kerosene lantern which holds the needle <corr sic=controling>controlling</corr> the width of the orifice through which the vaporized kerosene passes. <form>barahan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>yard-</tr>*stick. <number>2</number> <tr>criterion</tr> for measuring s.t. <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. cloth of cheap quality with big, checkered prints. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> wear this sort of cloth.&dagger;

<p id=2301><form>baradíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>bara<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=2302><form>bárag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B256; a12P]</itype> lose one&apos;s footing, <tr>stagger</tr> from a blow or drunkenness. <i>Mibárag (nabárag) siya pagsumbag nákù,</i> He staggered when I boxed him. <i>Barágun (pabarágun) ta ka niíning usa ka básung tubà,</i> I&apos;ll make you stagger with this glass of palm toddy.

<p id=2303><form>baragbárag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> pace back and forth in front of s.o., usually with a purpose. <i>Mubaragbárag ang amahan ug pamisitáhan ang íyang dalága,</i> When s.o. visits the daughter, the father paces back and forth conspicuously in front of them.

<p id=2304><form>baráha</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>playing card</tr>. <form>bistu ang &mdash;</form> it is clear what you (he, etc.) has up his sleeve. <form>&mdash; nga dunut</form> highly improbable <tr>excuse</tr> for doing s.t. <i>Ayaw kug sugali ánang ímung baráha nga dunut,</i> Don&apos;t hand me those phoney excuses. <number>1a</number> mahjong piece. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC2; a1]</itype> play cards. <i>Nakigbaráha nákù ang duha ka sugarul,</i> The two gamblers asked me to play cards with them. <i>Mánu ta. Baraháun,</i> Let&apos;s decide who will be first with cards. <form>-dur(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> dealer in cards. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> be the dealer. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> hire, have as a card dealer.

<p id=2305><form>barak</form> <pos>n</pos> leg muscles.

<p id=2306><form>bárak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>barracks</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a2]</itype> make into barracks.

<p id=2307><form>baráka</form> <pos>n</pos> a room added to a house as an extension. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6(1)]</itype> construct an extension to a house. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> hip roof with sloping ends and sloping sides. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> construct a hip roof.

<p id=2308><form>barandilya, barandilyas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fence</tr> or <tr>balustrade</tr> made of rails and posts. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> put, make into a <tr>railing</tr>.

<p id=2309><form>bárang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. sorcery whereby insects are introduced into the intended victim. <number>2</number> insect, usually a mutant specimen, with which <ix>bárang</ix> sorcery is performed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> practice <ix>bárang</ix> on s.o. <i>Barángun siya ni Danílu,</i> Danilo will inflict his sorcery on him. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> sorcerer.

<p id=2310><form>baranggay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a unit of government of the pre-Spanish Filipinos, the titular head of whom was the <ix>dátù</ix> or sultan. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>balángay</sc>.</xr> <number>3</number> a nightly rosary held by turns in the houses in a certain neighborhood. <i>Átù rung turnu sa baranggay,</i> Tonight, the nightly rosary of the <ix>baranggay</ix> will be held in our house. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2C23]</itype> hold a <ix>baranggay</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> go to one&apos;s girl friend&apos;s house, as the members of a prayer group go to s.o.&apos;s house for the <ix>baranggay</ix> (colloquial).

<p id=2311><form>barasbáras</form> <xr>= <sc>barabára</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>bára</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2312><form>barásu</form> <xr>= <sc>brásu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2313><form>barat</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>cheap</tr>, <tr>petty</tr>: refusing to pay a reasonable price and heeding matters not worth one&apos;s attention. <number>2</number> cheap, <tr>vulgar</tr>. <i>Barat na kaáyu nang bayhána, bísan kinsa lang ang ubanan,</i> That woman is very cheap. Anybody can have her. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for a person to become cheap. <i>Mauy ibarat nímu ug ímu siyang ashan,</i> You will come to be vulgar if you attach importance to what she says. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> for things to be of little value, inferior, make s.t. in an inferior way. <i>Mibarat (nabarat) ang písu,</i> The peso has become devalued. <i>Ayúha pagtahì. Ayawg barata (ibarat),</i> Sew that dress well. Don&apos;t put out s.t. cheap. <form>-íra</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of bargaining prices down too much. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be a haggler. <i>Makabastus ang labihang pagkabaratíra,</i> It is degrading to bargain too hard. <form>-íru</form> <xr>= <sc>baratíra</sc> (male).</xr>

<p id=2314><form>baratíha</form> <pos>n</pos> piece of wood about 1&Prime; thick, 2&Prime; <pb n=114>wide and anywhere from one foot up in length, usually used for flooring. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a]</itype> make into floorboards.

<p id=2315><form>baratilyu</form> <pos>n</pos> bargain sale. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> hold a bargain sale. <i>Baratilyúhun (ibaratilyu) níla ang ílang uld istak,</i> Their old stock is going to be on sale. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> buy s.t. on sale. <i>Mamaratilyu kug sapátus,</i> I&apos;ll buy shoes that are on sale.

<p id=2316><form>baratíru</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>barat</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2317><form>barátu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> low price. <i>Barátu kaáyu ang palalítun ug sirbisyu sa Hungkung,</i> Goods and services are very cheap in H. K. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> become, be <tr>cheap</tr>. <i>Mubarátu (mabarátu) ang bugas kun ting-ani,</i> Rice gets to be cheap during harvest time. <number>2</number> <itype>[AP; b6]</itype> cheapen, make contemptible. <i>Ang babáying mukúyug ug láki bísan ása nagbarátu (nagpabarátu) sa íyang kaugalíngun,</i> A woman who goes just anywhere with a man cheapens herself. <form>baratuhun</form> <pos>a</pos> of a cheap sort. <i>Sinínang baratuhun,</i> A cheap shirt.

<p id=2318><form>barátu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> cut from one&apos;s winnings. <i>Tagái kug barátu sa daug nímu sa búlang,</i> Give me a cut from your winnings in the cockpit. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give s.o. a cut from one&apos;s winnings.

<p id=2319><form>baraw, báraw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> interrupt the tossing of the coin in gambling to annul that particular toss. <i>Baráwa nang antugun kun suspitsádu ka sa inantugan,</i> Interrupt the toss if you are suspicious about the way the coins are being tossed. <form>(&rarr;)</form> expression used to squelch a friendly request for s.t. <i>&lsquo;Daúgan ka man. Paliti kug sapátus, ha?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Baraw. Píla ra guy daug.&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;You won in gambling. How about buying me a pair of shoes?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Just hold your horses there. That much I didn&apos;t win.&rsquo;

<p id=2320><form>báraw<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C]</itype> for fighting cocks to hit each other with their gaffs while in the air.

<p id=2321><form>báraw<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>balaraw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2322><form>barawan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large squid (<ix>núkus</ix>).

<p id=2323><form>baraybaray</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>pile</tr> s.t. up. <i>Baraybaraya ang mga kahun simpig sa bungbung,</i> Pile the boxes against the wall. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB36; c1]</itype> fall, put in line. <i>Mibaraybaray sila atubángan sa maistru,</i> They lined up before the teacher.

<p id=2324><form>barbahan</form> <pos>n</pos> wooden container for coconut palm toddy in the shape of a rectangle 3&prime; by 4&prime;.

<p id=2325><form>barbas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> wash infected skin with boiled leaves of medicinal herbs. <i>Mu rag nagamay ang kabahung nga nabarbasan,</i> The ulcer seemed to get smaller after it was cleaned and washed. <pos>n</pos> the water and boiled leaves of medicinal herbs used in washing sores, ulcers, and other skin diseases.

<p id=2326><form>barbas<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>balbas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2327><form>barbikiyu</form> <pos>n</pos> food <tr>barbecued</tr> on a stick. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>barbecue</tr> s.t.

<p id=2328><form>barbil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bar bell</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> exercise with a, make into a bar bell. <form>-ádu, -áwu</form> <pos>a</pos> having a well-developed physique of the sort that results from exercising with a bar bell. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become well-built.

<p id=2329><form>barbir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>barber</tr>. <form>&mdash; siyap</form> <xr>= <sc>barbiríya</sc>.</xr> <form>-íya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>barbershop</tr>.

<p id=2330><form>barbíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>barber</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> <tr>become</tr>, <tr>make</tr> into a <tr>barber</tr>. <form>barbiruhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>barbershop</tr>.

<p id=2331><form>barbityurits</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>barbiturates</tr>.

<p id=2332><form>barbula</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>valve</tr> in a pipe or tire.

<p id=2333><form>barbun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b(1)]</itype> go to a banquet only for the sake of eating. <i>Mamarbun si Isku sa bunyag sa anak ni Uduy,</i> Isko will certainly be there for the food when Odoy&apos;s son is baptized. <pos>n</pos> act of attending a banquet for eating alone. <i>Kung pamarbun na gánì ang hisgútan way katupung ni Alù,</i> Talking of going to parties just for the food, no one can beat Alo. <form>-íru</form> <pos>a</pos> attending banquets for the sake of food alone.

<p id=2334><form>barda</form> <xr>= <sc>balda</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2335><form>bardádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>baldádu</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>balda</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2336><form>bards<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>barge</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> take a <tr>barge</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> make into a barge.

<p id=2337><form>bardut</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>prostitute</tr> (slang). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be, become a prostitute. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> patronize a prostitute.

<p id=2338><form>bargas</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>plow</tr> made of steel (so called after the brand name Vargas).

<p id=2339><form>barì</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. <tr>sickle</tr> for cutting long and thick grass, with the blade at the outside edge, and fastened to a wooden handle about 3&prime; long. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>cut</tr> grass with a <ix>barì.</ix>

<p id=2340><form>barikus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>varicose veins</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4b4]</itype> have varicose veins. <i>Barikusun (barikusan) kag maghayhil ka,</i> You&apos;ll get varicose veins if you wear high heels.

<p id=2341><form>baril<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>barrel</tr>, <tr>drum</tr>.

<p id=2342><form>baril<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>shoot</tr> s.o. or s.t. with a gun. <i>Si Risal dihà barila sa Luníta,</i> Rizal was executed at the Luneta.

<p id=2343><form>barílis<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. blue-finned <tr>tuna</tr> which grows to 3&prime;.

<p id=2344><form>barílis<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> metal <tr>drums</tr> for oil.

<p id=2345><form>barína</form> <pos>n</pos> screw <tr>auger</tr> for making holes. <form>&mdash; dimánu</form> <pos>n</pos> a screw auger with no brace, gimlet. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> bore a hole with a drill. <i>Barináhi ang káhuy úsà twirkáhi,</i> Drill a hole in the wood before you put in the screw.

<p id=2346><form>barínis</form> <pos>n</pos> water <tr>container</tr> made of an internodal section of bamboo. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make, make into a water container of this sort.

<pb n=115>

<p id=2347><form>barinúgan</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>stubborn</tr>, refusing to yield or comply. <i>Barinúgan kaáyung igsuúna kay dílì mupatúu sa ákung tambag,</i> He is a stubborn brother because he refuses to heed my advice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become stubborn.

<p id=2348><form>barinuhan</form> <xr>= <sc>barinúgan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2349><form>bárit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>barrette</tr> for holding the hair in place. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, make into a barrette.

<p id=2350><form>baríta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bar</tr> of soap, chocolate, etc. <i>Tagsingkwinta na ang baríta sa sabun,</i> Soap costs fifty cents a bar now. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> form, make into a bar. <i>Baritáhun ta ning tsukulit,</i> Let&apos;s form this chocolate into bars.

<p id=2351><form>baritun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>baritunu</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <tr>baritone</tr> musical instrument. <number>2a</number> brass wind instrument: the baritone. <number>2b</number> baritone saxophone.

<p id=2352><form>baritunu</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>baritone</tr> voice or s.o. with a baritone voice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> be a baritone; sing in the baritone. <i>Mubaritunu (mabaritunu) tingáli ning ákung tíngug ug maulitáwu na ku,</i> I will probably have a baritone voice when I reach adolescence. <i>Magbaritunu ku kay kúlang sila,</i> I&apos;ll sing with the baritones because there&apos;s not enough of them. <i>Baritunúhi nang íyang kanta,</i> Sing the baritone part to the song.

<p id=2353><form>barkáda</form> <pos>n</pos> people one goes around with. <i>Giimbitar kung ákung mga barkáda sa ákung adlaw,</i> I invited my cronies to my birthday party. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C1; a1c3]</itype> go around together. <i>Way kaláki ning magbarkáda,</i> It&apos;s no good to go around with a gang. <form>mag-</form> <pos>n</pos> people who are gang mates. <i>Nadáhig siya sa imbistigasiyun kay magbarkáda man sila sa nakapatay,</i> He was also investigated because he was in the same gang as the murderer. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> gang mate. <form>barkadur</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of going around with one&apos;s gang.

<p id=2354><form>barkilyus</form> <pos>n</pos> baked sweet made from flour, eggs, sugar and rolled into crisp hollow tubes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make barquillos.

<p id=2355><form>barku</form> <pos>n</pos> large <tr>ship</tr>. <form>hibyaan sa &mdash;</form> <number>1</number> not catch the boat. <number>2</number> failed to get married. <form>walà kuy &mdash;</form> I&apos;m poor. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> take a ship.

<p id=2356><form>barnáti</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> drive s.o. to work very hard. <i>Gibarnáti pagpagúna ang sinuhúlan,</i> The hired laborer was made to work hard weeding. <number>2</number> <itype>[B16]</itype> become skilled in s.t. after constant, strenuous training. <i>Ang pagtrabáhu níya sa talyir nakabarnáti (nakapabarnáti) níya sa makina,</i> His work in the shop made him skilled with machines.

<p id=2357><form>barnis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>varnish</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> varnish s.t. <i>Barnísan kung ímung sungkud,</i> I&apos;ll varnish your cane.

<p id=2358><form>barpin</form> <pos>n</pos> an ornamental pin with a clasp. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> wear an ornamental pin.

<p id=2359><form>bartíha</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>plank</tr>, <tr>board</tr>. <i>Gilugkat ang usa ka bartíha sa bungbung,</i> One plank was torn off the wall. <number>2</number> <tr>parcel</tr>, block of land. <i>Bahínun sa tulu ka bartíha ang ílang yútà,</i> Their land will be divided into three parcels. <number>3</number> <tr>share</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> make, or cut into planks or boards. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> put a board between two things. <i>Bartihái ang kanal arun makalabang ang kutsi,</i> Place some planks over the canal so the car can pass over it. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>divide</tr>, cut up into pieces or sections. <i>Hukum ang mubartíha (magbartíha) sa yútà nga iapud-apud sa mga anak,</i> A judge will apportion the land that will be distributed among the children. <i>Bartiháa ang kík sa walu ka bátà,</i> Divide the cake among the eight children. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A]</itype> get a share or a part of. <i>Nakabartíha siyag duha ka gatus sa usa ka byáhi,</i> His share in one trip was two hundred pesos.

<p id=2360><form>bartindir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bartender</tr>, one who acts as a bartender. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B36; a]</itype> be the one who mixes the drinks.

<p id=2361><form>bartulína</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cell</tr> for the solitary confinement of a prisoner. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> place in solitary. <i>Ayaw panguláta arun dì ka bartulináhun (ibartulína),</i> Don&apos;t fight with anybody or you will get put in solitary.

<p id=2362><form>bartuníku</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish, the climbing perch: <bio>Anabas testudines</bio>.

<p id=2363><form>baru, báru</form> <pos>n</pos> large cylindrical water or rice <tr>container</tr> made from tin plate or an empty petroleum can, having a capacity of around 5&ndash;6 gallons. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into such a container.

<p id=2364><form>barug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB36; c1P]</itype> <tr>stand</tr>, stand up, cause to do so. <i>Mubarug kita inigtugtug sa nasudnung áwit,</i> Let us stand when the national anthem is played. <i>Mibarug ang íya pagbása níya ug librung law-ay,</i> He got a bone on (lit. his stood up) when he read the dirty book. <i>Nagbarug (nagpabarug) siya sa masakitun,</i> He helped the sick man get to his feet. <number>1a</number> <itype>[B3(1)46; c1]</itype> for a building to stand, be built. <i>Sa katapúsan nagbarug nang balay nga ákung gitúkud,</i> At last the house I constructed was built. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c2]</itype> stand up for one&apos;s opinions or principles. <i>Makabarug ra giyud sa katapúsan ang matúud,</i> Truth prevails in the end. <i>Barugi (ibarug) ang katinúud sa ímung gipanulti,</i> Stand up for the truth of your statement. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> stand for, act as proxy for s.o., <tr>guarantee</tr> for s.o.&apos;s obligations or rights. <i>Akuy nagbarug sa íyang útang sa bangku,</i> I stood as guarantor for his debts to the bank. <i>Gibarugan ku ni tiyù pagpamaláyi nákù kay wà si Tátay,</i> My uncle stood for my father when I made the formal marriage proposal. <pb n=116><number>4</number> <itype>[B12; c1P]</itype> get standing in a community. <i>Ang makabarug (makapabarug) sa táwu ang íyang prupisyun,</i> A man&apos;s profession gives him dignity. <number>5</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> look good in s.t., for s.t. to become one. <i>Dì ka mubarug sa míni kay tag-as kag tul-an,</i> You don&apos;t look good in a mini because you have long legs. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> height. <i>Mubù ug barug,</i> Of a short height. <number>2</number> bearing and features. <i>Ang íyang barug daw istadista,</i> His bearing is statesman-like. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> stature and/or features of a person. <i>Ambúngang pamarug,</i> Handsome features. <number>2</number> one&apos;s standing in a profession or any group. <form>-ánan</form> <pos>n</pos> principle. <i>Táwung way barugánan,</i> A man without principles. <form>(&larr;)-an</form> <pos>a</pos> for a person to have a good bearing. <i>Barúgan nga pagkalaláki,</i> Good-looking man.

<p id=2365><form>barumbáda</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>squander</tr> s.t. valuable. <i>Nagbarumbáda lang ka sa ímung kabílin,</i> You are squandering your inheritance. <i>Ibarumbáda lang níyang íyang nindut nga sinínà, gihímung pambáy,</i> She wastes her beautiful dress, using it around the house.

<p id=2366><form>barumbádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ill-mannered</tr>. <i>Barumbádu nang anáka kay dì mangáyug katahúran sa íyang katiguwángan,</i> That child is ill-mannered because he doesn&apos;t greet his folks. <number>2</number> careless in dress; wearing clothing untidily or in such a way as to destroy it. <i>Barumbádu siyang mamisti. Lúpig pay buguy,</i> He dresses terribly, worse than a tramp. <number>3</number> <tr>vagabond</tr>, <tr>vagrant</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> become ill-mannered. <number>2</number> <itype>[B3(1)6; c]</itype> become careless of one&apos;s dress, treat clothes carelessly. <i>Ayaw ibarumbádu kanang ímung púlung putì sa tubaan,</i> Don&apos;t ruin your white shirt wearing it to the toddy stand. <number>3</number> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> become a vagabond. <i>Nagbarumbádu siya sukad mapapha sa trabáhu,</i> He became a tramp after he lost his job.

<p id=2367><form>barumitir, barumitru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>barometer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6(1)]</itype> measure s.t. with a barometer.

<p id=2368><form>barung</form> <pos>n</pos> fancy, embroidered shirt with long sleeves used for formal wear. It slips over the head and is worn outside of the trousers. <form>&mdash; púlu</form> short-sleeved version of the <ix>barong</ix> with buttons all the way down. <form>&mdash; Tagálug, Pilipínu</form> <xr>= <sc>barung</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, make into <ix>barong.</ix>

<p id=2369><form>barungbárung</form> <xr>= <sc>balungbálung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2370><form>barúnguy</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. flying fish, name given to several smaller species.

<p id=2371><form>barut</form> <pos>n</pos> tobacco that is of the lowest class. <i>Ibaligyag kinilu ang barut,</i> The cheapest k.o. tobacco is sold by the kilogram. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>inferior</tr> in quality. <i>Dalì rang mulubad ang panaptung barut,</i> A cloth which is inferior in quality easily fades. <number>2</number> ugly to look at. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> be, become inferior in quality or ugly. <i>Mibarut (nabarut) ang lamì sa tabákung wà maputus,</i> The tobacco lost its flavor because it hadn&apos;t been wrapped. <i>Nagkabarut ang átung dapit kay midagsang ang iskwátir,</i> This place is turning into an eyesore because of the proliferation of the squatters.

<p id=2372><form>bárut</form> <pos>n</pos> the inedible pulp of the jackfruit which surrounds the edible flesh.

<p id=2373><form>barútu</form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>boat</tr> with a dug-out bottom, plank or sawali sidings, and usually with outriggers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> ride a small boat. <i>Magbarútu ta paingun sa Sámar,</i> Let&apos;s take a boat to Samar. <i>Barutúha (ibarútu) ang masakitun sa píkas pulù,</i> Transport the patient to the other island on a boat. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C12; b6(1)]</itype> go boating. <i>Nakigpamarútu nákù ang ákung trátu,</i> My boy friend asked me to go boating with him.

<p id=2374><form>baryabli</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>changeable</tr>, <tr>fickle</tr>. <i>Ning tyimpung baryabli ang dátù mapubri, ang pubri maadunáhan,</i> In these uncertain times the rich become poor and the poor, rich. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> be <tr>variable</tr>. <i>Ang bili sa palalítun kanúnayng mubaryabli (mabaryabli),</i> Retail prices are constantly fluctuating.

<p id=2375><form>baryu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>barrio</tr>, the smallest territorial unit of government. <number>2</number> the country as opposed to the city or town. <i>Láay ang kinabúhì sa baryu,</i> Life in the country is boring. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB26; a12]</itype> be, become, make into a barrio. <i>Kining urdinansáha ang mibaryu (mipabaryu) sa Pásil,</i> This ordinance made Pasil a barrio. <form>&mdash; nga way kaldíru, k&umacracu;n</form> <pos>n</pos> a barrio without pots, a humorous allusion to the place where a person heads after death. <form>&mdash; kapitan</form> <pos>n</pos> captain of the barrio, the barrio chief. <form>&mdash; kawunsil</form> <pos>n</pos> barrio council, the lawmaking body of the barrio. <form>tininti dil &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> barrio lieutenant, the title formerly given to the head of a barrio. <form>baryubaryu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> <number>1</number> stay in separate groups, not mingling with the rest. <i>Nagbaryubaryu ang mga dátù ug musimus nga bisíta,</i> The rich visitors were in separate groups from the poor visitors. <number>2</number> for each to do his own, not work cooperatively. <i>Magbaryubaryu lang tag plíti,</i> Each of us pays his own fare. <i>Ug makigbaryubaryu mu, maglain lang pud mi,</i> If you want to do it on your own, then we&apos;ll do ours on our own, too. <form>baryuhánun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> resident of rural areas. <i>Kadaghánan sa baryuhánun dinhi magbabául,</i> Most of the barrio folk here are farmers. <form>tagi-</form> <pos>n</pos> resident of a barrio. <form>katagi-</form> <pos>n</pos> barrio-mate.

<p id=2376><form>bás</form> <xr>= <sc>balas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2377><form>bása</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3S; ab2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>read</tr>. <i>Dílì ku makabasa,</i> I cannot read. <i>Wà ku kabasa ánà,</i> I haven&apos;t <pb n=117>had a chance to read that. <i>Basáha ang Biblíya,</i> Read the Bible. <i>Basáhi siya,</i> Read to him. <i>Hibasahan gánì ni Tátay ang sulat sa ímung trátu,</i> If Father reads your boy friend&apos;s love letter. <number>2</number> <tr>interpret</tr> signs, omens. <i>Inighuman ug urasiyun sa básu, basáhun dáyun sa tambálan ang ímung mga sakit,</i> After the shaman says the magic words into a glass, he will read your sickness in it. <number>3</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> <tr>understand</tr>, get the meaning. <i>Nabása ku sa ímung mata nga gihigugma mu siya gihápun,</i> I can read in your eyes that you still love him. <form>hi&N;-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of reading. <form>kabasahun</form> <pos>a</pos> feel very much like reading. <form>balasahun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>reading matter</tr>. <form>mag-r-/l-(&rarr;), um-r-/l-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>readers</tr> of a certain publication. <form>tig-</form> <pos>a</pos> in the habit of reading.&dagger;

<p id=2378><form>basà</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>wet</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>watery</tr>, <tr>soft</tr>. <i>Dì ku gustug kan-un nga basà ang pagkalútù,</i> I don&apos;t like rice with too much water in it. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; ang papil</formx> ruined reputation. <i>Walay musugut níya kay basà na ang íyang papil sa pagkapalikíru,</i> Nobody has accepted his marriage proposals because he has a bad reputation as a philanderer. <number>4</number> <formx>&mdash; ang tíngug</formx> <tr>raspy voiced</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB12; b5]</itype> <tr>wet</tr> s.t., become wet. <i>Ang ulan mauy mubasà (mupabasà) sa pilapilan,</i> The rain will wet the ricefields. <i>Bas-i (bas-a) kanang ímung túhud,</i> Wet your knee a little. <i>Mabasà lang nà siya kun malígù,</i> He doesn&apos;t have intercourse. (Lit. He only gets wet when he takes a bath.) <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> wash s.t. <i>Si Pitra mubasà áning húgawng lamísa,</i> Petra will wash this dirty table. <number>3</number> <itype>[a]</itype> cook, using more water than usual. <i>Gibasà níya paglung-ag ang kan-un,</i> She cooked the rice soft (with more water than usual). <number>4</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> bathe with s.t. on. <i>Bísan sulud sa banyung sirádu nagbasà gihápun,</i> Even in the privacy of her bathroom, she bathed with s.t. on. <number>5</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <formx>&mdash; ang papil</formx> for reputation to be ruined. <form>hi&N;-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> wash s.o.&apos;s feet. <i>Himasái ang mga bátà únà pakatulga,</i> Wash the children&apos;s feet before you put them to sleep. <form>panghi&N;-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> wash one&apos;s feet. <i>Nanghimásà ka na?</i> Have you washed your feet? <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> watery.

<p id=2379><form>básag<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> large, rectangular bamboo hamper for storing dirty clothes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a1]</itype> make into this k.o. hamper.

<p id=2380><form>básag<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB126; a1]</itype> for s.t. not thick to <tr>split</tr> or <tr>shatter</tr>, split or shatter s.t. <i>Kinsay nagbásag sa pinggan?</i> Who broke the plate? <i>Nabásag ang sista,</i> The guitar cracked. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> for the voice to crack. <i>Mabásag ang tíngug kun bayungbáyung na,</i> When you reach adolescence, your voice cracks. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> cracked, shattered. <i>Ayaw gamíta nang sag-úba kay basag na,</i> Don&apos;t use that bamboo container because it is cracked. <number>2</number> <tr>cracked</tr> in voice.

<p id=2381><form>basagbasag</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>garfish</tr>.

<p id=2382><form>basagbásag</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>glabella</tr>, the part of the frontal bone between the two eyebrows, extending a little above and below.

<p id=2383><form>basak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>field</tr> of wet-cultivated rice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> cultivate a rice field. <i>Basakun ku nang usa ka iktariya,</i> I will make that one hectare into a rice field. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> rice field.

<p id=2384><form>basal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>bang</tr> on s.t. to produce noise. <i>Basalun námung táru ug may iskilipsi,</i> We&apos;ll beat the kerosene cans when there&apos;s an eclipse. <pos>n</pos> anything used in banging. <i>Basal sa bumbu,</i> The <tr>drumstick</tr>.

<p id=2385><form>basalyu, basalyus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vassal</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a vassal.

<p id=2386><form>basalyus<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> loyal circle of <tr>followers</tr> (colloquial). <i>Ang basalyus sa pulitiku,</i> The inner circle of the politician&apos;s followers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be, become loyal followers of ...

<p id=2387><form>basangag, basángag</form> <pos>a</pos> a <tr>toothless</tr> mouth that is wide open. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B56; c1]</itype> for a toothless mouth to be wide open, as in laughing. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> for the gum to lose a row of teeth leaving a large gap. <i>Nabasangag íyang lagus,</i> There was a big gap in his gums.

<p id=2388><form>basar</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>shop</tr> or <tr>department store</tr> that sells various kinds of goods. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12b6]</itype> make into a <tr>bazaar</tr>.

<p id=2389><form>basas, básas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b(1)]</itype> have the upper hand, be on the <tr>winning</tr> end. <i>Wà kay basasan ánang bayhána,</i> You have no chance of getting the upper hand with that woman.

<p id=2390><form>basbas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>chop off</tr> nodes, lumps, etc. in wood or bamboo. <i>Gibasbásan níya ang mga lipak pára sa ílang sáwug,</i> He cleaned and smoothed the bamboo strips for the flooring. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> chips, particles removed from wood that has been cleaned. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> carefully smoothed wood. <number>2</number> carefully selected words. <i>Binasbásan ang íyang mga púlung,</i> His words are carefully selected.

<p id=2391><form>basbas<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>husk</tr> corn. <i>Basbasi ang mais,</i> Husk the corn. <pos>n</pos> husks of corn.

<p id=2392><form>basbas<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>train</tr> with constant repetition. <i>Akuy mibasbas níyas ínum,</i> I taught him to drink. <i>Nabasbas ku sa trabáhu human mamatay si Pápa,</i> I learned how to work after Papa died. <i>Gibasbas níya ang irù pagsáyaw,</i> He trained the dog to dance.

<p id=2393><form>basbas<sub>4</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>balasbas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2394><form>basdak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; ac]</itype> be <tr>tight</tr> and <tr>bulging</tr> due to fullness, esp. the stomach. <i>Basdákun tang átung tiyan,</i> Let&apos;s fill our stomachs chock-full. <i>Ginabas ang átung ibasdak sa pansing bag,</i> Let&apos;s fill the punching bag full <pb n=118>of sawdust.

<p id=2395><form>bashuy</form> <xr>= <sc>bas-uy</sc>, <ix>1</ix>.</xr>

<p id=2396><form>bási<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> rice <tr>wine</tr>. <number>2</number> wine made from sugar cane. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a1]</itype> make into rice or sugar cane wine.

<p id=2397><form>bási<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>military base</tr>. <form>&mdash; nabal</form> naval base. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a2b6]</itype> establish a military base.

<p id=2398><form>bási<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> base a conclusion or course of action on s.t. <i>Ang maáyu mauy basíhi sa ímung kinabúhì,</i> Base your life on what is good. <i>Ayaw giyud ibási (basíha<corr>)</corr> ang ímung paghukum sa íyang sulti,</i> Don&apos;t base your decision on what she says. <pos>n</pos> <tr>basis</tr>.

<p id=2399><form>bási<sub>4</sub>, básì</form> <xr>= <sc>básin</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2400><form>basíbas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN2]</itype> <tr>daybreak</tr>. <i>Mibasíbas (namasíbas) nang kabuntágun,</i> Morning was breaking.

<p id=2401><form>basilika</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>basilica</tr>.

<p id=2402><form>basilin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vaseline</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6(1)]</itype> rub vaseline on.

<p id=2403><form>básin</form> <number>1</number> [so-and-so] might happen but I hope not, lest [so-and-so] happen. <i>Pagdala ug páyung, básig muulan,</i> Take along an umbrella. It might rain. <i>Buháta dáyun, básin ug malímut ka,</i> Do it the first thing. You might forget to do it. <number>2</number> I hope [so-and-so]. <i>Básin pag manwildu sila run,</i> I hope they will give us our salary today. <i>Básin ug mahúlug tà ka ánang káhuy,</i> I hope you fall out of that tree. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> try one&apos;s luck. <i>Pamasíni ug paningil, mubáyad tingáli siya,</i> Try your luck collecting from him. He might just pay up. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b8]</itype> pin one&apos;s hopes on s.o. <i>Mamásin ku sa ákung kamanghúran nga maduktur,</i> I am pinning my hopes on my youngest child&apos;s becoming a doctor. <form>panghi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b8]</itype> hope for s.t. to happen. <i>Nanghimásin lang ku nga dílì ulúrun ang mais,</i> I am just hoping that my corn won&apos;t get infested with worms. <form>pamasinbásin</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> try one&apos;s luck with pretty slender chances of success.<i> Mamasinbásin lang ta. Piláhay ug swirtihun,</i> Let&apos;s try a long shot. Who knows, we might be lucky.

<p id=2404><form>basiyar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> transfer the contents of a container to another container. <i>Sáku ang basiyari sa bugas,</i> Transfer the rice to a sack.

<p id=2405><form>basiyu, basíyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> empty <tr>container</tr>. <number>1a</number> empty cartridge shell. <number>2</number> empty <tr>plate</tr> to eat off of. <i>Panghatágig basíyu ang mga bisíta,</i> Give the visitors empty plates. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2; a12]</itype> for containers to be empty. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> set the table. <i>Pamasíyu na,</i> Set the table now. <i>Ang plátung bag-u mauy ibasíyu,</i> Set the new plates on the table. <number>3</number> for machinery (gears, propellers, etc.) not to engage. <i>Mubasíyu ang kadína sa bisiklíta,</i> The bicycle chain fails to engage. <i>Ug mubasíyu ang pála sa bangkà muusab ang inandaran,</i> When the propeller of the boat gets out of the water, the noise of the motor changes in quality.

<p id=2406><form>baska<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for corn or rice to be cooked dry and loose. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; a12b6]</itype> for rice to be cooked dry and loose. <i>Mubaska (mabaska) ang linung-ag nga mais kun kúlang ug túbig,</i> The corn grits will be dry if they lack water.

<p id=2407><form>baska<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB; c1]</itype> for things not liquid to fill s.t. to capacity, be <tr>filled</tr>. <i>Undángi pagtakus sa bugas kung mabaska (mubaska) na ang sáku,</i> Stop pouring the rice into the sack if it is already filled to capacity. <i>Nagbaska ning ákung tíyan,</i> My stomach is full to capacity. <pos>n</pos> <tr>chock-full</tr>, bulging due to fullness.

<p id=2408><form>baskad</form> <xr>= <sc>buskag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2409><form>baskag</form> <xr>= <sc>buskag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2410><form>baskit</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>basket</tr>. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>baskit bul</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> <number>1</number> make into a basket. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <number>a</number> intercept correspondence before it reaches its destination. <i>Gibaskit sa inahan ang suwat sa íyang anak,</i> The mother intercepted the letter for her daughter (and threw it away). <number>b</number> throw away correspondence. <i>Gibaskit lang intáwun ang ákung aplikasyun,</i> My application was just consigned to the circular file.

<p id=2411><form>baskit bul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>basketball game</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; b6]</itype> play basketball. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> basketball court.&dagger;

<p id=2412><form>baskug</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>strong</tr> and <tr>healthy</tr>, <tr>vigorous</tr> in movement. <i>Baskug kaáyu siyang manglihuklihuk kay batan-un pa,</i> He is full of pep because he is still young. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2; a]</itype> be strong and healthy. <i>Ang gátas makabaskug (makapabaskug) sa láwas,</i> Milk makes you strong. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b7c1]</itype> do in a <tr>brisk</tr> and vigorous manner. <i>Baskúga (ibaskug, baskúgi) ang pagsíkad sa bisiklíta,</i> Pedal the bicycle more briskly. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; ang kabúhì</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)]</itype> for the pit of the stomach to palpitate rapidly in pain due to <ix>kabúhì.</ix> <i>Mabaskug ákung kabúhì basta mukáun kug útang tinunuan,</i> The pit of my stomach palpitates fast if I eat vegetable stew cooked in coconut milk.

<p id=2413><form>baskula</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>scales</tr> for weighing, where the fulcrum is not in the middle, e.g., steelyard.

<p id=2414><form>baslan</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>bálus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2415><form>basngag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c]</itype> utter sharp words in anger or impatience. <i>Mamasngag siyag samuksamukun kun magtrabáhu,</i> He snaps at people when he is disturbed while working.

<p id=2416><form>basnig</form> <pos>n</pos> a haul seine net, round in shape, for catching fish which run in schools and can be attracted by light. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> fish with the <ix>basnig</ix>.

<p id=2417><form>basta</form> <number>1</number> <tr>provided that</tr>, <tr>if and only if</tr>. <i>Ihátag ku ning risíbu basta bayran ku nímu,</i> I will give you the receipt provided that you pay me. <i>Bísag magabin-an ka, basta na lang madala ákung gitúgun,</i> Even if it takes half <pb n=119>the night, so long as you do what you were told to do. <number>2</number> [so-and-so] is the case, no matter what anyone says. <i>Na, basta, náa lagi,</i> Well, that&apos;s the way it is. There is, believe it or not. <number>3</number> with commands reminding a person to keep his promise: don&apos;t forget! <i>Basta ayaw giyud ug pakítà dinhig usab,</i> Mark this, don&apos;t ever show your face here again. <i>Basta ha? Muuban ku,</i> Don&apos;t forget now. I want to go along. <form>&mdash; nga, kay &mdash;</form> to make the story short, suffice it to say that. <i>Basta nga (kay basta) pagpanganti níya, nangatágak ang buláwan,</i> Anyway, when he made a wish, gold pieces fell out. <form>&mdash; kay</form> <xr>= <sc>basta</sc>, <ix>1, 2.</ix></xr> <form>bastabasta</form> <pos>a</pos> not very exact, accurate. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> do s.t. in an inaccurate way. <i>Ug bastabastáhun (ibastabasta) nímu, alkansi ta,</i> If you do it any old way, we will lose money. <form>dílì &mdash;</form> not just ordinary. <i>Dílì bastabasta tung kasála,</i> That was no ordinary wedding.

<p id=2418><form>bastanti</form> <tr>sufficient</tr> in amount for a certain need. <i>&lsquo;Ígù ning lima?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Bastanti.&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Will these five do?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Yes. They&apos;re just enough.&rsquo; <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be sufficient. <i>Ang diklarasyun sa tistígus mauy nakabastanti (nakapabastanti) sa ibidinsiya,</i> The declaration of the witness was enough to make the evidence sufficient.

<p id=2419><form>bastar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c5]</itype> be <tr>enough</tr>, <tr>sufficient</tr>. <i>Dílì makabastar (ikabastar) nang kwartáha sa ákung kinahanglanun,</i> That money is not enough for my needs.

<p id=2420><form>bastarda<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> set, be placed across s.t. diagonally. <i>Nagbastarda ang hubug sa dálan,</i> The drunk was lying diagonally across the road. <i>Bastardáha (ibastarda) pagtáud sa rayna ang banda,</i> Put the band diagonally across the queen. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be <tr>crooked</tr>, not straight. <i>Nagbastarda ang linya sa mga kadíti,</i> The cadets&apos; line is crooked.

<p id=2421><form>*bastarda<sub>2</sub></form> <form>íha di-</form> illegitimate daughter.

<p id=2422><form>bastardu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for a course or direction to be off to the side and not directly into. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56; a1]</itype> be off to one side. <i>Nagbastardu ámung ági tungud sa sulug,</i> Our course was off to one side because of the current.

<p id=2423><form>*bastardu<sub>2</sub></form> <form>íhu di-</form> illegitimate child.

<p id=2424><form>bastid</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for a bulb to be burnt out. <number>2</number> be out in blackjack. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>spurn</tr> a suitor (slang). <i>Gibastid si Husi sa íyang gipangulitawhan,</i> The girl Jose is courting spurned him. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> for a bulb to burn out. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> go over twenty-one in blackjack. <i>Wà ka ba mabastid?</i> Didn&apos;t you go over twenty-one?

<p id=2425><form>bastidur<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>birsu<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=2426><form>bastidur<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> rounded frame for use in embroidery. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> use, make into an embroidery frame.

<p id=2427><form>bastika</form> <pos>n</pos> the hard core of thick abaca rope which remains when the rope is worn out. <i>Ayaw ilábay ang písì. Magámit pa ang bastika niíni,</i> Don&apos;t throw the rope away. The hard core can still be used.

<p id=2428><form>bastipul</form> <xr>= <sc>bustipul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2429><form>bastiyan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> man&apos;s name. <number>2</number> euphemism for <ix>bastus.</ix>

<p id=2430><form>bastruk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> strike s.o. with the butt of a gun. <i>Bastrúkun ku siya ning karbin,</i> I&apos;ll strike him with the butt of this carbine.

<p id=2431><form>bastun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>walking stick</tr>, usually polished and sometimes with carved designs. <number>2</number> package, bar, long like a <tr>cane</tr>. <i>Usa ka bastung sabun,</i> A long bar of soap. <i>Usa ka bastung sigarilyu,</i> A carton of cigarettes. <form>&mdash; di San Husi</form> <xr>= <sc>kilála</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> use, make into a cane. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> hit with a cane. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make into long bar-shaped cakes or packages. <form>-íru</form> <pos>n</pos> jailer. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> be a jailer.

<p id=2432><form>bastus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> acting in a morally <tr>reprehensible</tr> way. <i>Kabastus, mangílad ug buta,</i> How reprehensible! Cheating a blind man! <i>Nagkalingaw ug isturyag bastus,</i> They were amusing themselves telling dirty stories. <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> to be morally reprehensible. <form>paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> act in a reprehensible way, treat, regard s.o. as reprehensible. <i>Nagpakabastus ka ánang ímung pangitsúra,</i> The way you&apos;re dressed, you look reprehensible.

<p id=2433><form>bastus<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> clubs in the Spanish cards. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b4(1)]</itype> for a club to be drawn. <i>Hibastusan ang ákung karta,</i> I drew a club, <ix>or</ix> My cards were beaten by a club.

<!-- Fixed order of pos -->

<p id=2434><form>básu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> drinking glass. <number>2</number> the Virgin Mary (Biblical). <i>Básung ispirituhánun,</i> The Spiritual vessel (of God&apos;s grace). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a drinking glass. <form>binasúan</form> <pos>n</pos> dance with glasses on the hands and head. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> dance the glass dance.

<p id=2435><form>bas-ug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>heave</tr> a load onto the shoulders. <i>Siya ra ang mibas-ug sa dakung bukag,</i> He heaved the large basket onto his shoulders by himself.

<p id=2436><form>basúka</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bazooka</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> fire a bazooka at.

<p id=2437><form>básul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; bc3]</itype> <tr>blame</tr> s.o. for a fault. <i>Mubásul aku nímu,</i> I will blame you. <i>Ang draybir ang gibásul (gibasúlan) sa aksidinti,</i> The driver was blamed for the accident. <i>Unsa may ikabásul nímu nákù nga nagtúman man ku?</i> What are you blaming me for, since I did what you said? <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b3]</itype> repent, regret having done s.t. <i>Nagbásul kung walà mupadáyun pagtuun,</i> I regretted that I did not continue my studies. <i>Wà kuy kabasúlan sa ákung gibúhat,</i> I did nothing I regret. <form>pag-</form> <pos>n</pos> repentance.

<pb n=120>

<p id=2438><form>básul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. hairy <tr>caterpillar</tr> with hair that produces an itchy prick. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4b4]</itype> have <ix>básul</ix> on it, be pricked by a <ix>básul.</ix> <i>Gibásul ang bayábas,</i> The guava tree has caterpillars on it. <i>Hibasulan ku,</i> I was pricked by a <ix>básul.</ix>

<p id=2439><form>básul<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>whitlow</tr>, an inflammation at the edge of the finger- or toenails. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a4b4]</itype> become, have a whitlow. <i>Mabásul nà ug dílì tambálan,</i> That will turn into a whitlow if you don&apos;t put medicine on it. <i>Dì ku makatayip kay gibásul (gibasúlan) ang ákung tudlù,</i> I can&apos;t type because I have an inflammation on my finger.

<p id=2440><form>básun</form> <xr>= <sc>básin</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2441><form>basúni</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>thorn</tr> lodged in the flesh. <number>2</number> s.t. which causes a sharp emotional pain. <i>Basúni sa ákung dughan ang ímung pag-ayad,</i> It was a thorn in my heart that you spurned my love. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)6]</itype> for a thorn to be lodged in the flesh. <i>Mubasúni ang tunuk sa tuyum sa ímung tiil,</i> The sea urchin&apos;s thorn will lodge in your foot. <i>Nabasúni sa láwas ang bála,</i> The bullet was lodged in the body.

<p id=2442><form>basúra</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>garbage</tr>. <number>2</number> one&apos;s <tr>dirty</tr> secrets, kept from the public. <i>Nangahúkad ang ílang mga basúra,</i> They washed their dirty linen in public. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> <number>1</number> make into a garbage container. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> throw s.t. into the garbage. <form>basurahan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>receptacle for garbage</tr>.

<p id=2443><form>basuríru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>garbage collector</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2b]</itype> be, make into a garbage collector.

<p id=2444><form>bas-uy</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> simple <tr>stew</tr> made of pork flesh and innards, fried in spices and thrown in boiling water, usually prepared at feasts to be given to the helpers. <number>2</number> stew made from bananas or tubers boiled in water and sweetened. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make <ix>bas-uy.</ix>

<p id=2445><form>baswat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>lift</tr> or <tr>carry</tr> s.t. heavy, usually by holding the bottom. <i>Gibaswat sa nubyu ang nubya padúng sa naghulat nga awtu,</i> The bridegroom carried the bride to the waiting automobile.

<p id=2446><form>basyaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> for a depressed area to gather water. <i>Mubasyaw (mabasyaw) ang nátad inig-ulan,</i> The yard becomes a pool when it rains. <pos>n</pos> standing water that gathers on a depressed area.

<p id=2447><form>bat</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>baseball bat</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>bat</tr> a ball.

<p id=2448><form>bát<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>butt</tr> of a gun. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> make a butt.

<p id=2449><form>bát<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>bátir<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=2450><form>bát<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>balat</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2451><form>báta<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>divide</tr> into equal groups or portions for sale. <i>Batáha sa dúsi ka bugkus ang kamunggay,</i> Divide the vegetables into twelve equal bundles. <pos>n</pos> portion for sale. <form>batabáta</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> estimate the quantity of s.t. <i>Batabatáha ang íyang pangidarun,</i> Estimate how old she is.

<p id=2452><form>báta<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> woman&apos;s nightgown. <form>&mdash; dibanyu</form> bathrobe. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, make into a nightgown. <i>Dì siya mubáta ug nipis,</i> She won&apos;t wear a flimsy nightgown.

<p id=2453><form>bátà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>child</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>son</tr> or <tr>daughter</tr>. <number>3</number> <tr>mistress</tr>, <tr>concubine</tr>. <number>4</number> <tr>bodyguard</tr>, <tr>protege</tr> of s.o. of high rank. <i>Nag-abusar ábi bátà man sa prisidinti,</i> He&apos;s abusive because he&apos;s the president&apos;s protege. <form>&mdash; nga lintì</form> tough, ruffian. <form>kanay &mdash;</form> attaboy, that&apos;s the way you should be. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>young</tr>, in the early period of life or growth. <i>Bákang bátà,</i> Young cow, heifer. <i>Matul-id nímung hiwing káhuy kun bátà pa,</i> You can straighten a crooked tree while it&apos;s young. <i>Bátà siyang tan-áwun,</i> She looks very young. <number>2</number> a <tr>novice</tr> in the field. <i>Bátà pa íyang pagkaduktur,</i> He&apos;s still a novice at practicing medicine. <number>3</number> for the hour to be early. <i>Bátà pa ang kagabhíun,</i> The night is still young. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2; a]</itype> get to be young-looking. <i>Mibátà kang tan-áwun niánang sinináa,</i> You look young in that dress. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> make s.o. his mistress or protegee. <i>Nakabátà kug mistísa,</i> I had a mistress with a Spanish blood. <i>Matun íyang gibátà,</i> He made a goon into his protege. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> rear s.o. from childhood. <i>Gibátà ku ni Tiyù pagkamatay ni Tátay,</i> My uncle took care of me after my father died. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1; c1]</itype> grow up in a certain atmosphere. <i>Nagbatà aku sa kakabus,</i> I grew up in poverty. <i>Bataa (ibatà) siya sa kabuútan,</i> Rear him in an atmosphere of honesty. <form>paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> act like, consider, treat like a child. <i>Ayaw ku pakabatáa. Antígu na bítaw ku,</i> Don&apos;t treat me like a baby. I know how already! <form>batàbátà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> right-hand man. <number>2</number> bodyguard. <number>3</number> protege. <number>4</number> errand boy, right-hand man. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a1]</itype> request s.o. to run an errand for him. <i>Ibatàbátà ra kug palit ug bínu,</i> Do me a favor and get some wine. <form>batàbatà</form> <pos>n</pos> younger. <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>binátà</sc>.</xr> <form>batàbataun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> childish. <number>2</number> fond of children. <form>-in-</form> <pos>a</pos> acting like a child. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> act like a child. <i>Ayawg ibinátà (binatáa) ang ímung sinultihan,</i> Don&apos;t talk in a childish way. <i>Ug binatáan ku níya, mawálà ákung kasukù,</i> When she acts like a little child to me, my anger vanishes. <form>binat-an</form> <pos>n</pos> way s.o. takes care of children. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> childhood friend. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> children. <form>batan-un</form> <pos>a</pos> young, youthful. <i>Batan-un pa siyang naminyù,</i> He got married while he was still quite young. <form>kabatan-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the days of one&apos;s youth. <i>Kun handúmun nátù ang átung kabatan-un,</i> When we reminisce about our youth. <number>2</number> state of being young. <form>-ut(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> naughty child, usually used as a term of address. <i>Uy bataut ka,</i> Hey, you naughty boy! <pos>a</pos> childish <pb n=121>in behavior. <i>Dalága ka na piru bataut gihápun,</i> You&apos;re grown-up, but you act like a child. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become childish.

<p id=2454><form>Bataan</form> <pos>n</pos> Bataan, a province in Southwestern Luzon. <form>&mdash; dí</form> <pos>n</pos> Bataan Day.

<p id=2455><form>batad</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sorghum</tr>, k.o. coarse grass used for forage: <bio>Andropogon sorghum</bio>.

<p id=2456><form>batadbátad</form> <pos>n</pos> the space between the anus and the genitalia.

<p id=2457><form>bátak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB12; a]</itype> <tr>split</tr> s.t. long or <tr>break</tr> s.t. open; be split, broken open. <i>Nagbátak siyag kawáyan,</i> He is splitting bamboo. <i>Ayaw batáka ang nangkà kay hilaw pa,</i> Don&apos;t split the jackfruit open because it is still unripe. <i>Palakul ang ibátak sa káhuy,</i> Split the wood lengthwise with an axe. <number>2</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> pay off debts by splitting coconuts or bamboo. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>cracked</tr>, <tr>broken</tr>. <i>Batak ang dakung kaldíru,</i> The large kettle is cracked. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> board where s.t. is sliced, esp. in circumcisions. <form>l-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> clumps of bamboo from which bamboo stems are usually taken. <number>2</number> debt to be paid off by splitting bamboo or coconuts open.

<p id=2458><form>batakan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> measuring stick, <tr>ruler</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>principle</tr> by which judgment of s.t. is gauged. <i>Ang púlung sa Diyus mauy batakan sa kinabúhì,</i> Our lives are based on the word of God. <form>&mdash; nga baláud</form> <pos>n</pos> basic law, the Constitution.

<p id=2459><form>batakbatak</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. frog that croaks very loudly. <number>2</number> loquacious person.

<p id=2460><form>batal</form> <pos>n</pos> hardened part on an otherwise soft or medium-soft surface. <i>Dúnay batal sa abukádu,</i> There was a hard spot in the avocado. <i>Dúnay batal sa kutsun,</i> There was a hard lump in the mattress. <i>Mga batal sa samad,</i> Clots of blood in the wound. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6]</itype> <number>1</number> be s.t. hard in an otherwise soft area. <i>Mibatal ang pistúla sa íyang bulsa,</i> One could feel a hard place in his pocket where his pistol was. <number>2</number> be, become <tr>brazen</tr>. <i>Mibatal (nabatal) na ning náwung kug síging pangútang,</i> I have become shameless from constantly borrowing money. <form>&mdash; ang náwung</form> <pos>a</pos> shameless, hardened to insults. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> stay put, refuse to move or budge from a position. <i>Nagpabatal lang siya sa íyang gilingkúran bísag gipasíbug,</i> He did not budge from his seat even when he was asked to move a little. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> flat floor of wood or stone raised above the ground found at the back of the kitchen, used for storing water jars, and washing. It usually has steps going down. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make, add a <ix>batalan.</ix>

<p id=2461><form>bataliyun</form> <xr>= <sc>batalyun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2462><form>batalya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>battle</tr>. <number>1a</number> <tr>fight</tr> (humorous usage). <number>2</number> <tr>soldiers</tr> arrayed for battle. <number>3</number> any large group of persons going s.w. or grouped together. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> have a <tr>fight</tr>, <tr>conflict</tr>, or battle. <i>Kasayu ninyung nagbatalya ganína,</i> How early you were at it this morning! <form>-dur(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> one who fights for principles, causes, etc. <i>Batalyadur kaáyu nang bayhána,</i> That woman is a great fighter.

<p id=2463><form>batalyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>battalion</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a2]</itype> make into a battalion.

<p id=2464><form>*batánas</form> <form>way &mdash;</form> <tr>ill-bred</tr>, no manners (euphemism for <ix>way batásan</ix>).

<p id=2465><form>batang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>apáli</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2466><form>batang<sub>2</sub>, bátang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>lie</tr> <tr>prostrate</tr>. <i>Nagbatang na ang masakitun ug pila ka búlan sa banig,</i> The patient has been bed-ridden for several months. <i>Ibatang ang ímung láwas sa baybáyun,</i> Lie down on the beach. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> keep <tr>still</tr> without moving. <i>Ipabatang (pabatanga) ímung tuu, suntuk sa wala,</i> Keep your right arm in place and hit with your left. <number>2</number> <tr>stay</tr> in a place permanently. <i>Pabatangun ku nímu dinhi hangtud sa hangtud?</i> Will you make me stay in this place forever? <number>3</number> stick around s.w. without doing anything. <i>Nagpabatang ka dihà nga daghan man tag trabáhu?</i> Why are you sitting around there doing nothing when there is so much to do? <form>pa-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. longline fishing, usually for sharks.

<p id=2467><form>bátang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>log</tr>. <form>tulud &mdash;</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tulud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2468><form>bat-ang</form> <xr>= <sc>balat-ang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2469><form>batangbátang</form> <pos>n</pos> hook of an earring.

<p id=2470><form>batanggas</form> <pos>n</pos> things that originate in the province of Batangas. <number>1</number> <tr>jackknife</tr>. <number>2</number> a breed of chicken popularly used in cockfighting because of its remarkable strength and fierceness. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> stab with, make into a jackknife.

<p id=2471><form>batangginya</form> <pos>n</pos> native of the province of Batangas (female). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be, become a <tr>Batangue</tr>ña.

<p id=2472><form>bátas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> cut down bamboo poles. <number>2</number> split bamboo poles. <number>3</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> pay off a debt by splitting or cutting down bamboos. <i>Ákù lang batásan ning ákung útang nímu,</i> I&apos;ll pay off my debt to you by cutting bamboos down.

<p id=2473><form>batásan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>custom</tr>, usual way of acting. <i>Batásan námung mangadyì únà mangáun,</i> It&apos;s our custom to pray before eating. <number>2</number> one&apos;s <tr>manners</tr>, way of dealing with s.o. <i>Maáyung batásan,</i> Good way of dealing with people. <i>Way batásan,</i> Having no manners. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; c1]</itype> make doing s.t. a habit. <i>Nabatásan na sa mga kutsíru ang pagpílì sa ílang sakay,</i> The rig drivers have gotten into the habit of choosing their passengers. <i>Ibatásan (batasánun) ku sa ákung mga anak ang kamatinahúrun,</i> I will train my children to be respectful. <pb n=122><form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> proper behavior, the social conventions. <i>Pamatásan sa mga militar ang pagsaludar,</i> Saluting is a part of military courtesy. <pos>n</pos> set of customs.

<p id=2474><form>bátaw</form> <xr>= <sc>bulay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2475><form>batáyan</form> <pos>n</pos> a bird trap made of bamboo with a bait or bird decoy. The bird is caught when it alights on the trigger mechanism which snaps a noose as the bird perches on it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a]</itype> make into a <ix>batáyan.</ix> <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> catch birds with a <ix>batáyan.</ix>&dagger;

<p id=2476><form>batbat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>relate</tr> or <tr>describe</tr> an event in detail. <i>Batbáta (ibatbat) sa hukmánan ang ímung nasaksihan,</i> Explain to the court what you saw.

<p id=2477><form>bathálà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>God</tr>. <i>Makagagáhum ang (si) Bathálà,</i> God is all powerful. <number>2</number> a <tr>god</tr>. <i>Ang salapì nahímung bathálà álang kaníya,</i> Money became his god. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> worship like a god. <i>Ikaw ang ákung bathaláun (ibathálà) hangtud sa hangtud,</i> I will worship you like a god forever. <form>paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> act like a god, treat like a god. <i>Ángay nga pakabathaláun ang bána sa asáwa,</i> It is only right that a wife treat her husband like a god. <form>Culu-</form> <pos>n</pos> false gods, idols. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> worship false gods.

<p id=2478><form>bathay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)46N; b6]</itype> s.t. which appears prominently on part of one&apos;s body. <i>Mibathay (namathay) ang ugat sa íyang agtang,</i> Veins stood out prominently on his forehead.

<p id=2479><form>batì</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>inferior</tr> in quality. <i>Ayaw pagpalit ug sinínang batì,</i> Don&apos;t buy clothes which are inferior in quality. <number>2</number> <tr>ugly</tr> (derisive). <i>Batig dagway,</i> Ugly in face. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> for s.t. to get to be of poor quality. <i>Mabatì ang lamì sa tinúlang isdag kaugmaan,</i> Fish stew develops a bad flavor if you keep it till the following day. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; a1]</itype> get to be ugly. <i>Mauy nakabatì (nakapabatì) sa átung syudad ning mga balungbálung,</i> These shacks are what makes our city ugly.

<p id=2480><form>bátì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23; a12]</itype> feel s.t., have symptoms of a sickness. <i>Dì ka mubátig kasakit íning dagúma,</i> You won&apos;t feel anything from this needle. <i>Gibátì ba nímu ang kahapdus?</i> Did you feel the pain? <number>2a</number> <itype>[a4]</itype> feel s.t. that affects the whole body. <i>Gibátì siya ug katugnaw,</i> She felt cold. <number>2b</number> be sensitive to, emotionally disturbed by. <i>Batíun kug kamíngaw,</i> I feel lonely. <number>3</number> <itype>[A123S; a2b2]</itype> <tr>hear</tr>. <i>Dì siya makabatì kay bungul,</i> He cannot hear because he is deaf. <i>Nabátì níya ang dahúnug sa litì,</i> He heard the rumbling sound of the thunder. <i>Hingbatian kung ílang panagsulti,</i> I overheard their conversation. <number>4</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> sympathize with. <i>Mubátì sa ímung kalisud ang ímung kadúgù,</i> Your kin will sympathize with you in your hardship. a audible. <i>Bátì kaáyu sa ámù ang ímung katáwa,</i> We can clearly hear your laughter from our house. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <tr>be in labor</tr>. <i>Nagbatì na siya. Dad-a sa matirniti,</i> She&apos;s in labor. Bring her to the clinic. <i>Hináut nga láki nang íyang gibatì,</i> I hope it&apos;s a boy she is in labor with. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a1]</itype> <tr>perceive</tr> s.t. through physical sensation. <i>Pamatía ang ákung pulsu,</i> Feel my pulse. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2S; a]</itype> listen. <i>Wà ka ba mamátì sa ákung sulti?</i> Weren&apos;t you listening to my story? <i>Pamatíun ta ning plakáha,</i> Let&apos;s listen to this record. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>feeling</tr>, state of the body. <i>Láin ang ákung památì karun,</i> I feel rather unwell today. <number>2</number> <tr>opinion</tr>. <i>Unsay památì mu báhin niánà?</i> What is your opinion about that? <form>pani&N;-</form> <xr>= <sc>pa&N;-</sc>, <ix>2.</ix></xr> <form>pabatìbátì</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> say s.t. bad within s.o.&apos;s earshot. <i>Pabatìbatíun ku níyag mga púlung nga pahiubus,</i> He says hurting words within my hearing. <number>2</number> say or ask for s.t. by <tr>hints</tr> with indirection. <i>Mupabatìbátì siya nímu kay nakagustu siya sa ímung rilu,</i> He will give you hints (lit. let you overhear) because he likes your watch. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>beloved person</tr>. <i>Binátì nga asáwa,</i> Beloved wife. <form>-l-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> feelings, sensitivities. <i>Gisamáran mung ákung balatían,</i> You hurt my feelings. <number>2</number> <tr>sickness</tr>. <i>Balatían nga tísis,</i> The sickness of T.B. <form>ma-in-un</form> <pos>a</pos> sympathetic, showing one&apos;s sufferings. <form>pag-</form> <pos>n</pos> feelings toward s.o.&dagger;

<p id=2481><form>bátì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>hog cholera</tr>, a deadly disease affecting pigs. <number>2</number> by extension, <tr>fowl cholera</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infected with hog cholera.

<p id=2482><form>batibáti</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> do s.t. <tr>severely</tr> and <tr>repeatedly</tr> to s.o. <i>Akuy nagbatibáti ug kuláta sa kawatan,</i> I rained blows on the thief. <i>Pastilan níyang nakabatibáti ug kasábà,</i> My! How mercilessly she scolded them! <i>Gibatibáti silag dril,</i> They were drilled mercilessly.

<p id=2483><form>batid</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>skilled</tr>, having <tr>specialized</tr> training. <i>Batid kaáyu siya sa makina,</i> He&apos;s an expert on engines. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; a2]</itype> get to be an <tr>expert</tr> or a <tr>specialist</tr>. <i>Akuy mibatid (mipabatid) níya sa pangisdà,</i> I made him an expert in fishing. <form>paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> make oneself expert in. <i>Nagpakabatid ku sa pyánu,</i> I made myself expert in piano playing.

<p id=2484><form>batíis</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>leg</tr>, esp. the <tr>lower leg</tr>. <number>2</number> legs of pants. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a leg for toys, trousers, etc. <i>Kining bulpin ang batiísun (ibatíis) sa munyíka,</i> Make these ballpoint pens into the legs for your doll. <form>hi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> wash s.o.&apos;s legs. <i>Himatiísi ang bátà,</i> Wash the child&apos;s legs. <form>panghi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b]</itype> wash one&apos;s legs. <i>Manghimatíis ku únà matúlug,</i> <pb n=123>I&apos;ll wash my legs before I go to bed. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having good strong legs.

<p id=2485><form>batikan, batíkan</form> <pos>a</pos> for a person to be <tr>famous</tr>. <i>Ang batíkang aktur sa mga lílas dramátik,</i> The famous movie actor. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; c1]</itype> become famous.

<p id=2486><form>Batikánu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Vatican</tr>.

<p id=2487><form>batikubra</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>snake</tr>.

<p id=2488><form>batikúla</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>crupper</tr>, part of saddle or harness which goes around the tail. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put on, make into a crupper.

<p id=2489><form>batikúlun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>gizzard</tr>, the second stomach of a bird. <number>2</number> <tr>stomach</tr> (humorous usage). <i>Dì musakit ang batikúlun kug musugut kag sa dílì,</i> It won&apos;t bother my stomach (lit. gizzard) whether you accept me or not.

<p id=2490><form>batil<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> full-bodied <tr>cargo boat</tr> without outriggers. It moves by means of a sail or an engine.

<p id=2491><form>batil<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>beat</tr> or <tr>whip</tr> eggs, cream, etc. <i>Batila ang sikwáti úsà iságul,</i> Whip up the chocolate before mixing it in. <i>Tubag batilan sa tungug, sa úlu námù makahúngug,</i> Toddy with mangrove bark mixed into it goes to the head. <pos>n</pos> <tr>utensil</tr> for beating.

<p id=2492><form>batimbátim</form> <xr>= <sc>batinbátin<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=2493><form>bátin<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>hide and seek</tr> played by teams. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12C2; b6]</itype> play <ix>bátin.</ix> <form>batinbátin<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>bátin<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=2494><form>bátin<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac2]</itype> <tr>call</tr> a pig. <i>Batína ang bábuy arun kalawgan,</i> Call the pigs so I can feed them. <pos>n</pos> the call or summons for a pig. <form>-an, -an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. beaten to call pigs.

<p id=2495><form>batinbátin<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> fruit of fruiting trees or vegetables in the early stages of formation. <i>Daghan nang mga batinbátin ang mangga,</i> There are lots of young fruits on the mango tree. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> grow into young fruits. <i>Mibatinbátin na ang mga búnga sa tsíkus,</i> The sapodilla fruits have made their appearance now.

<p id=2496><form>báting</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> go <tr>swimming</tr>. <i>Magbáting ta sa Talísay,</i> Let&apos;s go bathing in Talisay. <form>&mdash; sut, siyut</form> <pos>n</pos> bathing suit. <form>san &mdash;</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> take a sunbath.

<p id=2497><form>batingaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>mousetrap</tr> with a trigger mechanism that snaps. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> catch with a mousetrap. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> make into a mousetrap.

<p id=2498><form>batinggílan</form> <xr>= <sc>batinggúlan</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>batinggul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2499><form>batinggul</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>headstrong</tr>, <tr>stubborn</tr>, not listening to advice. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> <xr>= <sc>batinggul</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> get to be stubborn. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> stubbornness.

<p id=2500><form>bátir<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>baseball bat</tr>. <number>2</number> one at bat. <number>3</number> one&apos;s turn in batting. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> strike with a bat.

<p id=2501><form>bátir<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>butter</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; c]</itype> put butter on.

<p id=2502><form>batiri, batiríya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>battery</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> use a battery, put a battery in.

<p id=2503><form>batirplay urkids</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>orchid</tr>.

<p id=2504><form>batirul</form> <pos>n</pos> tall <tr>pot</tr> made of clay or metal for cooking chocolate. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> cook in the <tr>chocolate pot</tr>. <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put one&apos;s hands on the hips like the handle of a chocolate pot. <i>Nagbinatirul siyag bantay sa nagtrabáhu,</i> She stood with her hands on her hips while she watched the workers. <pos>n</pos> medium-sized <tr>fish corral</tr> in the shape of a chocolate pot, put in 1 to 3 fathoms of water.

<p id=2505><form>batis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>batiste</tr>, a fine, thin linen or muslin.

<p id=2506><form>batiwtiw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tailor bird</tr>, the song of which is popularly said to be, &lsquo;<ix>Dakug putus</ix>&rsquo;, &lsquo;Having a large penis&rsquo;: <bio>Orthotomus atrogularis</bio>.

<p id=2507><form>batiyà</form> <pos>n</pos> a shallow and wide <tr>basin</tr> usually with a crumpled side for laundry. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a1]</itype> make this sort of <tr>wash basin</tr>.

<p id=2508><form>batsi<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>potholes</tr> in streets. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; c1]</itype> for roads to have potholes, make potholes. <i>Mubatsi (mabatsi) ang kalsádag síging lunúpan,</i> A road that gets flooded will get full of potholes. <form>batsihun</form> <pos>a</pos> full of potholes.

<p id=2509><form>batsi<sub>2</sub></form> (slang, from <ix>sibat</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> <tr>get out</tr> of s.t., <tr>run away</tr>. <i>Mibatsi si Títù sa íyang buluhatun,</i> Tito bugged out of the chores. <i>Nakabatsi ang mamumúnù sa prisuhan,</i> The prisoner escaped from the jail. <i>Batsíhan pa nà nímung ímung asáwa,</i> If you just run away from your wife. <i>Ákung ibatsi ang ákung trátu,</i> I will run away with my girl friend. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ac1]</itype> steal, get s.t. by foul or illegal means. <i>Si Pilu ang mubatsi sa ilimnun,</i> Pilo will steal the drinks.

<p id=2510><form>batsíhì</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible marine nerite <tr>snails</tr>.

<p id=2511><form>batsilyir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>B.A. degree</tr>. <number>2</number> one who holds the B.A.

<!-- Sense n6 partly treated as subentry -->

<p id=2512><form>batu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>rock</tr>, <tr>stone</tr>, <tr>pebble</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>precious stone</tr>, <tr>kidney stone</tr>. <number>3</number> s.t. that has hardened. <i>Batu na ang kukakúla,</i> The coca-cola has frozen solid now. <number>4</number> <tr>piece</tr> used in a game of checkers, chess, <i>sungkà,</i> or any game that uses pieces. <number>5</number> <tr>flint</tr> in a lighter. <number>6</number> <formx>-ng búhì</formx> <pos>n</pos> k.o. stone which is heavy, compact, hard, whitish, and which pops when heated. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; a1P]</itype> harden into stone. <i>Ayaw paulani ang simintu kay mubatu nà,</i> Don&apos;t expose the cement to the rain because it will harden. <i>Batuhun pagpagáhì ang balikutsa,</i> Let the coconut candy harden like stone. <number>2</number> <itype>[AP; a2P]</itype> <number>a</number> stand stock-still like a stone. <i>Mubatu (mupabatu) man lang ug sugúun,</i> He just stands there when he&apos;s told to do s.t. <number>b</number> harden oneself to s.t. <i>Nabatu na ang nawung niánang bayhána,</i> That woman has become hardened to insults. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put a stone in jewelry. <i>Úpal ang ibatu sa singsing,</i> Use opal for a stone in your ring. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <pb n=124>put as an anchor or sinker. <i>Batuhi ug dakù,</i> Use a big stone for sinker. <number>5</number> <itype>[b6(1)]</itype> put a flint in a lighter. <form>&mdash; baláni</form> <pos>n</pos> magnet, lodestone. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a1]</itype> become a magnet, impart magnetic force to s.t. <form>batubalaníhun</form> <pos>a</pos> magnetizing. <i>Batubalaníhung pahiyum,</i> A magnetic smile. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> to throw stones at. <i>Batúun (batúan) nátù ang irung búang,</i> Let&apos;s stone the mad dog. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> line, pave s.t. with stones. <i>Batúhi ang karsáda,</i> Pave the road with stones. <pos>n</pos> the action of stoning. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> anchor, sinker. <number>2</number> anchor man in a relay. <i>Si Grig ang ílang pamatu (pangbatu) sa lumbà,</i> Greg is their anchor man in the relay. <number>3</number> a person who can be relied upon in emergencies, the best bet in a contest. <number>4</number> spending money. <i>Náa bay pamatu nímu?</i> Do you have any money to spend? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> <number>1</number> use or make as anchor or sinker. <number>2</number> be anchor man, best bet. <number>3</number> use for spending money. <form>batubátu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> anchor. <number>2</number> sinker on a fishing line. <number>3</number> stone used for artificial jewelry. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> put, use as a sinker. <i>Batubatúhan ang iring nga lumsan,</i> Put a sinker on the cat you are going to drown. <number>2</number> pelt with stones. <number>3</number> put in a stone in fancy jewelry. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <ix>úbi</ix> that is firm and round or oval-shaped. <form>batuun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> full of rocks, stones. <number>2</number> pimply-faced. <number>3</number> fruits of seeds or hardened parts.&dagger;

<p id=2513><form>batu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> borrow money, buy s.t., usually basic commodities, on credit. <i>Mubatu kug duha ka gantang bugas,</i> I&apos;ll buy two gantas of rice on credit. <i>Magbatu kug kinyintus kang Dun Pakítu kay magbáy ku,</i> I&apos;ll borrow five hundred pesos from Don Paquito to build my house.

<p id=2514><form>batúan</form> <pos>n</pos> good-sized basket of any shape, but shallow, usually loosely woven, with no cover, used as a container for farm produce. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a1]</itype> make or use a <ix>batúan.</ix>

<p id=2515><form>batubára</form> <pos>n</pos> boom, a spar extending along the bottom of the sail attached to the mast. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac1]</itype> make into, attach a boom of this sort.

<p id=2516><form>batud</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish.

<p id=2517><form>bátud</form> <pos>n</pos> grub of a coconut beetle (<ix>bakukang</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> <number>1</number> be infested with <ix>bátud.</ix> <number>2</number> be <tr>crazy</tr>. <i>Gibátud ka dihà?</i> Are you crazy?

<p id=2518><form>bátug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>perch</tr> on s.t., <tr>alight</tr> to perch. <i>Mibátug ang tulábung sa bukubuku sa kábaw,</i> The heron landed on the carabao&apos;s back. <i>Ang panan-aw ni Husi didtu magbatug sa gwápang babáyi,</i> Joseph let his gaze rest on the beautiful woman. <i>Tabúning pagkáun arun dì batúgan sa lángaw,</i> Cover the food or the flies will get on it. <number>2</number> for children to go home at supper time. <i>Uy! Památug na mu! Urasiyun na,</i> Hey! You kids go home now. It&apos;s time for prayers.

<p id=2519><form>bátug<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>bat-ug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2520><form>bat-ug</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>barracuda</tr>.

<!-- Moved number 1 to first verb sense -->

<p id=2521><form>bátuk<sub>1</sub></form> <tr>against</tr>, <tr>versus</tr>. <i>Ang áway ni Balug bátuk Di Liyun,</i> The fight of Balug versus De Leon. <i>Tambal bátuk sa sip-un,</i> A medicine against colds. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23C12; b(1)]</itype> <tr>oppose</tr>. <i>Dì aku mubátuk sa ákung mga labaw,</i> I will not oppose my superiors. <i>Ayaw batúki ang pagbuut sa ímung ginikánan,</i> Don&apos;t oppose the wishes of your parents. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> respond to a hurt by being cold or silent to the perpetrator. <i>Dílì maáyung magbátuk sa ginikánan kun kasab-an,</i> It&apos;s no good to feel resentment against your parents if they scold you. <form>ma-in-un</form> <pos>a</pos> resentful, tending to respond to slights by coldness.

<p id=2522><form>bátuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a small area different in color or texture from the background. <i>Ang irù dúnay itum nga bátuk sa masigkakílid,</i> The dog has a black spot on either side. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> dye s.t.

<p id=2523><form>bátuk<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>balalátuk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2524><form>batul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for smooth or soft surfaces to have hard spots. <number>2</number> hard, <tr>brazen</tr> in character. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B4]</itype> get to have rough spots. <i>Nagkabátul man ning manggáha,</i> This mango is full of hard spots. <number>2</number> <itype>[B3N]</itype> get to be hard or brazen in character. <i>Mibátul ang íyang nawung,</i> She got to be shameless. <i>Nagkabatul na ang kasingkásing níya,</i> Her heart is becoming hardened.

<p id=2525><form>batul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>seaweed</tr>.

<p id=2526><form>bátul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>bátud</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>básul<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr> <number>3</number> <tr>slow-moving</tr> or <tr>slow-witted</tr> person. <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>bátud</sc>, <ix>v</ix>.</xr>

<p id=2527><form>bátul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> <number>1</number> for everything to go wrong at once. <i>Gibátul ning ákung pagkabutang. Nabuthan ku ug nahutdan pug gasulína,</i> Everything has been going haywire. I got a flat and ran out of gasoline. <number>2</number> be crazy. <i>Gibátul ka nga sagúlan nímug tubà ang kapi?</i> Have you gone crazy mixing palm toddy into the coffee?

<p id=2528><form>bat-ul</form> <pos>n</pos> hard <tr>lumps</tr> found in fleshy fruits. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> for fruits to get lumps in them. <i>Gibat-ul ang ságing,</i> The bananas have lumps in them. <form>ka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be full of lumps. <i>Nagkabat-ul ang mangga,</i> The mangoes are full of lumps.

<p id=2529><form>batulang</form> <xr>= <sc>batúan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2530><form>batun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> <tr>have</tr> or <tr>possess</tr> s.t. <i>Nagbatun siya ug dakung hibalu,</i> He is deeply learned. <i>Ayaw batuni ang pagdumut,</i> Do not nurse your hatred. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> have a servant. <i>Nakabatun kamig kiriwan kaáyu,</i> We had a thieving servant. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> take <pb n=125>care of s.t. <i>Kinsay mibatun sa bátà pagkapíang niíni?</i> Who was looking after the child when he broke his leg? <i>Batuni kinig maáyu kay handumánan ni nátù,</i> Take good care of this because it is a souvenir. <number>4</number> <itype>[AN; b(1)]</itype> raise and take care of s.o. else&apos;s domesticated animal for a consideration, usually for half the offspring. <i>Siyay namatun sa ákung anay,</i> He raised my sow for half the litter. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> servant. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become a servant. <form>binatnan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> animal raised for s.o. <number>2</number> foster child.

<p id=2531><form>batun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>baton</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>conduct</tr> an orchestra, choir, etc. <i>Inig-áwit ninyu, ákung batunan,</i> When you sing, I&apos;ll conduct. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make into a baton.

<p id=2532><form>batung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>net</tr> used for trapping animals by placing it across the path or dropping it over the animal. <form>(&larr;), batung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; ab2]</itype> trap animals with a net. <i>Batunga ninyu ang bakatin,</i> Catch the wild pig in a trap. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> make into a net trap.

<p id=2533><form>bátung</form> <xr>= <sc>balátung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2534><form>batúnis</form> <xr>= <sc>butúnis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2535><form>bátus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>claquer</tr>, a person or group of persons hired to clap or root. <i>Mga bátus kadtung namakpak níya,</i> Those who applauded for him were paid claquers. <number>2</number> <tr>follower</tr>, person who defends s.o. or is on his side. <i>Wà dihà ang tanang bátus sa bágis,</i> Not all the ruffian&apos;s followers were there. <number>3</number> underlings, protege of a politician. <i>Bátus siya sa mayur,</i> He is one of the mayor&apos;s boys. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B56; a12]</itype> be, make into claquer, defender, protege of a politician.

<p id=2536><form>bat-us</form> <pos>n</pos> stomach discomfort due to overeating. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P]</itype> <number>1</number> cause stomach discomfort. <number>2</number> <itype>[a4]</itype> suffer from over-satiation. <i>Kun gibat-us ka ligdan ug gantang,</i> If you feel discomfort from overeating, roll a quart jar over your stomach.

<p id=2537><form>batúta</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>baton</tr>. <number>2</number> policeman&apos;s billy. <number>3</number> <tr>penis</tr> (slang). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>conduct</tr> an orchestra. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into, strike with a nightstick or baton.

<p id=2538><form>batuwang</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>batúan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2539><form>batuytuy</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>conch</tr>.

<p id=2540><form>batwan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small tree of the secondary forest.

<p id=2541><form>batwánun</form> <xr>= <sc>balatwánun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2542><form>batyà</form> <xr>= <sc>batiyà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2543><form>batyag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b8]</itype> <tr>notice</tr>, be aware of s.t. <i>Wà ku makabatyag sa ulan kay nahinánuk aku,</i> I didn&apos;t notice the rain because I was sound asleep. <i>Nabatyagan ku siya nga milabay dinhi,</i> I noticed him passing by here. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P]</itype> make s.o. aware. <i>Ang paghut sa irù nakabatyag (nakapabatyag) kanákù nga dinhay misulud,</i> The dog&apos;s barking made me aware that s.o. had come in. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2N; a12Nb2]</itype> have physical sensations. <i>Mubatyag ka gánì sa kutukutu mu, risulta na nà sa ínum,</i> If you feel pain in the pit of your stomach, it&apos;s the result of drinking. <i>Pamatyágun (batyágun) nímu ang kasakit unyà,</i> You will feel the pain later. <pos>n</pos> feeling, sensation. <i>Pamatyag sa kaluud,</i> A sensation of vomiting.

<p id=2544><form>bau</form> <pos>n</pos> land or fresh-water turtle. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> catch turtles. <i>Mamau ta sa humayan,</i> Let&apos;s catch turtles in the rice fields. <form>baúhay, baúay</form> Mr. Turtle (in stories).

<p id=2545><form>baubau</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. bug infesting squash, bright red in color, about a centimeter long.

<p id=2546><form>báud</form> <xr>= <sc>baláud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2547><form>baug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> spank, whip to discipline. <i>Gibaug sa kutsíru ang kabáyù,</i> The rig driver beat the horse.

<p id=2548><form>baug<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for eggs to be addled or old. <number>2</number> for a house to be no good. <i>Baug nga balay,</i> A ramshackle house. <number>3</number> sterile, incapable of producing offspring. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for eggs to get old and addled. <i>Ayawg ug-úga ang itlug. Mabaug unyà,</i> Don&apos;t shake the eggs. They&apos;ll get addled. <number>2</number> <itype>[B16; b4]</itype> be, become incapable of producing offspring. <form>(&larr;)<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> for an infection to putrify. <i>Nabáug ang íyang hubag,</i> His boil putrified. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>búug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2549><form>báug<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; a4]</itype> be constipated. <i>Mabáug (mubáug) ang bátà ug hidaghanag painum ug sikwáti,</i> A child will get constipated if it drinks too much chocolate. <i>Gibáug aku,</i> I&apos;m constipated.

<p id=2550><form>baul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> cultivated dry field. <i>Gidáru nákù ang baul,</i> I plowed the field. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> engage in farming, cultivate a field. <i>Baulun nákù ang pátag,</i> I&apos;ll cultivate the plain. <form>binal-an, -in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> parcel of land cultivated for farming. <i>Kakugnan na karun ang binal-an (binaulan) níya kanhi,</i> Thick cogon grass is growing in what used to be his farmland. <number>2</number> products from one&apos;s farm. <number>3</number> way of farming. <form>kabal-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> farmlands. <form>mag-r-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> farmer. <form>pa&N;-, pani&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> farming. <i>Ang pamaul (panimaul) mauy kasagárang pangítà dinhi,</i> Most of the people here live by farming.

<p id=2551><form>baul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> trunk. <form>&mdash; mundu</form> <pos>n</pos> trunk with an arched top.

<p id=2552><form>baul<sub>3</sub>, bául</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> out of shape, poorly proportioned. <i>Bául ug nawung,</i> Having an ill-proportioned face. <number>2</number> not resonant in sound. <i>Bául nang sistáhag tíngug,</i> That guitar has a poor sound. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> become ill-proportioned or of poor resonance. <i>Nabául ang lamísang íyang gihímù, dakug tiil,</i> The table he made turned out ugly. It had such big legs. <xr><ix>see also</ix> <sc>pamául</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=126>

<p id=2553><form>baulu</form> <xr>= <sc>bahuulu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2554><form>báung</form> <pos>n</pos> drinking <tr>cup</tr> made of a half of a coconut shell. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make a <ix>báung.</ix>

<p id=2555><form>baungun, baúngun</form> <xr>= <sc>buluungun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2556><form>báus</form> <pos>n</pos> severe <tr>inflammation</tr> of the lymph nodes in the groin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> have a severe groin inflammation of this sort.

<p id=2557><form>baut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> keep s.o. <tr>beaten</tr> in a game without allowing him a chance to win back. <i>Bautun tikaw sa tsís arun mutagam ka,</i> I won&apos;t let you win a single chess game so you&apos;ll learn your lesson.

<p id=2558><form>báut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B123]</itype> get <tr>satisfaction</tr>, <tr>convinced</tr>. <i>Walà ku mubáut sa íyang pangatarúngan,</i> I was unconvinced by his reasoning. <i>Dílì ku mabáut hangtud makabunal ku níya,</i> I will not be satisfied until I can give him a beating.

<p id=2559><form>báut<sub>2</sub></form> if only [such-and-such] a thing had happened. <i>Báut mibálik pa, dílà ra untay way labud,</i> If only he had come back. He would have gotten it. (Lit. The only thing that would have escaped my pummeling would have been his tongue.) <i>Báut pag napalit nákù tung yutáa, dátù na tà ku,</i> If only I had bought that land, I would be rich now.

<p id=2560><form>báut<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>gipakaingun</sc> (dialectal).</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ingun<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=2561><form>baúu</form> <xr>= <sc>bau</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2562><form>báwang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. <tr>red onion</tr>, the size of a marble used medicinally and as a spice. <number>2</number> <tr>garlic</tr> bulb. <number>3</number> triangular-shaped <tr>firecracker</tr>, of greater intensity than the ordinary firecracker.

<p id=2563><form>báwas</form> <pos>a</pos> <itype>[b7c]</itype> <tr>deduct</tr> s.t. from s.t. <i>Bawási nang túbig sa táru,</i> Remove some of the water in the can.

<p id=2564><form>bawbaw<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>balawbaw</sc>, <ix>2.</ix></xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> place the gaff higher on a fighting cock so as to give the opponent an advantage. <form>&mdash; sa tuu</form> fighting with a special gaff on the right to give the opponent an advantage.

<p id=2565><form>bawbaw<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>balbal</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2566><form>bawbu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>tree</tr>.

<p id=2567><form>bawhag</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> doing things unthinkingly. <i>Bawhága níyang milabang sa dálan way lingìlíngì,</i> How <tr>careless</tr> of her to cross the street without looking to the right or left. <number>2</number> unthinking in speech. <i>Bawhága nímu, magpalumaluma ka mag sáad,</i> You talk too much. You make promises you can&apos;t possibly fulfill. <i>Bawhága nímu. Nabungat tu <corr sic=nimu>nímu</corr> nga wà tà tu siya kahibalu,</i> How careless of you. You let it slip out when he wouldn&apos;t have even known about it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be unthinking in what one does.

<p id=2568><form>bawhinya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>orchid trees</tr>, small or ornamental trees of the genus <bio>bauhinia</bio>, bearing flowers resembling orchids.

<p id=2569><form>báwì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>take back</tr> s.t. lent or given. <i>Ug dì ka mubáwì sa ímung gisulti,</i> If you don&apos;t take back what you said. <i>Dì na mabáwì kay binayran,</i> You can&apos;t get it back because it&apos;s been paid for. <i>Gibawían ang saup sa íyang uma,</i> The tenant had his land repossessed on him. <number>2</number> <tr>save</tr>, <tr>deliver</tr> (Biblical). <i>Bawíun mu kami sa mga panulay,</i> Deliver us from evil. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> <tr>recoup</tr> one&apos;s losses, recover one&apos;s investment. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> recompense, make up for s.t. <i>Way makabawì sa ímung salà kanákù,</i> Nothing can make up for the wrong you have done me. <i>Bawia ang ímung kalaksut pinaági sa kabuútan,</i> Compensate for your ugliness by being nice. <i>Kining kwarta ibawì sa ímung giantus,</i> This money is to compensate for your sufferings. <number>3</number> <itype>[AB236; c1]</itype> bring s.t. back onto course by pulling it in the opposite direction; get back on course. <i>Aku ang mibawì sa manubíla,</i> I turned the steering wheel to the opposite direction to get the car on course. <i>Ug dílì mubawì ang barútu,</i> If the boat doesn&apos;t right itself. <i>Inigkíling sa sakayan ibawì (bawia) sa tuu,</i> When the boat tilts, pull it to the right.

<p id=2570><form>báwis</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>fish</tr>.

<p id=2571><form>bawkag</form> <xr>= <sc>balúkag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2572><form>bawnsir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bouncer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B136; a1]</itype> be, make into a <tr>bouncer</tr>.

<p id=2573><form>bawnus</form> <xr>= <sc>balúnus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2574><form>bawtismu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>baptism</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>baptize</tr> s.o.

<p id=2575><form>bawù</form> <xr>= <sc>balù<sub>2, 3</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=2576><form>baw-u</form> <pos>n</pos> dish made of stewed lean meat cooked dry in a pan over fire and constantly stirred so that it comes out like pieces of string in a bunch. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make <ix>baw-u.</ix>

<p id=2577><form>bawud</form> <xr>= <sc>balud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2578><form>bawug</form> <xr>= <sc>balug</sc>.</xr> <form>bawugbáwug</form> <pos>n</pos> piece of pliant bamboo used as lever for a bucket used to draw water. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make into a bamboo lever of this sort, put such a lever on a well.

<p id=2579><form>bawugbug</form> <xr>= <sc>balugbug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2580><form>báwuk</form> <xr>= <sc>báluk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2581><form>bawukbáwuk</form> <xr>= <sc>báluk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2582><form>báwun</form> <xr>= <sc>bálun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2583><form>bawunas</form> <xr>= <sc>balúnas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2584><form>báwund</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>bind</tr> s.t. into a book.

<p id=2585><form>bawungbáwung</form> <xr>= <sc>balungbálung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2586><form>bawungkut</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. brown turban <tr>shell</tr>, the <bio>delphinula</bio> snail.

<p id=2587><form>bawúnù</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>mango</tr> tree: <bio>Mangifera caesia</bio>.

<p id=2588><form>bawúnus</form> <xr>= <sc>balúnus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2589><form>báwut</form> <pos>a</pos> evenly <tr>matched</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2]</itype> be evenly matched. <i>Báwut kaáyu ang duha ka intranti sa banggà,</i> The two contestants <pb n=127>were very evenly matched. <form>walay &mdash;</form> unevenly matched. <i>Walay báwut ug kanà ipárang sa ákù,</i> They&apos;re poorly matched if you set that one off against mine.

<p id=2590><form>bay</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>abay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2591><form>báy</form> <xr>= <sc>balay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2592><form>bayà<sub>1</sub></form> <number>1</number> particle giving an admonitary tone. <number>a</number> <ix>with an imperative:</ix> make sure that, better do. <i>Hinumdumi bayà,</i> You&apos;d better remember. <i>Sigurúa bayà ha,</i> Make sure you do it! <number>b</number> <ix>with a statement:</ix> watch out. <i>Mamáak bayà nà,</i> Watch out! He bites. <i>Ikaw bayà ang nanghilabut, ayaw pamasángil,</i> You touched it. Don&apos;t try to make excuses. <number>c</number> <xr>= <sc>bayáay</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <ix>particle with a statement or exclamation:</ix> [so-and-so] is different than it should be. <i>Tiawtíaw ka bayà,</i> You&apos;re joking, though you shouldn&apos;t be. <i>Bayà, nagbinátà ka dihà,</i> Hmm, you&apos;re acting like a child. <i>Kabuútan bayà nímu,</i> How good of you, but you shouldn&apos;t have. <i>Bayang kusúga níyang midágan, mu rag unsáun siya,</i> God! How he ran away. As if I were going to do s.t. to him. <i>&lsquo;Panginum mu áning kúk, u.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Busug pa bayà ku, bay,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Here, drink this coke.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;No thanks, I&apos;m still full.&rsquo; <number>3</number> why should that be the case when ... <i>Wà nay bugas? Nagpalit bayà aku gahápun,</i> There&apos;s no rice? Why? I just bought some yesterday. <number>4</number> <ix>particle conceding that s.t. is the case which one didn&apos;t think to be so.</ix> <i>Nákug dì ka kamaung mulútù. Lamì bayà,</i> I thought you didn&apos;t know how to cook. But I must say it&apos;s good. <i>Pagkadakù bayà sa Manílà,</i> I did not know Manila was this big. <form>-ay(&larr;)</form> <ix>particle with a condition:</ix> a feared consequence will happen if the condition happens (had happened, were to happen). <i>Bayáay (bayà) na man ug nasakpan pa ta. Prísu giyud,</i> God! If we had been caught. It would have meant jail.

<p id=2593><form>bayà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> leave s.t. exposed. <i>Mga babáying bigáun nga mubayà sa ílang láwas sa kadaghánan,</i> Lewd women who expose their bodies in public. <i>Kinsa may nagbayà íning asúkar sa lamísa?</i> Who left the sugar uncovered on the table? <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; b4(1)]</itype> pay s.t. no mind. <i>Mupabayà gánì ka sa ímung nigusyu, maalkansi ka giyud,</i> If you neglect your business, you will surely lose. <i>Pabay-i na lang ang ílang insultu,</i> Don&apos;t pay their insults any mind.

<p id=2594><form>bayábas</form> <pos>n</pos> guava: <bio>Psidium guajava</bio>. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; bc]</itype> gather guava fruit. <i>Adtu ta sa sapà mamayábas,</i> Let&apos;s gather guavas near the river. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23C12; c]</itype> have sexual intercourse (humorous). <i>Ipamayábas ku ning ákung trátu arun dì makabuwag nákù,</i> I&apos;ll have sexual intercourse with my girl so she won&apos;t break off with me. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> monkey around instead of doing s.t. seriously. <i>Mamayábas ning batáa ug sugúun,</i> This child plays around when he is told to do s.t. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> place where guava trees abound. <form>-in-</form> pidgin, broken language. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> speak or write a language this way.

<p id=2595><form>báyad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S3S; b1]</itype> <tr>pay</tr> for s.t. <i>Nagbayad mig kinyintus káda búlan,</i> We paid five hundred a month. <i>Bayran ku lang ug písus ang gantang,</i> I&apos;ll just pay one peso for a <ix>ganta.</ix> <i>Bayran ku ra siya,</i> I&apos;ll pay him. <i>Pilay ibáyad?</i> How much shall we pay? <number>2</number> <itype>[A13S; b1]</itype> pay a moral debt. <i>Magbáyad ka sa ímung pag-insultu nákù,</i> You&apos;ll pay for your insults to me. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fee</tr>, <tr>charge</tr>. <i>Way báyad ang gamayng bátà,</i> There is no charge for small children. <number>2</number> amount which serves as payment. <i>Pilay báyad sa bibingka?</i> How much do we owe for the rice cakes? <i>Báyad sa ímung kaáyu,</i> In return for your goodness. <form>balayranan, balayran, balaydan, balaydanan</form> <pos>n</pos> things to be paid for. <form>ig-l/r-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> amount to be paid. <form>kabayáran</form> <pos>n</pos> recompense. <i>Ang kwartang nasunud níya kabayáran sa íyang paghágù,</i> The money she inherited was a recompense for her trouble. <number>2</number> retribution, punishment. <form>pani&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> just desert. <i>Ang ímung pagkabilanggù panimáyad sa ímung kamaldítu,</i> You got your just deserts when you went to jail. <form>&mdash; sa útang</form> a man&apos;s daughter (humorous usage&mdash;from the notion that a man pays for his sins against women by what happens to his daughter: if he commits a sin against a woman, the same thing will happen to his daughter as punishment to him). <form>balayrunun (balaydunun, bayrunun)</form> <pos>n</pos> amount to be paid off. <i>Líbu pang balayrunun ku sa bangku,</i> I still have one thousand pesos to pay off to the bank.

<p id=2596><form>bay-ad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); c1]</itype> lie on the back. <i>Dì kung katúg ug magbay-ad. Tikungkung giyud,</i> I can&apos;t sleep on my back. I have to curl up. <i>Ayaw bay-ára (ibay-ad) ang halígi sa agiánan,</i> Don&apos;t put the post down in the way.

<p id=2597><form>bayamban</form> <xr>= <sc>balanban<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=2598><form>bayanan</form> <xr>= <sc>balayanan</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>balay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2599><form>bayang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; bc]</itype> <tr>go</tr>, put s.t. where it is exposed to view or to the elements. <i>Mibayang na siya sa íyang baráha,</i> He has already spread his cards open for everyone to see. <i>Nagbayang sa ulan ang mga bátà,</i> The children were exposed to the rain. <i>Gibayang sa lamísa ang inasal,</i> The roasted pig was placed on the table where everyone could see it. <i>Mabayang sa katilingban ang pulitiku,</i> A politician&apos;s life is exposed to public view. <pb n=128><i>Pagtárug lingkud. Ayaw pagpabayang,</i> Sit properly. Don&apos;t expose yourself to public view. <form>(&larr;)<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> set food on the table. <i>Gibayángan (gibáyang) na ang lamísa,</i> The table has been set.

<p id=2600><form>bayang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. marine fish, wide as it is tall.

<p id=2601><form>báyang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the flag-raising ceremony (so called from the Tagalog words of the Philippine national anthem: <ix>Báyang Magíliw</ix> &lsquo;Beloved Country&rsquo;.) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> hold the flag-raising ceremony.

<p id=2602><form>bay-ang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tree.

<p id=2603><form>bayang-ang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6c1]</itype> be displayed, exposed to others&apos; eyes. <i>Dílì maáyung tan-áwun ang dalága ug mubayang-ang lang paglingkud, dílì manapu,</i> It&apos;s unbecoming for a young lady to sit down carelessly without covering her front. <i>Bayang-ánga (ibayang-ang) ang ímung tinda,</i> Lay out all the items for sale.

<p id=2604><form>bayangbáyang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small round-shaped marine fish.

<p id=2605><form>bayáni</form> <pos>n</pos> hero. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; b6]</itype> be a hero. <form>bayaníhun</form> <pos>a</pos> heroic.

<p id=2606><form>bay-ansil</form> <pos>n</pos> small-scale business of buying and reselling, usually elsewhere, with a profit. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> engage in this business.

<p id=2607><form>báyas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bias</tr>, a cut diagonal to the cloth. <number>2</number> piece of cloth cut diagonally about 1&frac12;&Prime; wide to be used as facing. <form>&mdash; tip</form> <pos>a</pos> prepared cloth tape for facing necklines, armholes, or hems. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cut cloth diagonally, cut a bias tape. <i>Bayása ang kwilyu sa ákung sinínà,</i> Cut the collar of my dress diagonally.

<p id=2608><form>bayat</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>worn-out</tr>, dilapidated, esp. clothes. <number>2</number> poor in quality. <number>3</number> <tr>slovenly</tr> in dress. <i>Bayat ang ákung pamisti run kay magtrabáhu man ku sa uma,</i> I&apos;m slovenly dressed because I am going to work in the field. <number>4</number> mentally slow, <tr>stupid</tr>. <i>Kabayat. Dúgay kaáyu nga nakat-un,</i> How dull he is. It took him forever to catch on. <number>5</number> sluggish, slow-moving. <number>6</number> poor in doing things. <i>Bayat kaáyu nang musiyat,</i> He is a poor shot. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> for things to get worn out and dilapidated. <i>Nabáyat (mibáyat) na lang ning ákung sapátus sa pagkanúnayng gináwì,</i> My shoes have become ragged and worn-out from constant use. <i>Nagkabayat na ang ílang payag,</i> Their shack is gradually falling into ruin. <number>2</number> be poor in quality. <i>Mabayat (mubayat) giyud nang ímung trabáhug ímung kiátan,</i> Your work will turn out shoddy if you go about it carelessly. <number>3</number> be slovenly. <number>4</number> get to be dull, stupid. <number>5</number> get to be sluggish, slow-moving. <number>6</number> get to be unskilled in doing things. <form>kabayatbayat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be hard put to do s.t. because of the large number of things that have to be done at once. <i>Nagkabayatbayat mig panghípus sa wà pa muabut ang mga bisíta,</i> We were in a dither trying to clean up before the visitors arrived.

<!-- Added number 3 in entry below -->

<p id=2609><form>bayaw</form> <pos>n</pos> brother-, sister-in-law. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get for a brother- or sister-in-law. <number>2</number> <itype>[c]</itype> be brothers- and sisters-in-law. <i>Dì ku gustung makigbáyaw níya kay palahúbug siya,</i> I don&apos;t want to have him as a brother-in-law because he&apos;s a drunkard<corr>.</corr> <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make s.o. a brother- or sister-in-law.

<p id=2610><form>báyaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB236; c1]</itype> <tr>raise</tr>, <tr>rise</tr> into the air. <i>Ang hánging kusug mauy nagbáyaw (nagpabáyaw) sa papil,</i> The strong wind blew the papers into the air. <i>Dì makabáyaw dáyun ning tabanúga,</i> This kite won&apos;t soar up right away. <i>Ang pagbáyaw ni Kristu,</i> The ascension of Christ. <i>Ibáyaw (bayáwa) ang túung kamut sa baksir,</i> Raise the boxer&apos;s right hand. <pos>n</pos> elevation of the host in the mass.

<p id=2611><form>bayáyat</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>slovenly</tr> in dress or appearance. <number>2</number> <tr>dilapidated</tr>, <tr>worn-out</tr>. <i>Balay nga bayáyat,</i> A dilapidated house. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> get slovenly in dress. <i>Nagkabayáyat na karun ang íyang pamisti nga naminyù na siya,</i> She has become slovenly in her manner of dressing now that she&apos;s married. <number>2</number> get worn-out or dilapidated. <i>Mubayáyat (mabayáyat) ang sapátus ug sigíhag sul-ub,</i> The shoes will get all worn-out if you keep wearing them.

<p id=2612><form>baybay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>beach</tr>. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> go along the beach. <i>Namaybay ug lawig ang bapur,</i> The boat sailed close to the shore. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>pamalaybay</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>balaybay</sc>.</xr> <form>-un</form> <xr>= <sc>baybay</sc>.</xr> <form>kabaybayúnan</form> <pos>n</pos> seashores.

<p id=2613><form>baybay<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>bábay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2614><form>bayhun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>carriage</tr>, <tr>bearing</tr> of a person. <i>Gikaibgan kung ambúngan níyang bayhun,</i> I admire his handsome posture. <number>2</number> <tr>gait</tr> in walking. <number>3</number> <tr>outline</tr>, <tr>appearance</tr> of s.t. <i>Makítà gíkan sa lungsud ang bayhun sa payag ibábaw sa bungtud,</i> The outline of the shack on the top of the hill is visible from the town. <number>4</number> having the form of (Biblical usage). <i>Ang láwas ug dugù ni Kristu sa bayhun sa pán ug bínu,</i> The flesh and blood of Christ in the form of bread and wine. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c6]</itype> swing the arms in walking. <i>Ibayhun ímung paglakaw,</i> Walk swinging your arms. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> way of walking. <i>Ilhan ta ka bisag layù sa ímu lang pamayhun,</i> I know you from afar by your carriage. <number>2</number> appearance.

<p id=2615><form>bayi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>female</tr> animal or plant. <number>2</number> descriptive term given to plants, where the same name is given to different species or varieties. The smoother and usually larger variety or species <pb n=129>is described as <ix>bayi</ix> whereas the thornier or smaller variety is called <ix>laki</ix> &lsquo;male&rsquo;. <ix>Kudyapà nga bayi,</ix> The smooth <ix>kudyapà</ix> (<bio>Amaranthus viridis</bio>) as opposed to the <ix>kudyapà nga laki,</ix> the armed <ix>kudyapà</ix> (<bio>Amaranthus spinosus</bio>). <form>(&larr;)</form> human female. <i>Báyi ákung anak,</i> My baby is a girl. <form>bayhána</form> particular, exclamatory woman. <i>Patyun ta ka bayhána (babayhána) ka,</i> I&apos;ll kill you, you woman. <i>Kinsang bayhána (babayhána)?</i> Which woman? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; c1]</itype> turn out to be a girl. <i>Ug mabáyi, átù siyang nganlag Ána,</i> If she turns out to be a girl, we&apos;ll call her Anna. <form>babáyi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>woman</tr>. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>báyi</sc>.</xr> <form>babayhána</form> <xr>= <sc>bayhána</sc>.</xr> <form>-ng búhat</form> a woman of proper deportment. <i>Dílì muláag ang babáying búhat,</i> A lady doesn&apos;t roam about. <number>3</number> <tr>mistress</tr>. <i>Gipusil sa asáwa ang babáyi sa íyang bána,</i> The wife shot her husband&apos;s mistress. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>báyi</sc>, <ix>v</ix>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> have, make into a mistress. <form>paba-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> fool around with women. <form>pama-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> take a mistress. <i>Gastúsu kining mamabáyi ta,</i> It&apos;s expensive to keep a mistress. <form>hima-, hi&N;-</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of women. <form>panghima-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> chase after women. <form>binabáyi, binabayi</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> effeminate. <i>Binabáyi siyag panlíhuk,</i> He is effeminate in his motions. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; nga ulan</formx> lingering drizzle. <number>3</number> cock with hen-like feathers. <number>4</number> adapted for a woman&apos;s use. <i>Bisiklítang binabayi,</i> A woman&apos;s bicycle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do s.t. like a woman. <i>Nagkabayù ug binabáyi,</i> Riding sidesaddle. <i>Binabayha (ibinabáyi) ímung tingug,</i> Make your voice sound like a woman&apos;s. <form>makiba-(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>hima-</sc>, <ix>a</ix>.</xr> <form>babayin-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <xr>= <sc>binabáyi</sc>, <ix>1,</ix> <ix>2.</ix></xr> <form>bayin-an, babayin-an, tagbayin-an, tagbabayin-an, tagbayi</form> <pos>n</pos> people on a bride&apos;s side in a marriage. <form>kababayin-an</form> <pos>n</pos> women as a group. <i>Dì makabutar ang kababayin-an,</i> The women cannot vote. <form>baláyi</form> <pos>n</pos> parents of one&apos;s children-in-law. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> be in the <ix>baláyi</ix> relation, parents of children that married each other. <form>binaláyi</form> <pos>n</pos> daughter-in-law. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> make, get as daughter-in-law. <form>pamaláyi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> ask a girl&apos;s hand from her parents. <i>Kinsa may dakung táwu sa ímung pamaláyi?</i> When you asked for her hand in marriage, who was the spokesman? <i>Gipamay-an na siya,</i> S.o. has already asked for her hand in marriage. <form>babayíru</form> <xr>= <sc>himabáyi</sc>.</xr>&dagger;

<p id=2616><form>bayibáyi<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <xr><sc>bayingbaying</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2617><form>bayibáyi<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shin</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> hit in the shins. <i>Nahitakingking siya kay ákung gibayibáyi pagpátid,</i> He hopped in pain when I kicked him in the shins.

<p id=2618><form>bayin</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>bind</tr> a book.

<p id=2619><form>bayingbaying</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>praying mantis</tr>.

<p id=2620><form>bayinti</form> number twenty. <pos>v</pos> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tris</sc></xr> for conjugation. <form>bayintihun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> twenty-centavo coin, twenty-peso bill. <form>dya-</form> <pos>n</pos> twenty-peso bill. <form>&mdash; únu, dus, trís, etc.</form> <pos>n</pos> twenty-one, two, three, etc. <form>bayinti dus</form> <pos>n</pos> twenty-two rifle. <form>bayntisingkuhun</form> <pos>n</pos> twenty-five cent coin. <form>bayinti utsu</form> <pos>a</pos> lacking in intelligence (like the month of February which has fewer days than other months. People who are born in February are thought to have a tendency to act foolishly.)

<p id=2621><form>baykarb</form> <pos>n</pos> sodium bicarbonate.

<p id=2622><form>baykawun, baykawunt</form> <pos>n</pos> the Viscount aircraft. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13P; b6]</itype> take a Viscount.

<p id=2623><form>baylákag</form> <xr>= <sc>balyákag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2624><form>baylan</form> <pos>n</pos> a person supposed to have close and friendly relationships with supernatural beings, evil or good, such that he can deal with them on behalf of other people: he can ask them to bring illness or cure illnesses of any sort, natural or supernatural in cause. He officiates at offerings (<ix>diwáta</ix>) and at folk weddings and other ceremonies in relation to supernatural beings. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be, become a <ix>baylan.</ix>

<p id=2625><form>bayli</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dance</tr>, <tr>ball</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; b1c3]</itype> do ballroom dancing. <i>Gibaylíhan (gikabayli) nákù si Rús,</i> I danced with Rose. <i>Dúm kaáyu ang ílang gibaylíhan,</i> The place where they are dancing is very dim. <i>Kining sunatáha maáyung baylíhan,</i> This song is a good one to dance to. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> hold a dance. <form>baylíhan, baylihánan</form> <pos>n</pos> dance hall, floor. <form>-rína</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> woman fond of, skilled in dancing. <number>2</number> taxi dancer. <number>3</number> ballerina. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> become skilled in dancing, a ballerina or a taxi dancer.

<p id=2626><form>baylu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C; ac1]</itype> <tr>exchange</tr>. <i>Magbaylu tag lápis,</i> Let&apos;s exchange pencils. <i>Baylúi ug manuk ang ákung mais,</i> Barter my corn for a chicken. <i>Ayaw ibaylu ang ímung sapátus sa íyang pantalun,</i> Don&apos;t swap your shoes for his pants. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a2]</itype> take s.t. with the understanding that one will give it or its equivalent back. <i>Bayluun kung ímung dus písus,</i> I will borrow your two pesos. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> buy things for immediate household use. <i>Pagbaylu ngadtug sigarilyu,</i> Go buy some cigarettes. <pos>n</pos> s.t. one borrowed from s.o. else. <i>Ang baylu mung kwarta nákù wà nímu ilisdi,</i> You did not repay the money you borrowed from me. <form>bayluay, baylúay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> exchange with one another.

<p id=2627><form>bayna</form> <pos>n</pos> the sheath of a gaff. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> sheath the gaff. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a sheath.

<p id=2628><form>baytamins</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vitamins</tr>.

<p id=2629><form>bayu, báyu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab6]</itype> beat to a pulp or powder. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> rain blows on s.o. <i>Bayuhun <pb n=130>takag ilárun ku nímu,</i> I&apos;ll rain blows on you if you swindle me. <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> homemade dynamite consisting of a wick, fuse, and gunpowder pounded compactly inside a can or bottle.

<p id=2630><form>báyu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a coat coloration of horses: light yellowish tan to a deep reddish brown.

<p id=2631><form>bayùbáyù</form> (from <ix>kabáyù</ix>) name given to various fish with a diagonal posture in the water or horse-like appearance, esp. pipe fishes.

<p id=2632><form>báyud</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>discolored</tr>, <tr>bruised</tr>, esp. fruit. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> for fruit or other crops to become discolored or bruised. <i>Nabáyud ang kamúti nga gibyáan sa ínit,</i> The sweet potatoes became discolored because they were left exposed to the sun. <i>Nagkabáyud ang ákung láwas sa binunalan,</i> My body has become black and blue from being beaten.

<p id=2633><form>bayúdang</form> <xr>= <sc>bayúrang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2634><form>bay-ug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>shake</tr>, <tr>rock</tr> s.t. <i>Mubay-ug siya sa dúyan, magdung-ag pa,</i> She rocks the cradle and still has to do the cooking. <i>Nabay-ug ang tibuuk Batanggas pagbutu sa Taal,</i> The whole province of Batangas shook when Taal erupted. <number>2</number> shake out of complacency, break the peace and quiet. <i>Nabay-ug ang tibuuk balángay sa balità,</i> The whole village was shaken up by the news. <number>3</number> <itype>[B12; a1]</itype> get bruised, rattled by being rocked or bumped into s.t. <i>Nagkabay-ug ang bábuy sa kataas sa ámung byáhi,</i> The pig was all bruised and shaken after our long journey. <i>Ayawg bay-úga nang mga mangga,</i> Do not bruise the mangoes.

<p id=2635><form>bayugbayug</form> <xr>= <sc>balukbáluk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2636><form>bayugbug</form> <xr>= <sc>balugbug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2637><form>bayukáwi</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. smooth climbing bamboo of the forest, woven into baskets: <bio>Dinochloa scandens</bio>.

<p id=2638><form>bayukbáyuk</form> <xr>= <sc>balukbáluk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2639><form>bayukbuk</form> <pos>n</pos> natural fertilizer composed of dead leaves and manure. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> apply compost. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into compost.

<p id=2640><form>bayukut</form> <xr>= <sc>alúla</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2641><form>bayulin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>violin</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> play, play on the violin. <form>-ista</form> <pos>n</pos> violinist. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a12]</itype> become, make into a violinist.

<p id=2642><form>bayulit</form> <pos>n</pos> violet in color. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; c1]</itype> be, make violet in color.

<p id=2643><form>bayumbu</form> <pos>n</pos> movable screen, room <tr>divider</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put, make into a divider. <i>Bayumbúhan kung ákung kusína,</i> I&apos;ll make a divider for my kitchen.

<p id=2644><form>bayung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>adolescent</tr> cock. <number>2</number> adolescent boy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B25; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> get to be a cockerel. <number>2</number> get to be an adolescent boy. <form>bayungbáyung</form> <pos>n</pos> a pre-adolescent boy.

<p id=2645><form>báyung<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>dáyung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2646><form>bayungad</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for s.t. long to be <tr>bent</tr> or <tr>sagging</tr>. <number>2</number> protruding upper lip. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> <number>1</number> be sagging, bent. <i>Nagbayungad ang bukubuku sa kabáyù sa kabug-at sa karga,</i> The horse&apos;s back is sagging under the heavy load. <i>Nabayungad ang atup tungud sa kabug-at sa sín,</i> The roof is sagging under the weight of the iron sheet. <number>2</number> for the upper lip to be protruding in an ungainly way.

<p id=2647><form>bayuníta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bayonet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> stab with a bayonet. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> hunting knife shaped like a bayonet.

<p id=2648><form>bayupsi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> take a <tr>biopsy</tr>.

<p id=2649><form>bayúrang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a k.o. bolo about 22&Prime; long having a straight blade with a straight back which curves down to the blade near the tip. <number>2</number> a k.o. bolo around 18&Prime; long with a shallow convex curve two-thirds way to the top edge and upward curve on the bottom edge meeting the top edge in a point.

<p id=2650><form>báyut</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sissy</tr>. <i>Báyut ka. Nahadluk ug lawàlawà,</i> You&apos;re a sissy because you&apos;re afraid of spiders. <number>2</number> male <tr>homosexual</tr>. <i>Báyut ang ákung kusturíra,</i> My dressmaker is a homosexual. <number>3</number> small light plane. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> become sissy or homosexual. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> hire oneself out to a male homosexual. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> sissyish, <tr>effeminate</tr>. <i>Bayutun siyang manglihuklihuk,</i> He acts in an effeminate manner. <form>-i</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>-un(&rarr;)</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> nagging, complaining sort. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be a whining grumbler.

<p id=2651><form>bayuuk, bayúuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mumps</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4b4]</itype> be affected with mumps. <i>Dì mabukang ákung bàbà kay gibayuuk ku,</i> I <corr sic="can not">cannot</corr> open my mouth because I have mumps. <i>Gibayuukan ang wala kung áping,</i> I have mumps in the left cheek.

<p id=2652><form>bayúus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bud</tr> from which a fruit or flower develops. <number>2</number> a girl who is about to blossom into full womanhood. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> grow buds. <i>Katahum sa búwak nga mubayúus na,</i> How lovely the budding flower is.

<p id=2653><form>baywantikwan</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. bargain sale in which a buyer gets free an extra item of the same class as the thing he buys. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c6]</itype> hold a buy-one-take-one sale. <i>Ibaywantikwan níla ang <corr sic=uld-istak>uld istak</corr> arun madispatsar,</i> They are selling their old stock on a buy-one-take-one basis in order to dispose of it.

<p id=2654><form>bi<sub>1</sub></form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>ambi</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> particle coming at the end of sentences expressing a request, meaning &lsquo;please&rsquo; a in requesting an action to be done in direction of the speaker. <i>Itudlus ra nang butilya, bi,</i> Hand me that bottle, please. <i>Dad-a ngari bi,</i> Please bring it over here. <i>Dì ku bi,</i> Yes, please (Lit. I don&apos;t want any, <pb n=131>let me have it). <number>b</number> in requesting an action to be done for the benefit of the speaker when the speaker is situated close to the person requested. <i>Imakinilya ku ári, bi,</i> Please type this up for me.

<p id=2655><form>bi<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> letter B.

<p id=2656><form>bí</form> <number>1</number> (from <ix>híbi</ix>) expression of teasing to a child to heighten its <corr sic=embarassment>embarrassment</corr> (<ix>paghíbì</ix>). <i>Bí, dì ka tagáag kindi,</i> Nah, nana nahna, you&apos;re not going to get any candy. <number>2</number> expression used in calling goats.

<p id=2657><form>bias</form> <pos>n</pos> water container made of one internode of a bamboo tube. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a bias.

<p id=2658><form>bíaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> for water to gather s.w. <i>Gibiáwan ámung sílung pagbahà,</i> Our ground floor was filled with water when it flooded. <number>2</number> for tears to well up in the eyes. <i>Mga lúhà nga nabíaw sa íyang mga mata,</i> Tears that welled up in her eyes. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> large, loosely woven basket where farm produce is gathered. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> container for holding a supply of water. <i>Biawan sa túbig baláan,</i> The font of the holy water.

<p id=2659><form>biaybíay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> deride s.o., say s.t. to humiliate s.o. <i>Ayaw siya biaybiáya tungud sa íyang pagkabakul,</i> Don&apos;t humiliate him just because he is hunchbacked. <i>Ibiaybíay níya ang mahúgaw níyang kagahápun,</i> Deride her with her evil past. <pos>n</pos> <tr>derision</tr>. <i>Giantus ni Kristu ang tanang biaybíay sa mga Hudíyu,</i> Christ suffered the derision of the Jews. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>derisive</tr>. <i>Mabiaybiáyun nga mga pangutána,</i> Humiliating questions.

<p id=2660><form>biaypi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>V</tr>.I.P.

<p id=2661><form>bíba</form> <number>1</number> cheerful and jolly in a talkative way. <number>2</number> <ix>particle:</ix> Long live! <i>Bíba si Usminya! Bíba ang Pilipínas!</i> Long live Osmeña! Long live the Philippines! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; c1]</itype> be, become cheerful. <i>Mubíba (mabíba) ang íyang kinaíya ug may kwarta,</i> He gets a cheerful disposition when he gets money. <form>bibahut</form> <pos>a</pos> endearingly <tr>cheerful</tr>, <tr>jolly</tr>. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> endearing cheerfulness. <i>Dì ku maúlaw muadtu sa íla tungud sa ílang kabibahut,</i> I&apos;m not afraid to go to their house because they are so warm and friendly.

<p id=2662><form>bíbi<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> small duck with colored feathers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> raise ducks. <form>bibihan</form> <pos>n</pos> duck farm.

<p id=2663><form>bíbi<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. lucine clam.

<p id=2664><form>bíbi<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>baby</tr>. <number>2</number> nickname for a girl. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> nickname a child &lsquo;baby&rsquo;.

<p id=2665><form>bibingka</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> rice cake made from finely ground rice mixed with coconut milk, sugar, and sometimes with other ingredients as flavoring. <number>2</number> woman&apos;s genitalia (humorous usage). <form>&mdash; nga usay likì</form> <pos>n</pos> woman&apos;s genitalia (lit. rice cake with a single crack). <form>&mdash; nga hilaw</form> <pos>n</pos> woman&apos;s genitalia. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make rice cakes. <number>2</number> <itype>[A123P; a12]</itype> put between the devil and the deep blue sea (from the idea that the <ix>bibingka</ix> is baked in between two fires). <i>Ug mupaúlì ku kasab-an. Ug dílì, kasab-an sad. Nabibingka ku,</i> If I go home, I&apos;ll be cussed out. If not, I&apos;ll be cussed out, too. I&apos;m between the devil and the deep blue sea.

<p id=2666><form>bibirun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> baby&apos;s <tr>feeding bottle</tr>. <number>2</number> woman&apos;s breast (humorous). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB16; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> feed with a bottle, take the bottle. <i>Nagbibirun ka ba sa ímung bátà?</i> Are you bottle-feeding your baby? <i>Magbibirun lang gihápun ning batáa,</i> This child still drinks from a bottle. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make into, use as a feeding bottle.&dagger;

<p id=2667><form>bibisítir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6]</itype> take care of s.o.&apos;s child, usually in contexts talking about the States. <i>Dad-a ku sa istits, aku lay mubibisítir sa ímung anak,</i> Take me to the States and I will be your child&apos;s nursemaid.

<p id=2668><form>bibliya, biblíya</form> <pos>n</pos> the Holy <tr>Bible</tr>.

<p id=2669><form>bibliyutika, bibliyutíka</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>library</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a2]</itype> make into a library.

<p id=2670><form>bíbu</form> <pos>a</pos> for a place to be <tr>lively</tr>, full of <tr>fun</tr>. <i>Bíbu kaáyung syudad kun mapasku,</i> The city is full of life at Christmastime. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a]</itype> get to be lively.&dagger;

<p id=2671><form>bíbut</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> an endearing term for a <tr>baby</tr>. <number>2</number> girl (slang). <number>3</number> one&apos;s girl (slang). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> have, make s.o. his girl. <i>Insik ang íyang gibíbut,</i> He took a Chinese girl for his girlfriend.

<p id=2672><form>bída<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>adventure</tr>, <tr>experiences</tr> of a person in his lifetime. <number>2</number> <tr>role</tr> in a drama. <i>Kinsay nagdá sa bída ni Maríya Klára?</i> Who plays the role of Maria Clara? <number>3</number> one who plays the leading role. <i>Muintra ku basta akuy bída,</i> I&apos;ll participate as long as I am the leading lady. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; a]</itype> tell one&apos;s experiences, adventures. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2356; a2]</itype> be the leading player, make the leading player.

<p id=2673><form>bída<sub>2</sub></form> <ix>short for</ix> <xr><sc>purbída</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2674><form>bidbid</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. small <tr>sprat</tr> or <tr>herring</tr>. <number>2</number> net used to catch the <ix>bidbid.</ix> <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> catch <ix>bidbid.</ix> <pos>n</pos> fishing for <ix>bidbid.</ix>

<p id=2675><form>bíding<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> bead-like embroidery on cloth. <form>&mdash; nga makina</form> <pos>n</pos> machine for doing beading. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> do beading on cloth.

<p id=2676><form>bíding<sub>2</sub>, bídings</form> <pos>n</pos> mattress, sheets, etc. to sleep on. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> put <tr>bedding</tr> s.w. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> use as, make into bedding. <i>Bidínga (ibíding) ning mga hábul,</i> Use these sheets for your bedding.

<p id=2677><form>bidiyù</form> <xr>= <sc>bidyù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2678><form>bidlak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>tear</tr>, <tr>rip</tr> apart with force. <i>Nabidlak ang íyang sinínà nga nasángit sa alambri,</i> Her dress got ripped when it got caught <pb n=132>on the wire.

<p id=2679><form>bidlì</form> <pos>n</pos> feeling of nausea or heartburn due to eating heavy foods. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146; a4]</itype> develop such a feeling. <i>Magbidlì ang ákung ginhawáan ug mukáun kug tambuk,</i> I get nauseated when I eat pork fat. <i>Gibidlì aku pagkáun nákug kamúti,</i> I felt heartburn after I ate sweet potatoes.

<p id=2680><form>bidlísiw</form> <pos>n</pos> rays of the sun. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> for the rays of the sun to shine. <i>Mibidlísiw nang adlaw pagbángun nákù,</i> The sun was shining when I woke up. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2S]</itype> for a liquid to spurt continuously. <i>Nagbidlisiw ang túbig sa likì sa túbu,</i> The water is spurting out of the crack in the water pipe.

<p id=2681><form>bidsit, bidsiyit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sheet</tr> or <tr>blanket</tr> used as a cover. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put, make into a bed cover.

<p id=2682><form>bíduk</form> <xr>= <sc>bíruk<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=2683><form>bidyù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>spear</tr>, the size of a coconut midrib, used as a probe for crabs and other slow-moving things. <number>2</number> spear of this size, shot like an arrow for small fish, crabs, etc. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> shoot or stab s.t. with a <ix>bidyù.</ix> <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> catch things with the <ix>bidyù.</ix>

<p id=2684><form>bígà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> plant cultivated for its edible corms, member of the <bio>Araceae</bio> family, similar in appearance to the <ix>bagyang</ix> (<bio>Alocasia macrorrhiza</bio>), but smaller and growing in dry fields.

<p id=2685><form>bígà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> great sexual desire. <i>Tigúwang piru may bígà gihápun,</i> He may be old, but he still has strong sexual urges. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; b4]</itype> stimulate one&apos;s sexual desire; have sexual desire. <i>Makabígà (makapabígà) ang sibúyas bumbay,</i> Onions can increase one&apos;s sexual desire. <i>Gibigáan ka dihà nga manghaluk ka man?</i> Why are you kissing me? Are you possessed of an uncontrollable sexual desire? <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> have sexual desires. <i>Namígà nang ákung anay,</i> My sow is displaying sexual desire. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> go find sexual adventures. <i>Ang pampaman ang maáyung pamigáan,</i> The whorehouse is the best place to unleash your sexual urges. <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>aphrodisiac</tr>. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>libidinous</tr>, <tr>oversexed</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become libidinous. <i>May mga táwung mabigáun ug mahubug,</i> There are people who become oversexed when drunk.

<p id=2686><form>bigal</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sow</tr>, mother pig. <number>2</number> a woman who has given birth (humorous usage). <i>Bigal siya apan dílì asáwa,</i> She is a mother (lit. sow) but not a wife. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a2]</itype> make into a sow. <i>Bigalun ku ning babúya,</i> I&apos;ll raise this pig into a sow. <form>-l-un(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> pig intended to be raised into a sow.

<p id=2687><form>bigamya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bigamy</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a3]</itype> be a bigamist, be charged with bigamy. <i>Ang sumbung imbis adultiriya, nabigamya,</i> The charge was changed from adultery to bigamy. <i>Nabigamya siya kay kaduha magpakasal,</i> He was convicted of bigamy because he contracted two marriages.

<p id=2688><form>bigatlà</form> <ix>humorous euphemism for</ix> <xr><sc>bigatlun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2689><form>bigatlun</form> <xr>= <sc>bigáun</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>bígà<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=2690><form>bigay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>give</tr> s.t. which has been extorted. <i>Ug dì ka mubigay, dì ka kapasar,</i> If you don&apos;t give a bribe, you won&apos;t pass. <i>Bigyan giyud ang mga dispatsir,</i> You have to pay protection money to the dispatchers. <number>2</number> deliver a blow to s.o. <i>Bigyan ta kag ímu kung ilárun,</i> I&apos;ll hit you one if you swindle me. <number>3</number> allow s.o. to make sexual advances (slang). <i>Mubigay nà siyag íyang uyab ang kasáyaw,</i> She will give herself freely if her boyfriend is her dancing partner. <number>4</number> <itype>[A12; b6]</itype> have sexual intercourse with (slang). <i>Bigyan nákung ákung hinigugma,</i> I&apos;ll have sexual intercourse with my girl. <number>5</number> purposely lose a point in jai-alai to enable the opponent to get it. <i>Ug ibigay nà níya run, dì na kadaug,</i> If he purposely loses this game, he can&apos;t win any more. <pos>n</pos> a point purposely defaulted in jai-alai in order to let the opponent have it. <pos>a</pos> giving one&apos;s self fully to sexual advances (slang).

<p id=2691><form>bigiw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b3]</itype> <tr>run</tr> fast for a reason. <i>Mibigiw ug dágan ang ilagà nga nakakità sa iring,</i> The rat ran away fast on seeing the cat. <i>Nakabigiw kug dágan sa pagkahibalu nákung naligsan siya,</i> I ran as fast as I could when I found out she was run over. <pos>n</pos> k.o. small canoe designed for getting s.w. fast. It consists of a single piece with outriggers, sloping upwards sharply in the front and the back. <form>bigiwbígiw</form> <xr>= <sc>bigiw</sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr>

<p id=2692><form>bigkas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1B26; a12b2]</itype> for string, rope, cloth, etc. to <tr>snap</tr> apart under tension, make s.t. snap. <i>Walà may nagbigkas ánà. Nabigkas lag íya,</i> Nobody broke it. It snapped by itself. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2B26; b5]</itype> <tr>rip</tr> stitches apart. <i>Gibigkas (gibigkasan) sa sastri ang hawakan,</i> The tailor took it apart at the waist.

<p id=2693><form>bigking</form> <xr>= <sc>bíking</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2694><form>bignì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12C; b3]</itype> <number>1</number> for animals to fight with lots of noise but little action. <i>Gibignían sa mga baktin ang lawug,</i> The piglets fought over the slop. <number>2</number> have petty quarrels (derogatory usage).

<p id=2695><form>bigsà</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> with high spirits, tending to be <tr>noisy</tr> and <tr>uninhibited</tr> in speech and manner. <i>Aligri nà siyag makainum kay bigsà,</i> He is fun when he is tipsy because he is lively. <number>2</number> <tr>flirtatious</tr>, not passive or reserved towards men. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> get to be in high spirits or flirtatious. <i>Mubigsà (mabigsà) nang bayhána basta náay mga láki,</i> That woman gets coquettish <pb n=133>when there are men around.

<p id=2696><form>bigsyat</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>big shot</tr> (slang). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a2]</itype> get to be a big shot.

<p id=2697><form>bigtas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2; c1]</itype> for stitches or bonds which hold things together to <tr>snap</tr>; cause them to do so. <i>Kinsay nagbigtas sa kawu sa bag?</i> Who made the handle of the bag come off? <i>Nabigtas (mibigtas) ang tahì sa sáku sa paghasuk sa kupras,</i> The seams on the sides of the sack came open when the copra was pounded to stuff it full.

<p id=2698><form>bigting</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>strike</tr> an animal in the leg to disable it, usually in preparation for butchering it. <i>Nagsaguyud ang tarian sa manuk ingun kini sa hibigtingan,</i> The cock&apos;s fighting leg is dragging, as if it got slashed.

<p id=2699><form>biguk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> <tr>cheat</tr> out of, <tr>steal</tr> s.t. <i>Kinsay nagbiguk sa kuliksiyun?</i> Who pocketed the collection?

<p id=2700><form>bigunya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>begonias</tr>, k.o. ornamental annual flowers: <bio>Begoniaceae spp</bio>. <form>&mdash; dibumbilya</form> hairy species of begonia with white flowers and small reddish leaves. <form>&mdash; dikalbásà</form> a hairy species of begonia with large squash-like leaves. <form>&mdash; dikurasun</form> k.o. begonia with heart-shaped flowers.

<p id=2701><form>bigut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> s.o. having ugly, knotted scars at the neck. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> for the neck to be ugly with knotted scars. <i>Nabigut ang íyang líug sa lamparúnis,</i> His neck was all scarred with skin eruptions.

<p id=2702><form>bigut<sub>2</sub>, bígut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> sew s.t. with large, rough stitches. <i>Gibígut (gibigutan) lang íning tapulan ang íyang muskitírung nagísì,</i> The lazy girl just sewed her torn mosquito net with large stitches. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> <tr>fasten</tr> s.t. with a pin. <i>Ibigut ang ríbun sa ímung púlu,</i> Pin the ribbon on your shirt. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. that has been pinned or stitched with large stitches.

<p id=2703><form>bígut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for a woman&apos;s or child&apos;s body to be <tr>compact</tr> and <tr>well-rounded</tr>. <i>Angayan ang batingsut sa mabígut níyang láwas,</i> She is well-built, and a bathing suit looks good on her.

<p id=2704><form>bigúti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mustache</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> wear a mustache. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> grow a mustache. <form>bigutíhun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> have a mustache. <number>2</number> descriptive name given to various k.o. fish with barbels. <form>-lyu</form> <pos>n</pos> small thin mustache. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> have, wear such a mustache.&dagger;

<p id=2705><form>bigwis<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> have loose bowel movements, light <tr>diarrhea</tr>. <i>Mubigwis ka gyud ug magpatakà kag káun,</i> You will get loose bowel movements if you eat just anything.

<p id=2706><form>bigwis<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>offspring</tr>. <i>Daghan silang bigwis,</i> There&apos;s a lot of kids in their family. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> bear young. <i>Mamigwis na sad ang iring,</i> The cat is going to have a litter again.

<p id=2707><form>bíhag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1a</number> bring into captivity. <i>Mga múrus ang mibíhag sa mga Bisayà,</i> Muslims who captured and carried away Visayan people. <number>1b</number> attract the attention. <i>Makabíhag sa átung pagtagad,</i> Can attract our attention. <i>Bihágun ku ang ímung kasingkásing,</i> I&apos;ll captivate your heart. <number>2</number> for fowls to attract another fowl not belonging to the flock. <i>Nabíhag ákung sunuy sa ílang himungáan,</i> My rooster was attracted to stay at their place by their hen. <number>3</number> <itype>[A3P; b4]</itype> <tr>defeat</tr> in a contest such that the loser is given to the winner, most commonly in cockfighting. <i>Gibihágan mig duha,</i> We lost (had defeated on us) two cocks. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> person <tr>captured</tr>. <number>2</number> fowls attracted to another flock. <number>3</number> s.t. lost in a contest where the winner takes the loser, esp. the defeated cock. <form>bihagay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; a12]</itype> for keeps, such that the winner gets the loser&apos;s thing. <i>Nagbihagay silag húlin,</i> They are playing marbles for keeps. <form>maka-r-, ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> attractive, captivating. <form>ma&N;-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. that is a steady winner, and wins over the loser. <i>Mahal kining sunúya hay mamimíhag,</i> This is a valuable cock because it is a steady winner.

<p id=2708><form>bíhì</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small univalve.

<p id=2709><form>bihìbihì, bihihì</form> <xr>= <sc>bahìhì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2710><form>bihikulu</form> <pos>n</pos> motor <tr>vehicle</tr>.

<p id=2711><form>bihilya</form> <pos>n</pos> a day of abstinence from meat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> observe abstinence from meat.

<p id=2712><form>bíhis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> wipe off the dirt from s.o.&apos;s body with a damp cloth. <i>Bihísi ang bátà únà pakatulga,</i> Wipe the child&apos;s body with a wet cloth before putting him to sleep. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> wipe oneself or s.o. with a damp cloth.

<p id=2713><form>bíhu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>adept</tr>, <tr>skillful</tr>. <i>Bíhu kaáyu siyang mamakak,</i><i></i> She&apos;s very good at lying. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be skillful, adept. <i>Nabíhu ku sa pagpangindiksiyun,</i> I became adept in giving shots.

<p id=2714><form>bíhud</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>roe</tr>. <number>2</number> one&apos;s children (humorous). <i>Pila nay bíhud mu karun?</i> How many children do you have now? <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> have roe. <i>Namíhud nang bansíkul nga ákung nakúhà,</i> The mackerels I caught were full of roe. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> become pregnant (humorous). <i>Namíhud ka lang nga way banabána?</i> You became pregnant without a husband? <form>bidhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fish having roe. <number>2</number> pregnant woman (humorous). <form>tingpamíhud</form> <pos>n</pos> spawning season.

<p id=2715><form>bihúku</form> <xr>= <sc>uway</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2716><form>bíhun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. Chinese noodle, translucent, coarser than the <ix>miswa</ix> but finer than <ix>tanghun.</ix> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1C12; b6]</itype> prepare a dish with <pb n=134><ix>bíhun.</ix>

<p id=2717><form>bíi</form> short for <ix>Maáyung gabíi,</ix> Good evening.

<p id=2718><form>bíka</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>potsherd</tr>. <number>2</number> s.t. worth as much as a sherd. <i>Unsa man ang sápì ku, bíka, nga dì mu dawátun?</i> Is my money worthless that you don&apos;t accept it?

<p id=2719><form>bikabika</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish.

<p id=2720><form>bíkag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB126; a12]</itype> <tr>prod</tr>, <tr>urge</tr> s.o. to do s.t. <i>Bísag giunsag bíkag, dílì giyud siya mukúyug,</i> No matter how much we prod him, he won&apos;t go. <i>Ang íyang trátu mauy nagbíkag níya paghímug dautan,</i> Her lover prodded her to do s.t. bad. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> having the urge to do things in imitation of theirs. <i>Bikag nga pagkatáwu. Unsay buhátun sa uban íyang sundun,</i> He is a <tr>copycat</tr>. Whatever other people do he wants to do, too.

<p id=2721><form>bikàkà<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>bikangkang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2722><form>bikàkà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. hopscotch played on a rectangular figure divided into two rows, each row of which contains four frames. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> play this k.o. hopscotch.

<p id=2723><form>bikang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>busy</tr>, <tr>preoccupied</tr> because of too many things to do at once. <number>2</number> <tr>encumbering</tr>, causing extra work. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get encumbered, too busy with many things. <i>Makabikang (makapabikang) ning mga silya sa ákung paglampásu,</i> These chairs make it all the harder to get the floor scrubbed. <i>Nagkabikang ku sa trabáhu nga nagkadaghan na ning mga táwu dinhi,</i> I have so much work now that there are so many people staying here.

<p id=2724><form>bikang<sub>2</sub>, bíkang</form> <pos>a</pos> having the feet spread apart, front to back or sideways. <i>Bikang íyang linaktan,</i> He walked with his feet spread apart. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> take a stride, take a long step. <i>Dì siya makabikang kay guut íyang palda,</i> She cannot take big steps because she has a tight skirt on. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> set one&apos;s feet apart. <i>Napukling kay walà man mabíkang ang mga tiil,</i> He fell because he had not set his feet well apart. <pos>n</pos> large stride. <form>-in-</form> <pos>a</pos> for the legs to be widely spread apart.

<p id=2725><form>bikangkang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> spread one&apos;s legs apart. <i>Ug dì ka mubikangkang, dúgay kang kahimugsúan,</i> If you don&apos;t spread your legs, you&apos;ll have a hard time giving birth.

<p id=2726><form>bikarbunátu</form> <pos>n</pos> sodium bicarbonate.&dagger;

<p id=2727><form>bikaryu</form> <pos>n</pos> officer of the church.

<p id=2728><form>bikil</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>nudge</tr>, <tr>move</tr> s.t. out of its position. <i>Kinsay nagbikil sa kwadru nga naharag man?</i> Who moved the picture, that it is tilting? <i>Ibikil (bikila) ang tupad mung natúlug,</i> Nudge the fellow beside you. He fell asleep. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <number>a</number> <tr>protrude</tr>, stick out. <i>Kun magtanum ug kamúting káhuy ibikil (bikila) ang píkas tumuy sa yútà,</i> When you plant cassava stems, let one end stick out of the ground. <number>b</number> encumber by protruding<corr>.</corr> <i>Mubikil ang bátà sa íyang tiyan iglakaw níya,</i> The child in her stomach sticks out and makes it hard for her to walk. <number>2c</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> trip s.o. <i>Nabikil ku sa tuud,</i> I tripped over the stump. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> suddenly twisted so as to get sprained. <i>Nagtakiang siyang naglakaw kay nabikil ang íyang tiil,</i> He walked with a limp because his foot got twisted. <number>4</number> <itype>[AC3; ac3]</itype> <number>a</number> be contrary, opposed. <i>Ang íyang anak mauy nakabikil sa íyang pagminyù ug usab,</i> Her child made it difficult for her to remarry. <i>Nagbíkil ang ílang mga hunàhúnà,</i> Their opinions differed. <number>b</number> provoke a quarrel, annoy s.o. with the purpose of angering him. <i>Bísag unsa na lay ílang buhátun nga ibikil sa bátà,</i> They never run out of ways to make the child cry. <pos>a</pos> <tr>contrary</tr>, <tr>adverse</tr>. <i>Bikil kaáyu ning batáa. Bisag unsay átung isulti, lalísun giyud,</i> This child is very contrary. He gives back talk to whatever we say. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>quarrel</tr>, <tr>provocation</tr> to a fight. <i>Wà pa mahílut ang ílang bikil,</i> Their quarrel hasn&apos;t been settled. <form>biklunun, biklúnun, bikilúnun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> needing prodding. <i>Biklunung batáa mabáwu kag paayun-áyun únà mulíhuk,</i> The child needs to be prodded. You go wild trying to get him to do s.t. <number>2</number> very sensitive, easily disturbed. <i>Biklunun si Pidru. Sabdan lag gamay, masukù dáyun,</i> Pedro is sensitive. Just nudge him, and he gets angry right away.

<p id=2729><form>bíking<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> carry s.t. hanging down in the hands. <i>Nagbíking ug baskit,</i> Carrying a basket. <i>Ayaw bikínga ang bátà,</i> Don&apos;t carry the child by the arms.

<p id=2730><form>bíking<sub>2</sub>, &mdash; pawdir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>baking powder</tr>.

<p id=2731><form>bikíni</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bikini</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> wear, make into a bikini.

<p id=2732><form>bikiri</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bakery</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> get, make into a bakery.

<p id=2733><form>biks<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> Vicks, brand name for mentholated medicines. <form>&mdash; inhílir</form> <pos>n</pos> Vicks inhaler.

<p id=2734><form>biks<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>bíku<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=2735><form>biktima</form> <pos>n</pos> victim of foul play. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> be made a victim. <i>Nabiktima ku sa mamarigla,</i> I was a victim of the thugs.

<p id=2736><form>bikturi</form> <pos>n</pos> the money used after the war, so called because of the legend &lsquo;victory&rsquo; on the bill.

<p id=2737><form>bikturya</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> win the love of s.o. <i>Dì ka na ángay mangabughù sa dáang trátu sa ímu nga bána. Tutal, ikaw may nakabikturya níya,</i> You shouldn&apos;t be jealous of your husband&apos;s former girl friend. Anyway, you were the one who landed him.

<p id=2738><form>bikturyúsu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>victorious</tr>.

<p id=2739><form>bíku<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hopscotch</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; b6]</itype> play hopscotch. <pb n=135><form>bikubíku</form> <xr>= <sc>bíku</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2740><form>bíku<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> sweet made of sticky rice cooked with coconut milk and sweetened, popularly eaten between meals. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make <ix>bíku.</ix>

<p id=2741><form>bikug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB26; a1]</itype> <tr>move</tr> s.t. fastened, <tr>bend</tr> s.t. firm out of place, be moved, <tr>bent</tr>. <i>Dì ni mabikug kay gilansang,</i> You can&apos;t budge it because it&apos;s nailed. <i>Ang íyang disisiyun dílì mubikug (mabikug),</i> His decision cannot be changed. <i>Bikuga siya sa íyang gilingkúran,</i> Dislodge him from where he is sitting.

<p id=2742><form>bíkug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cramp</tr> in the muscles. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[BN246; b4]</itype> get a cramp. <i>Mibíkug (namíkug, nabíkúgan) ákung bitíis,</i> I have a cramp in my legs. <number>2</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> cause cramps.

<p id=2743><form>bíkug<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a coconut or <ix>nípà</ix> midrib. <form>silhig nga &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> broom made of coconut or <ix>nípà</ix> midribs. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> beat s.o. with a coconut or <ix>nípà</ix> midrib.

<p id=2744><form>bíkul</form> <pos>n</pos> variety of white rice, recently introduced because of its high yield.

<p id=2745><form>*bikusbikus</form> <form>ka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be miserably <tr>poor</tr> and hard up.

<p id=2746><form>bikwad</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bent</tr> backwards, flat on its back, <tr>twisted</tr> <tr>askew</tr>. <i>Tukúri nang pusti. Bikwad man,</i> Straighten out the post. It is leaning over backwards. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; ab2]</itype> lean backwards, be bent askew; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Mibikwad siya arun dílì hiig-an ang íyang nawung,</i> She ducked backwards so that her face would not be hit. <i>Nagkabikwad ang tiil sa lamísa,</i> The legs of the table are getting all bent out of shape.

<p id=2747><form>bikwang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> cause s.t. to fall or turn over by pulling the feet or some appendage upwards. <i>Bikwánga lang ang batíyà arun mayabu ang túbig,</i> Turn the basin over to spill the water out. <i>Bikwánga ang bábuy dáyun gapúsa,</i> Pick the pig up by the legs and bind it.

<p id=2748><form>bikwing</form> <xr>= <sc>bíking</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2749><form>bíla</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b1c1]</itype> spread the legs apart to the sides. <i>Ngánung mubíla ka mang maglingkud?</i> Why do you spread your legs when you sit? <form>bilahan</form> <pos>n</pos> crotch. <form>bilabila</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to grasses which have tassels consisting of three or more spikes growing in at greater than 90° angles from each other (like legs spread apart), e.g. <bio>Eleusine indica</bio>.

<p id=2750><form>bílà, biláan</form> <pos>n</pos> ethnic group in Southern Mindanao. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> Bilaan region in Southern Mindanao.

<p id=2751><form>bílad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> <tr>widen</tr>, spread out, spread s.t. out. <i>Ang bulad núkus mubílad kun ihúmul sa túbig,</i> Dried squid will spread out when soaked. <i>Nagbílad sila sa báling arun mauga,</i> They are spreading the net to dry it. <i>Gipamutul níya ang mga tanum arun mabílad ang agiánan,</i> He cut the trees down to widen the path. <pos>n</pos> <tr>width</tr>, <tr>spread</tr>. <i>Hiktin ang bílad sa banig,</i> The mat is narrow across. <pos>a</pos> <tr>wide</tr>, <tr>broad</tr>. <i>Bílad kaáyu ang ílang uma,</i> Their farm stretches over a broad area. <form>biladbilad</form> <xr>= <sc>baliálà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2752><form>biláda<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> program of musical and literary numbers, usually held in the evening. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> hold such a program.

<p id=2753><form>biláda<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> extension of a room or of a house. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make an extension, add an extension to a room.

<p id=2754><form>bilag-ung</form> <xr>= <sc>balag-ung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2755><form>bilakà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> sit squat with legs crossed. <i>Nagbilakà siyang naglingkud daw Budha,</i> He is squatting with legs crossed like Buddha.

<p id=2756><form>bilakà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a variety of dwarf coconut, so short that sometimes its fruit touch the ground, with a trunk as big as the ordinary variety of tree, but with slightly bigger fruit.

<p id=2757><form>bílang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> consider, treat s.o. as. <i>Dì ku mubílang nímung igsúun tungud sa pakauwaw nga ímung gipátik sa átung ngálan,</i> I won&apos;t recognize you as a sister because of the disgrace you brought upon our name. <i>Gibílang kung inahan ang ákung gikasiráhan,</i> I consider my landlady a mother. <pos>n</pos> in the capacity of. <i>Bílang mananambal sultían tikaw sa makadáut nímu,</i> As a doctor I&apos;ll tell you what is harmful for you.

<p id=2758><form>bilangbílang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. cactus-like plant of the strand, the stems and leaves of which are used as a condiment and vegetable: <bio>Sesuvium portulacastrum</bio>.

<p id=2759><form>bilanggà</form> <pos>n</pos> infection affecting the vaginal lips, characterized by reddening and intense itching. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4b4]</itype> for vaginal lips to become reddish and itchy. <i>Malagmit bilanggaun (bilanggaan) kag dílì ka manghúgas sa ímung binday,</i> You&apos;ll get an infection in your vagina if you don&apos;t wash it.

<p id=2760><form>bilanggù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> <tr>imprison</tr>. <i>Bilanggúun (ibilanggù) ka sa ímung lawak,</i> You will be confined to your room. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> prisoner. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prison</tr>.

<p id=2761><form>bilanggutánan</form> expression of surprise or discomfort, mild euphemism for <ix>bilat sa íyang ina.</ix> <i>Bilanggutánan, hikalimtan kung ákung yáwi,</i> Damn! I forgot my keys. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> say <ix>bilanggutánan</ix> to s.o.

<p id=2762><form>bilangkad, bilangkat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> have the legs spread wide apart. <i>Nagbuy-ud siya nga nagbilangkat sa katri,</i> She was sprawled on the bed with her legs apart. <form>-ra</form> <pos>n</pos> broad, woman <pb n=136>who is cooperative in sexual matters.

<p id=2763><form>bilar</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vigil</tr>, esp. one of the dead. <i>Dúnay bilar basta dúnay mamatyan,</i> A vigil is always held if the dead person has relatives. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> keep a <tr>wake</tr>. <i>Gibilaran níla ang minatay,</i> They kept vigil over the corpse. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> do s.t. late into the night. <i>Magbilar kug tuun rung gabíi,</i> I will stay up late studying tonight. <number>2a</number> <itype>[B156]</itype> stay up late. <i>Nabilar ku gabíi kay hilabihang pagsákit sa bátà,</i> I stayed up late last night because the baby was very sick.

<p id=2764><form>bilas</form> <pos>n</pos> the husband or wife of one&apos;s husband&apos;s or wife&apos;s sibling. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; a12]</itype> be <ix>bilas.</ix> <i>Magbílas na ta kay gipakaslan kung igsúun sa ímung asáwa,</i> We&apos;re <ix>bilas</ix> now because I married your wife&apos;s sister.

<p id=2765><form>bílas</form> <pos>n</pos> eye infection, <tr>conjunctivitis</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> have sore eyes. <i>Gibílas ákung mata,</i> I have conjunctivitis.

<p id=2766><form>bilásun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish, the name given to the broad species of <bio>Caesio</bio>, esp. <bio>Caesio erythrogaster</bio>.

<p id=2767><form>bilat</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>cunt</tr> of a person or animal (coarse). <number>2</number> profane exclamation. <number>a</number> expression indicating disbelief. <i>Bilat! Ása man ku mutúu adtu,</i> Hell! You think I&apos;d ever believe that. <number>b</number> expression indicating exasperation at s.t. which happened contrary to one&apos;s desires. <i>Bilat! Nasipyat pa giyud dà,</i> Shit! I missed again. <form>&mdash; sa ímung (íyang) ina, inahan</form> <number>1</number> profane exclamation used upon experiencing annoyance. <i>Ikawng bilat sa ímung ináha ka,</i> You son of a bitch, you. <i>Gikaun sa bilat sa íyang ina,</i> The son of a bitch ate it. <number>2</number> watchamacallit, a filler word. <i>Ag kadtung unsa gud tung bilat sa íyang ináha tu&mdash;íyang íhi,</i> That&mdash;um, what was that son of a bitch there called, the axle. <form>bilatbilat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1245; a12]</itype> have more work to do than one can manage (coarse word). <i>Nagkabilatbilat ku sa trabáhu dinhi,</i> I&apos;m swamped with work here. <i>Akuy ímung bilatbilatun ug pabáyad ning utánga?</i> You trying to drive me crazy paying these debts. <form>-ra</form> <pos>n</pos> broad, a derogatory word referring to a woman.

<p id=2768><form>bilaug</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fair-sized, edible clam.

<p id=2769><form>bilay</form> <pos>n</pos> hanging screen. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> hang a protective screen. <i>Gibiláyan ku ang bátà arun dì mainitan,</i> I hung a screen up for the child so it wouldn&apos;t be in the sun. <form>bilaybílay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> hang a temporary walling for a temporary shelter. <i>Magbilaybílay ta samtang walà pa tay balay,</i> We&apos;ll put up a screen as a temporary shelter as long as we have no house.

<p id=2770><form>bilbátum</form> <pos>n</pos> bell-bottom pants.

<p id=2771><form>bilbaw</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>surísu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2772><form>bilbig</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. white, edible clam, growing to 2&Prime;.

<p id=2773><form>bilbiki</form> <xr>= <sc>milibiki</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2774><form>bilbil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a12]</itype> make, be overly <tr>obese</tr>. <i>Ang ímung kadakug káun mauy nakabilbil (nakapabilbil) nímu,</i> Your voracious appetite made you overly obese. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> overly obese.

<p id=2775><form>bilding</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>building</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> erect a building.

<p id=2776><form>bildu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>glass</tr>. <i>Bildu sa bintánà,</i> Glass in the window. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> fit s.t. with glass. <i>Bildúhan tag bag-u ang ímung antiyúhus,</i> Let&apos;s fit your glasses with new lenses.

<p id=2777><form>bildúra</form> <pos>n</pos> vegetables, root crops cooked in stews and soups with meat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> cook vegetables with soup or stew.

<p id=2778><form>bildyun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. bread in loaf, around 6&Prime; long with a fine, soft texture.

<p id=2779><form>bilgas</form> <pos>n</pos> Belgian nuns. <i>Ang kulihiyu sa Santa Tirísa gipadágan sa mga bilgas,</i> St. Theresa&apos;s School is run by Belgian sisters.

<p id=2780><form>bilhad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> pull two vertical things apart. <i>Bilhára ang birha arun makalusut ta,</i> Pull the railings apart so we can get through.

<!-- sub-entry hátag ug - confused. -->

<p id=2781><form>bili</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>price</tr>. <i>Ang bili sa palalítun,</i> The price of commodities. <number>2</number> <tr>worth</tr>. <i>Wà nay bili ang kinabúhì ug mawalà ka,</i> Life is worthless without you. <form>hátag ug &mdash;</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> not value s.t. <i>Ang ákung tambag dílì hatágan ug bili,</i> He does not value my advice. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> cost. <i>Mibili nag písus ang gantang sa mais,</i> A <ix>ganta</ix> of corn costs one peso. <number>1a</number> cost s.o. s.t., result in. <i>Kanang ímung binúang mubili nímug kastígu,</i> Your foolishness will cost you a spanking. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> <tr>quote</tr> a price to s.o. <i>Bilhan ta kag singku,</i> I will offer it to you for five. <form>bililhun</form> <pos>a</pos> valuable, precious.

<p id=2782><form>bilib</form> be <tr>impressed</tr> by s.o. <i>Bilib ku nímu dà, antígu giyud kang mukanta,</i> I&apos;m impressed by you. You sure know how to sing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B23(1)46; b3]</itype> be impressed. <i>Mibilib ang babáying sapían siya kay dúnay awtu,</i> The woman was impressed, thinking he was rich, because he had a car. <i>Ang biliban nákù ánang buksidúra ang íyang liphuk,</i> What impressed me about that boxer is his left hook. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> put on an act to impress s.o. <i>Nagpabilib na sad ang hambugíru,</i> The braggart is trying to impress us again.

<p id=2783><form>bilíbid<sub>1,2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>balíbud<sub>1,2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=2784><form>bilíbid<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> national <tr>penitentiary</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be put in Bilibid Prison. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> be put in Bilibid.&dagger;

<p id=2785><form>bilíbud<sub>1,2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>balíbud<sub>1,2</sub></sc>.</xr>s

<p id=2786><form>bilíbul</form> <xr>= <sc>bulíbuy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2787><form>biligyà</form> <xr>= <sc>baligyà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2788><form>bílik</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB2S6; a]</itype> <tr>turn</tr> on its axis, <tr>spin</tr> s.t. <i>Mubílik nang manubílag íya ra,</i> That steering wheel turns by itself. <i>Siyay mibílik sa <pb n=137>timun,</i> He turned the steering wheel of the boat. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>twist</tr> individual strands to be made into rope. <i>Dílì nímu bilíkun ang lugway ug hugut arun dílì mukulus,</i> Don&apos;t twist the strand tight so that it won&apos;t kink. <pos>n</pos> <tr>turning</tr>. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> device for twisting strands into rope.

<p id=2789><form>bilíkis</form> <xr>= <sc>balíkis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2790><form>bilin</form> <pos>n</pos> nativity scene depicted in a crèche. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> make, put a crèche s.w.

<p id=2791><form>bílin</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> leave s.t. behind. <i>Kinsay nagbílin ning baskit dinhi?</i> Who left this basket here? <i>Binlan ta kag bugas,</i> I&apos;ll leave you some rice. <i>Ibílin ang bátà,</i> Leave the child behind. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> for a wife to be left pregnant when her husband dies. <i>Gibinlan siya pagkamatay sa íyang bána,</i> She was pregnant (lit. had s.t. left in her) when her husband died. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; ug púlung, sulti</formx> <itype>[A]</itype> leave word. <i>Nagbílin siyag sulti nga ipatiwas ang ímung trabáhu,</i> He left word for you to finish your work. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> one&apos;s turn to be left behind. <i>Ákung bílin run,</i> It&apos;s my turn to stay behind this time. <number>2</number> words, orders left by s.o. <i>Ang bílin ni Tátay únà mamatay,</i> Father&apos;s last words before he died. <number>3</number> s.o. who stays behind. <i>Akuy bílin sa balay,</i> I&apos;ll stay in the house. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1</number> stay behind. <i>Akuy magpabílin,</i> I&apos;ll remain behind. <number>2</number> remain in the same way. <i>Nagpabílin silang malipáyun,</i> They remained happy. <i>Dì makapabílin ug dúgay ang báhù ning agwáha,</i> The smell of this perfume won&apos;t remain long. <form>hi-/ha-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b4]</itype> <number>1</number> be left behind. <i>Nahibilin ku paglarga sa barku,</i> I was left behind when the boat left. <i>Ang samad nahibinlan ug mga sugsug,</i> Small slivers were left in his wound. <number>2</number> be the amount remaining. <i>Písus ray nahabilin sa súhul nákù,</i> Only one peso was left from my salary. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; sa daplin</formx> for a girl to fail to get married. <form>pamilinbílin</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1</number> go around saying <corr sic=good-bye>goodbye</corr>. <i>Namilinbílin siyag pamisíta úsà mulangyaw,</i> She&apos;s making her goodbye visits before she emigrates. <number>2</number> leave needlessly. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> inheritance. <i>Giparíhas pagbáhin ang ámung kabílin,</i> Our inheritance was divided equally. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> for an inheritance to be left to s.o. <i>Dì mamatay ang úngù ug dì ikabílin ang íyang kaláki,</i> The witch can not die if the source of his power is not left to s.o. else. <form>binlunun</form> <xr>= <sc>bílin</sc>, <ix>n3.</ix></xr>

<p id=2792><form>bil-is</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tall, slender, ornamental palm with pinnate leaves, the fruit of which are similar to the <bio>Areca</bio> and may also be chewed: <bio>Heterospathe elata</bio>.

<p id=2793><form>biliyun</form> <pos>n</pos> billion. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> reach the billion mark. <form>-in-</form> <pos>a</pos> by the billions.

<p id=2794><form>bilt-in</form> <pos>n</pos> built-in cabinet and shelves. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> construct, put built-in furniture s.w.

<p id=2795><form>biltubil</form> <pos>n</pos> fight which endures the entire round&mdash;from the opening bell to the closing bell. <i>Ang biltubil nílang áway,</i> Their fight which lasted from bell to bell.

<p id=2796><form>bílu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>veil</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> wear, make into, put on a veil. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> be a veil sponsor in a wedding ceremony, the one who puts the veil over the shoulders of the couple in the course of the ceremony.

<p id=2797><form>bilug, bílug</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>matchsticks</tr>.

<p id=2798><form>bilungbilung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>moonfish</tr>: <bio>Mene maculata</bio>.

<p id=2799><form>bílus</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. outriggered sailboat, reaching 20&prime; in length. <form>dus &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> two-masted sailboat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> ride this sort of sailboat.

<p id=2800><form>bilwa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; c1]</itype> for the legs to be spread in falling. <i>Nabilwa ang íyang tiil pagkah&umacracu;g maung nalisa,</i> He fell down with his feet stretched apart, and they were dislocated.

<p id=2801><form>bilya<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>belt buckle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> put a buckle on s.o., make into a belt buckle.

<p id=2802><form>bilya<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. game of marbles where the marbles are shot into four holes arranged in a square.

<p id=2803><form>bilya<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>villa, suburban mansion</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> make a villa.

<p id=2804><form>bilyáka</form> <xr>= <sc>bilyáku</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=2805><form>bilyáku</form> <pos>a</pos> pranking, mischievous, but not of a malicious sort. <i>Gisúling sa bilyáku ang maistra,</i> The naughty boy peeped up the teacher&apos;s dress. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be, become mischievous. <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> act in a mischievous way.

<p id=2806><form>bilyanu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tossing coins, heads or tails</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c3]</itype> toss coins.

<p id=2807><form>bilyar</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>billiards</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c3]</itype> play billiards.

<p id=2808><form>bilyíti</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>a note, a short letter</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>love letter</tr>.

<p id=2809><form>bilyu</form> <pos>n</pos> strands of fiber twisted together into a string. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> twine hand-twisted strands into a thin rope (<ix>písì</ix>). <form>bilyuhan, bilyuhánan</form> <pos>n</pos> device for twining strands into rope.

<p id=2810><form>bilyun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>crazy, doing crazy, foolish things</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> go crazy. <form>Culu-</form> <pos>a</pos> somewhat crazy. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> crazy antics. <form>-aryu</form> <pos>n</pos> billionaire.

<p id=2811><form>bimul</form> <pos>n</pos> flat in music. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB26; b6c1]</itype> <number>1</number> play a diminished chord, for a chord to be diminished. <i>Siyay nagbimul sa katapúsang báhin sa kanta,</i> He played the finale with a diminished chord. <number>2</number> play a note too low, flat in pitch. <i>Mibimul (mabimul) ang túnu, mau nga ius-us ang ímung tudlù,</i> The notes are flat, so lower your fingers.

<p id=2812><form>binag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> set s.t. aside to give it away or donate it. <i>Káda adlaw sa minatay magbinag giyud kug kwarta pára ipamísa,</i> Every All Souls&apos; Day, I set aside a small amount for the mass. <i>Ibinag nátù níla ring ubang humay,</i> <pb n=138>We will set aside the rest of this rice for them.

<p id=2813><form>binagri</form> <pos>n</pos> sour <tr>vinegar</tr> from pineapple, apples. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make vinegar.

<p id=2814><form>binagsáan</form> (from <ix>usa</ix>) <pos>n</pos> any outriggered single-seater canoe.

<p id=2815><form>binakháwan</form> <xr>= <sc>bakhaw<sub>2</sub></sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr>

<p id=2816><form>binalatung</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>balátung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2817><form>binangkal</form> <pos>n</pos> delicacy made of leftover bread or cookies with sugar made into a ball, covered with sesame seeds and fried.

<p id=2818><form>binaw</form> <pos>n</pos> deer.

<p id=2819><form>bindáhi</form> <pos>n</pos> bandage. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> bandage s.t. <i>Bindahían tang ímung hubag,</i> Let&apos;s bandage your boil. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make into a bandage.

<p id=2820><form>binday</form> <pos>n</pos> child&apos;s talk for <tr>female genitalia</tr>.

<p id=2821><form>bindisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> blessing, benediction. <i>Bindisiyun sa párì,</i> The priest&apos;s benediction. <i>Bindisiyun sa mga ginikánan,</i> Parental blessing. <i>Ang ílang pagdaug mag-agad sa bindisiyun sa prisidinti,</i> Their victory depends upon having the president&apos;s blessings. <number>2</number> approval. <i>May bindisiyun na ba sa mayur ang ímung papílis?</i> Do your papers bear the mayor&apos;s approval? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b1]</itype> <number>1</number> give a <tr>benediction</tr>. <number>2</number> give <tr>approval</tr> to s.t.

<p id=2822><form>bindíta</form> <pos>n</pos> holy water. <form>agwa &mdash;</form> holy water. <form>&mdash; sa lukay</form> Palm Sunday. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> sprinkle holy water on. <form>binditahánan</form> <number>1</number> place where holy water is kept. <number>2</number> thing to be blessed. <form>-du</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. that has been blessed by a priest.

<p id=2823><form>bindítu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> clasp the hands on the breast as in prayer.

<p id=2824><form>binga, bingà, bingag</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. baler (volute) shell, used to crush cocoa seeds.

<p id=2825><form>bingal</form> <pos>n</pos> a slit or opening in a garment made for convenience in putting it on. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> put a slit in a garment. <i>Bingali ang luyu sa ímung blúsa,</i> Put a slit in the back of the blouse.

<p id=2826><form>bíngat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> widen the angle of opening. <i>Mibíngat siya sa balisung,</i> He opened his jackknife. <i>Bingátag maáyu ang tiiltíil sa kamira,</i> Spread out the camera tripod. <number>2</number> stretch the sides of a hole, pull an elastic string. <i>Ayaw bingáta ímung bàbà,</i> Don&apos;t stretch your mouth at the sides. <i>Gibingátan ku bítaw siyag tiradur, midágan lagi,</i> As soon as I stretched my slingshot, aiming at him, he ran away.

<p id=2827><form>bingaw</form> <xr>= <sc>bingal</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2828><form>bingbing</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> tweak a part of the body with the thumb and forefinger, usually the ears. <i>Akuy mubingbing ninyu ug magsábà mu,</i> I&apos;ll tweak your ears if you make noise.

<p id=2829><form>bingga</form> (slang form) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> <number>1</number> go ahead and do s.t. involving danger. <i>Bingga. <corr sic=Sukli>Suklì</corr>,</i> Come on, fight him. <i>Ug hanggátun ka binggáhi,</i> If he threatens, go ahead, get into it. <number>2</number> come on, step on it. <i>Bingga. Maapsan ta,</i> Step on it. They&apos;re about to overtake us. <number>3</number> maul s.o. <i>Gibinggáhan aku sa mga bágis,</i> The toughs mauled me.

<p id=2830><form>binggadúra</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> saying bad things about others with malicious intent. <number>2</number> vengeful. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be a malicious gossip. <i>Nabinggadúra siya kay gustung mangamung,</i> She became malicious in her talk because she wants other people to suffer her fate.

<p id=2831><form>binggála</form> <pos>n</pos> sparkler, k.o. fireworks that emit sparks.

<p id=2832><form>binggansa</form> <pos>n</pos> vengeance of a severely harmful sort.

<p id=2833><form>binggar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> harm others by speaking ill of them. <i>Naminggar kay nasína,</i> She is saying evil things because she is envious. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> beat up (slang). <i>Gibinggaran ang tigúlang,</i> The old man was mauled. <pos>n</pos> s.t. bad said of s.o. designed to harm him.

<p id=2834><form>binggu</form> <pos>n</pos> bingo. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> play bingo. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> get bingo. <i>Kaduha ku makabinggu gabíi,</i> I got bingo twice last night. <number>3</number> <itype>[B26; b6]</itype> for a card to go bingo. <i>Hápit na mubinggu ang ákung kard,</i> My card is about to go bingo.

<p id=2835><form>bingit</form> <pos>n</pos> throat infection. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4b4]</itype> have a sore throat. <i>Gibingit (gibingitan) ku,</i> I got a sore throat.

<p id=2836><form>bingka</form> <xr>= <sc>bibingka</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2837><form>bingkas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> rip stitches apart, for stitches to get ripped apart. <i>Kinsay nagbingkas niíning sinináa?</i> Who ripped this dress apart at the stitches? <i>Ayaw ináta arun dílì mabingkas ang tahì,</i> Do not pull at it or the stitches will get undone.

<p id=2838><form>bingkil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; b3]</itype> small quarrel, misunderstanding. <i>Natural sa mga bátà nga magbingkil sa mga duláan,</i> It&apos;s only natural for children to fight about toys. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> difference, reason for misunderstanding.

<p id=2839><form>bingkung</form> <pos>n</pos> tool resembling a small pick or axe with blade placed at an angle to the handle, used to dig up the soil shallowly, hollow out dugouts, trim logs, etc. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> work on s.t. with this instrument. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make into this instrument. <form>pa&N;-an</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to the hammerhead shark, so called because its flattened head with its oculonarial expansions is positioned to the body as the blade of a pick is to its handle.

<p id=2840><form>bingwit<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1N; a12b2]</itype> <tr>catch</tr> fish in shallow waters with a hook and line, usually using also a fishing rod. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> <tr>trap</tr> s.o. into marriage. <i>Nakabingwit si Tikla ug <pb n=139>sapíang Insik,</i> Tecla snared a rich Chinese.

<p id=2841><form>bingwit<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>bingit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2842><form>binhamin</form> <pos>n</pos> youngest man or boy in a group of men or boys.

<p id=2843><form>binhì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>seed</tr>. <i>Migítib nang binhì nga gipugas ku sa ímung sabakan,</i> The seed which I planted on your womb is now beginning to grow. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c16]</itype> <number>1</number> use as a seed for seedlings. <i>Binhía (ibinhì) ang lísu niánang kapayása kay dumadagkù,</i> Use the seeds of that papaya for seedlings because it is a large variety. <number>2</number> <tr>implant</tr> in one&apos;s mind. <i>Binhía (ibinhì) sa íyang kaisípan ang kabuútan,</i> Instill honesty in his mind.

<p id=2844><form>binhud</form> <xr>= <sc>banhud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2845><form>binibuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>homosexual man</tr>.

<p id=2846><form>binignit</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. sweet soup eaten as a snack, made of root crops and bananas cooked in coconut milk together with various other starchy ingredients, jackfruit, and flavoring. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make, make into <ix>binignit.</ix>

<p id=2847><form>binipisyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> activity held to raise money for charity. <number>2</number> <tr>charity</tr>, pecuniary help. <i>Nangáyù ang alkaldig binipisyu sa mga nasunúgan,</i> The mayor asked for charity for the fire victims. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> hold a benefit, etc. <i>Magbinipisyu ta arun makasapì ang pangílin,</i> Let&apos;s hold a benefit ball to raise money for the fiesta.

<p id=2848><form>bínit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>carry</tr> s.t. heavy by holding it at the top or at one end and letting it dangle. <i>Ayaw biníta ang bulsíta kay mabusbus,</i> Don&apos;t carry the paper bag by the top because the bottom will give way.

<p id=2849><form>binlad</form> <xr>= <sc>binulad</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>bulad</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2850><form>binlangan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>container</tr> for holding food or water for animals. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> make s.t. into a feeding container.

<p id=2851><form>binlud</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> finely ground corn grits. <number>2</number> small child who is allowed to participate in a game just to humor it.

<p id=2852><form>binrubyum</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. orchid.

<p id=2853><form>binsul</form> <pos>n</pos> stinger of a ray fish.

<p id=2854><form>binta<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sale</tr> of s.t. <i>Kusug ang binta sa karmilítus kun duul sa tulunghaan,</i> Candy sells fast near a school. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> offer s.t. for sale. <i>Ang ílang pinalit sa Sandákan ibinta sa Hulu,</i> The things they buy in Sandakan they sell in Jolo.&dagger;

<p id=2855><form>binta<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> advantage given in a game or contest. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> give s.o. an advantage. <i>Pila ka puntus ang ibinta mu nákù?</i> How many points will you give me as advantage? <number>2</number> <itype>[A123; b8]</itype> get an advantage. <i>Ug makabinta kag duha ka puntus, dì na siya kaapas,</i> If you get two points advantage, he won&apos;t be able to catch up.

<p id=2856><form>binta<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vinta</tr>, k.o. speedy sailboat used by Muslims, with colorful sails and with one or two outriggers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> take, make into a vinta.

<p id=2857><form>bintáhà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>advantage</tr> in competition. <i>Bintáhà kaáyu nga may titulu ta,</i> It is a great advantage to have a degree. <number>2</number> for a condition to be <tr>somewhat better</tr>. <i>Bintáhà run kay bubaratu ang baligyà,</i> Conditions are better now because food is cheaper. <i>Bintáhà run ang íyang hilánat,</i> His fever is better now. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>binta<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <formx>walà &mdash;</formx> <itype>[C3]</itype> be evenly matched, such that no one has an advantage. <i>Wà magbintáhà ug dakù ang inyung duhang láwas,</i> Your two bodies are <tr>evenly matched</tr>. <number>3</number> <itype>[B246]</itype> for conditions to <tr>improve</tr>. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>bintáhà</sc>, <ix>n2.</ix></xr> <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> take advantage at the expense of another. <i>Namintáhà ang magulang pagbáhin sa kindi,</i> The oldest child took advantage of the others when the candy was divided. <form>bintahadur, bintahúsu</form> <pos>a</pos> one who takes advantage of weaker people. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> become a person of the sort that takes advantage.

<p id=2858><form>bintánà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>window</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make, add a window. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> sit by or look out of the window. <i>Pamintanái ang nagtawag nímu,</i> Look out of the window at the man calling you. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> show as if appearing in a window. <i>Namintánà íyang pikuy,</i> His penis peeped out.

<p id=2859><form>bintang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>distance between</tr>. <i>Duha ka dupa lang ang bintang sa duha ka balay,</i> The two houses are only two fathoms apart from each other. <number>2</number> advantage, edge in a race or contest. <i>Kun ikaw lay makiglumbà nákù tagáan ta pa kag bintang,</i> I&apos;ll give you an advantage if it&apos;s just you that&apos;s going to race with me. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> be at a distance, be <tr>ahead</tr> of s.o. <i>Nagbintang sila pagpanglingkud,</i> They sat far from each other. <i>Ibintang (bintánga, bintanga) pagbutang ang mga kaang,</i> Place the flower pots far apart from each other. <number>2</number> give an edge in a contest. <i>Bintangan ta kag dus kartas,</i> I&apos;ll give you an advantage of two cards.

<p id=2860><form>bintang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>accuse</tr>, lay the <tr>blame</tr> on s.o. <i>Dílì maáyu nga mubintang (mamintang) ta ug salà kun dílì kita sigúru,</i> We must not lay blame on s.o. if we are not sure about it. <i>Akuy nabintangan sa sayup,</i> I was blamed for the mistake.

<p id=2861><form>bintanilya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>small window</tr>, e.g. a porthole. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> put a small window in.

<p id=2862><form>bintarug</form> <pos>n</pos> male genitalia (humorous euphemism). <i>Kadakù níya ug bintarug,</i> How big his <tr>penis</tr> is!

<p id=2863><form>binti</form> <xr>= <sc>bayinti</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2864><form>bintì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mixer</tr>, soft drink or water to dilute <pb n=140>liquor. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>mix drinks</tr>. <i>Bintíun níya ang lambanug ug <corr sic=sibin-up>sibin-ap</corr>,</i> He will mix the seven-up and the nipa palm toddy together.

<p id=2865><form>bintì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN]</itype> for the veins to be, become prominent. <i>Mibintì ang ugat sa íyang nawung sa kasukù,</i> The veins in his forehead stood out in his anger.

<p id=2866><form>bintiladur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>electric fan</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <number>1</number> use an electric fan. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> install an electric fan.

<p id=2867><form>bintilasyun</form> <pos>n</pos> ventilation.

<!-- bintul_2 in addenda on page 1148 -->

<p id=2868><form>bintul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large <tr>fish corral</tr> made of bamboo slats placed in a circle. A light placed in the middle attracts fish which are then caught with a net. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC12; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> fish with a <ix>bintul.</ix> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make into a <ix>bintul</ix> corral.

<p id=2869><form>bintuláwu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>ungainly</tr> or awkward-looking because of poor proportioning. <i>Bintuláwu siyang tan-áwun kay gamayg úlu,</i> He looks ungainly with his small head. <i>Bintuláwu nang baláya kay hábug piru gamay,</i> That house looks <tr>unbalanced</tr> because it is tall but very small.

<p id=2870><form>bintus</form> <pos>n</pos> mahjong pieces which represent the winds. Occasionally, the pieces which represent the grasses, daggers, and mirrors also are called <ix>bintus.</ix> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b(1)]</itype> have, draw <ix>bintus</ix> in mahjong. <i>Ug dì ku bintúsan (bintusan) mapúru ang ákung karta,</i> If I don&apos;t draw any <ix>bintus,</ix> my cards will be all of one kind.

<p id=2871><form>bintúsà</form> <pos>n</pos> method of relieving muscular aches by placing a glass on the skin and burning a wick in it to create a vacuum and draw the flesh into the glass. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> administer dry cupping. <i>Íyang gibintusáan dáyun ang íyang pamául,</i> He applied <tr>dry cupping</tr> to his sore muscles.

<p id=2872><form>bínu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wine</tr> or hard liquor. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a2]</itype> make into wine. <form>&mdash; tintu</form> red table wine.

<p id=2873><form>bínug</form> <pos>n</pos> wet spongy ground. <i>Dì muayun ang mais dinhi kay bínug,</i> Corn won&apos;t do well here because it is <tr>swampy</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become <tr>boggy</tr>. <i>Nagkabínug ang nataran sa síging ulan,</i> The yard is becoming all swampy because of the continuous rain. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> of a boggy quality.&dagger;

<p id=2874><form>binulábid</form> <xr>= <sc>balunábid</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2875><form>binúnga</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small tree of secondary forest, the sap of which is used as glue for musical instruments: <bio>Macaranga tanarius</bio>.

<p id=2876><form>binyal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>venial sin</tr>. <i>Ang salang binyal mapasaylu,</i> Venial sins are forgiveable. <form>&mdash; pa</form> expression used in swearing, that one will do s.t. <i>Magbag-u na ku, binyal pa,</i> I&apos;ll change my ways, may I commit a venial sin if I don&apos;t.

<p id=2877><form>bipíay</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for the BPI, Bureau of Plant Industry.

<p id=2878><form>bip-istik</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. <tr>dish</tr> consisting of thinly sliced beef fried with spices and soy sauce. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make, make into this dish.

<p id=2879><form>bir<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>beer</tr>.

<p id=2880><form>bir<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>abir</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2881><form>bira<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC2; c1]</itype> <tr>pull</tr>, <tr>tug</tr> at s.t. while standing still. <i>Nagbira sila sa písì,</i> They are having a tug-of-war with the rope. <i>Biraha (ibira) nà sa wala,</i> Pull it to the left. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; a12b2]</itype> <tr>attach property</tr> to repay a debt. <i>Bayri ímung útang arun dì birahun ímung yútà,</i> Pay your debts so your land won&apos;t be foreclosed. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> make an extension to a structure (pull on the dimensions). <i>Birahi ang kusínag duha ka mitrus sa luyu,</i> Add two meters to the kitchen in the back. <number>4</number> <formx>&mdash; ang kawit</formx> <itype>[a12]</itype> for a winner to treat to a drink of toddy. <i>Nakadaug lagi ka, sígi biraha ang kawit,</i> Since you won, you treat (lit. grab for the palm toddy container). <number>5</number> <formx>&mdash; sa kunut</formx> <itype>[a12]</itype> be wrinkled due to age (humorous). <i>Gibira na siya sa kunut piru maminyug usab,</i> She is old but she&apos;s going to marry again. <number>6</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> strip fiber from abaca. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the extent or length of action of pulling s.t. <i>Gimab-an nákù ang pasul ug tulu ka bira,</i> I shortened the fishing line by three arm lengths. <number>2</number> single act of hauling s.t. <i>Kining kargáha madala sa usa ka bira,</i> This cargo can be taken in one trip. <number>3</number> command given to a driver to get moving. <i>U sígi. Bira.</i> All right. Let&apos;s get going. <form>birabíra</form> <pos>n</pos> line fishing in which one keeps pulling the line out repeatedly rather than just waiting. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> fish in this way. <form>-da(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> a single <tr>trip</tr> or <tr>haul</tr> that a vehicle takes. <i>Madá tas usa ka biráda,</i> We can all be taken in one trip. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> make [so-and-so] many hauls. <i>Makabiráda tag daghang pasahíru kay tábù,</i> We can haul lots of passengers because it&apos;s market day.

<p id=2882><form>bira<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> <tr>punch</tr>, beat up s.o. (slang). <i>Birahun nákù nang hubug,</i> I&apos;ll beat up that drunk.

<p id=2883><form>biradur</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>screwdriver</tr>. <number>2</number> one who strips abaca fiber.

<p id=2884><form>biranda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>veranda</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make, make into a veranda.

<p id=2885><form>biránu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>summer</tr> time (March, April, May). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> spend one&apos;s summer vacation.

<p id=2886><form>birbal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>verbal</tr>, not written. <i>Kuntrátung birbal,</i> Verbal contract. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make an agreement verbal.

<p id=2887><form>birbiki</form> <xr>= <sc>biribiki</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2888><form>birbína</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to numerous genera of ornamental and wild herbaceous members of the <bio>Verbenaceae</bio>.

<pb n=141>

<p id=2889><form>birbu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>verb</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>word</tr>, logos (Biblical). <i>Ug ang birbu nahímung unud,</i> And the word became flesh. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> <tr>conjugate</tr> a verb.

<p id=2890><form>birdadíru</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>real</tr>, <tr>genuine</tr>. <i>Birdadíru nga batu,</i> Real precious gems.

<p id=2891><form>birdi</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>green</tr>. <number>2</number> dirty, <tr>off-color story</tr>. <number>3</number> name given to a mahjong piece with a green grass design: green dragon. <form>&mdash; butilya</form> bottle green. <form>&mdash; mansánas</form> apple green. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> be, become green in color. <number>2</number> be off-color. <i>Gibirdihan siya niánang isturyáha,</i> He considers that story to be off-color. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12B1256; b8]</itype> draw a green dragon in mahjong. <i>Ug makabirdi ku, makakáng giyud ku,</i> If I get a green dragon, I&apos;ll get a set of four.

<p id=2892><form>birds-ay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bird</tr>&apos;s-eye, brand of <tr>cloth</tr> used for diapers, napkins, etc.

<p id=2893><form>bird ub paradáyis</form> <pos>n</pos> bird of paradise, an ornamental banana-like <tr>plant</tr>: <bio>Strelitzia reginae</bio> and <bio>Heliconia latispatha</bio>.

<p id=2894><form>birdúgu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>executioner</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into an executioner.

<p id=2895><form>birgansúsa</form> <xr>= <sc>kipìkipì</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>kípì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2896><form>birgat</form> <pos>a</pos> for a woman to act so as to attract men&apos;s attention and give them to understand that she is easy to approach. <i>Birgátag kinataw-an. Nagdalag kamhir,</i> What a flirtatious laughter, full of come-on&apos;s. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become a flirt.

<p id=2897><form>birgatinya</form> <xr>= <sc>birgat</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2898><form>birgum kárum</form> <xr>= <sc>kipìkipì</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>kípì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2899><form>birha</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>grating</tr>, <tr>grillwork</tr> over an opening to avoid entry or exit. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> install, make into a grille.

<p id=2900><form>birhin</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>Virgin Mary.</tr> <number>2</number> statue of the Virgin Mary. <number>3</number> a woman who has not had sexual intercourse. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> consider a woman a <tr>virgin</tr>.

<p id=2901><form>biribiki</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>brace</tr>, a carpenter&apos;s <tr>tool</tr> for holding <tr>auger</tr> bits.

<p id=2902><form>biribiri, biribíri</form> <pos>n</pos> a sickness, <tr>beri-beri</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> be affected with beri-beri.

<p id=2903><form>bírig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> for a male fowl to perform the <tr>courtship</tr> dance with the female. <i>Gibirígan sa sunuy ang himungáan,</i> The rooster courted the hen. <number>2</number> for a man to <tr>make a pass</tr> at a woman. <i>Bísag sitinta anyus na mubírig pa gayud,</i> He&apos;s seventy years old, but he still makes passes. <form>-ay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> for fowls or people to prance about preparatory to attacking each other in a fight. <i>Nagbirigay ang duha ka baksidur,</i> The two boxers were prancing around. <form>birigbírig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> hang around s.o. to get s.t. from him. <i>Nagbirigbírig siya nákù kay dúna siyay ipamaráyig,</i> He has been courting me because he is going to ask for s.t.

<p id=2904><form>biriking</form> <pos>n</pos> automatic <tr>drill</tr>.

<p id=2905><form>bíring</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bearings</tr> of a machine. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6(1)]</itype> put bearings in s.t.

<p id=2906><form>birisbiris</form> <xr>= <sc>wiriswiris</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2907><form>birlína</form> <pos>n</pos> automobile having an enclosed compartment in the back and the driver&apos;s seat open. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> take such a car.

<p id=2908><form>birmúda<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> Bermuda shorts. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, make into Bermuda shorts.

<p id=2909><form>birmúda<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> Bermuda <tr>grass</tr>.

<p id=2910><form>birnakular, birnakyular</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vernacular</tr>.

<p id=2911><form>birnis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Friday</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B256; b4]</itype> be Friday. <i>Nagbirnis (mibirnis) na lang wà gihápun siya muabut,</i> It is (got to be) Friday and he has not arrived yet. <i>Hibirnisan kug ulì tungud sa bagyu,</i> It was already Friday when I arrived because of the typhoon. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> do things on Fridays. <i>Mabirnis ray íyang ianhi,</i> He&apos;ll come only on Fridays. <form>birnisbirnis</form> every Friday. <i>Birnisbirnis ang tinglímus sa simbahan,</i> They beg at the church on Fridays. <form>&mdash; Santu</form> <pos>n</pos> Good Friday. <form>nawung ug &mdash;</form> <tr>long faced</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN1]</itype> spend Good Friday. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> get a long face. <i>Nagbirnis ang íyang nawung kay wà paubana,</i> She has a long face because she wasn&apos;t allowed to go along. <form>síti &mdash;</form> well-aged palm toddy.

<p id=2912><form>birsikulu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>verse</tr> in the Holy Bible.

<p id=2913><form>birsiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>version</tr>, particular variation of s.t.

<p id=2914><form>birsu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>detonating device</tr> used formerly to set off loud explosions during gala or religious festivities.

<p id=2915><form>birsu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> metrical <tr>verses</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23C; c1]</itype> debate in verse. <i>Nagbirsu sila sa kulilísi,</i> They had a debate in verse at the wake.

<p id=2916><form>birsus</form> <tr>versus</tr>. <i>Si Ilurdi birsus di Liyun,</i> Elorde versus de Leon.

<p id=2917><form>birta</form> <xr>= <sc>bwilta</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2918><form>birtdi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>birthday</tr> of a living person. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; bc(1)]</itype> celebrate one&apos;s birthday. <i>Birtdíhan kung ákung kamagulángan,</i> I&apos;ll give a birthday party for my eldest child. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> attend s.o.&apos;s birthday party. <form>&mdash; parti</form> <pos>n</pos> birthday party. <form>&mdash; kík</form> <pos>n</pos> birthday cake.

<p id=2919><form>birtibra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vertebra</tr>.

<p id=2920><form>birtikal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vertical</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c16]</itype> make s.t. vertical.

<p id=2921><form>birtkuntrul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>birth control</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> practice birth control.

<p id=2922><form>birtud</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> special, often magical <tr>powers</tr> of s.t. <i>Dúna siyay birtud kay sugtun dáyug babáyi,</i> He has special powers because he is irresistible to women. <i>Táwu nga may birtud sa usa,</i> Man that has the swiftness of a deer. <number>2</number> virtuous deed. <i>Ang kabuútan mauy birtud nga angayang sundun,</i> Honesty is a virtue that is worth emulating.

<p id=2923><form>birtúsu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>virtuoso</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> become a virtuoso.

<p id=2924><form>bírù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; abc]</itype> be <tr>worried</tr>, concerned <pb n=142>about s.t. <i>Unsa na say ímung gibírù sa ímung inahan?</i> What did you bother your mother with again? <i>Ang inadlaw nga galastúhan mauy ákung nabirúan,</i> The money to meet daily expenses is what is worrying me.

<p id=2925><form>bíruk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a penetrating, deeply nauseous <tr>body odor</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a]</itype> have B.O. <i>Gibíruk siya kay hugawan,</i> He has B.O. because he&apos;s dirty. <form>-un</form> <pos>n</pos> person with B.O.

<p id=2926><form>bíruk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sterile</tr> male. <number>2</number> male with only one testicle. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> of a sterile type.

<!-- bís_2 in addenda at page 1148 -->

<p id=2927><form>bís<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>base</tr> in baseball. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> reach a base. <i>Wà makabís ang únang mihapak,</i> The first batter never reached first base. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> succeed in the first step of anything. <i>Dì makabís kanang dagway mung batì niánang bayhána,</i> With your face you won&apos;t get to first base with her.

<p id=2928><form>bísa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>visa</tr>.

<p id=2929><form>bisagak</form> <xr>= <sc>busagak</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2930><form>bisagra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hinges</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> install, use as a hinge. <i>Bisagráhan nákung pultahan,</i> I&apos;ll put hinges on the door.

<p id=2931><form>bisan, bísan</form> <number>1a</number> <tr>even</tr>, <tr>including</tr>. <i>Ang tanan nalísang, bisan aku,</i> Everyone was terrified. Even me. <i>Bisan sa bátà pa, kusgan na,</i> Even as a child he was strong. <i>Wà ku tagái bisan usa,</i> He didn&apos;t give me any, not even one. <number>1b</number> even [so-and-so] is all right. <i>Bisan pubri, basta dílì dawù,</i> It doesn&apos;t matter if he is poor, so long as he is not greedy. <i>Bisan gamay, dawátun ku,</i> I&apos;ll accept it, even if it is small. <number>2a</number> no matter if, even though, nevertheless. <i>Bisan pubri, manggihatágun gihápun,</i> Even if he is poor, he is generous. <i>Bisan gisakitan midúlà lang gihápun,</i> He continued playing even though he was in pain. <i>Bisan pa, dì ku muadtu,</i> Even so, I will not go. <form>&mdash; na lang</form> even if it is only [so-and-so]. <i>Tagái ku, bisan na lang singku,</i> Give me s.t., even if it is only five cents. <i>Wà miy makáun, bisan na lang ságing,</i> We have no food, not even bananas. <number>2b</number> <formx>&mdash; sa</formx> <tr>despite</tr>, in spite of. <i>Bisan pa sa ákung hinábang, wà gihápun musalir,</i> He wasn&apos;t successful despite my help. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash;</formx> [<ix>interrogative</ix>] <number>3a</number> no matter where, who, how, when, how much, etc. <i>Bisan maása siya, pangitáun ku siya,</i> No matter where he goes, I&apos;ll find him. <i>Bisan pila, palita,</i> Buy it, no matter how much it costs. <number>3b</number> anybody, where, etc. at all. <i>Bisan diin lang niya byái ang sinílas,</i> He used to put his slippers any old place. <i>Bisan kinsa makaapil,</i> Anyone may take part. <i>Mahímù bisan anus-a lang,</i> You can do it any time. <form>&mdash; ug, kun</form> <xr>= <sc>bisan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2932><form>bísap</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bishop</tr> in chess.

<p id=2933><form>bisayà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>Visayan</tr>. <i>Bantúgan siyang bisayà,</i> He is a famous Visayan. <i>Tambal nga bisayà,</i> Visayan medicines. <number>2</number> a smaller, ordinary <tr>mongrel</tr> variety of s.t., esp. domestic animals or cultivated plants. <i>Manuk bisayà,</i> Mongrel chicken. <i>Sibúyas bisayà,</i> Small, green onions. <i>Sabun bisayà,</i> Laundry soap in bars. <form>-in-</form> <number>1</number> the Visayan way. <i>Panambal nga binisayà,</i> Visayan type of folk healing. <number>2</number> Visayan language. <i>Binisayang putúput, tuganus,</i> Pure Visayan with no admixture of foreign words. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> speak Visayan. <i>Binisay-i lang ku,</i> Just speak to me in Visayan. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> translate into Visayan. <i>Kinsa tung paríang nagbinisayà sa biblíya?</i> Who was that priest who translated the Bible into Visayan? <form>bisayista</form> <pos>n</pos> Visayanist. <form>kabisay-an</form> <pos>n</pos> the Visayan Islands.

<p id=2934><form>bisbis</form> <xr>= <sc>bisíbis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2935><form>bisbul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>baseball</tr> game. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> play baseball. <form>-ista</form> <pos>n</pos> baseball player. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be, make into a baseball player.

<p id=2936><form>bisgù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for children to be <tr>fussy</tr> and troublesome. <i>Mubisgù ang bátà ug dúnay sakit nga batíun,</i> A child will be fussy if it is not feeling well.

<p id=2937><form>bísi<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the vice- or <tr>lieutenant</tr> governor, mayor, president, consul, etc. <i>Kun mamatay ang pamúnù pulíhan kini sa íyang bísi,</i> When a president dies the <tr>vice-president</tr> will take over. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B36; c1]</itype> be s.o.&apos;s lieutenant. <i>Siya ang bisíhi,</i> Run as his <tr>vice-mayor</tr>.

<p id=2938><form>bísi<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>busy</tr> with activity. <i>Bísi kaáyu rung mga piliunun kay hápit nang piliay,</i> The candidates are very busy now because it&apos;s election year. <number>2</number> a busy telephone. <i>Bísi gihápun ang tilipunu,</i> The telephone is still busy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> for the telephone to be busy.

<p id=2939><form>bisíbis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> <tr>sprinkle</tr> water on s.t. <i>Bisibísi ang lub-angun,</i> Water the seedlings. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> for it to sprinkle. <i>Ígù lang namisíbis ang ulan,</i> It just sprinkled.

<p id=2940><form>bisiklíta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bicycle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> ride a bicycle. <i>Dì ku mubisiklíta ug gubà,</i> I won&apos;t ride a broken bicycle. <i>Magbisiklíta ku padúlung sa syúdad,</i> I will ride a bicycle to the city. <i>Dì makabisiklíta ang bakul,</i> The cripple <corr sic="can not">cannot</corr> ride a bicycle. <i>Bisiklitáha lang ang Talísay,</i> Take a bicycle to Talisay. <i>Lisud ning agianánang bisiklitáhan,</i> This path is difficult to ride a bike over. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> take s.t. s.w. by bicycle. <i>Bisiklitáha (ibisiklíta) ang utanun ngadtu sa mirkádu,</i> Take the vegetables to the market on a bicycle. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get a bicycle. <i>Nakabisiklíta ku sa banggà,</i> I won a bicycle in the contest. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make into a bicycle. <i>Kanang ímung wísir bisiklitáhun na lang kay dautang makina,</i> Make your motor-bike into a bicycle because the motor <pb n=143>is shot. <number>5</number> <itype>[A]</itype> exercise lying flat on the back and kicking the feet, as if riding a bicycle. <form>&mdash; nga tuluy ligid</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tricycle</tr>. <form>&mdash; nga binabáyi, sa babáyi</form> <pos>n</pos> girl&apos;s bicycle.

<p id=2941><form>bísis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>times</tr>, <tr>instances</tr> of an event. <i>Daghan nang bísis nga hikit-an ta kamung nagkúyug,</i> There were many instances when I saw you going together. <i>Duha ka bísis (dús bísis) aku níya binuángi,</i> He fooled me twice.

<p id=2942><form>bisíta</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>visitor</tr>, <tr>guest</tr>. <i>Abiabíha ang átung mga bisíta,</i> Entertain our visitors. <number>2</number> monthly menstruation (slang). <i>Gitunghà ka na sa bisíta mu karung bulána?</i> Has your &lsquo;visitor&rsquo; arrived this month? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3N; b5]</itype> go visit s.o. <i>Bisitáhi (bisitáha) siya,</i> Visit him. <number>2</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> for the menstruation to come (slang). <i>Gibisitáhan tingáli siya kay pungtánun,</i> She must be on the rag because she is in a bad mood. <form>&mdash; iglisya</form> <pos>n</pos> walking to the different churches in a town and praying in the evening of Maundy Thursday. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> perform the church visit.

<p id=2943><form>biskù</form> <xr>= <sc>bisgù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2944><form>biskundi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>viscount</tr>.

<p id=2945><form>biskutsu</form> <pos>n</pos> stale bread that is toasted with a little sugar sprinkled on it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make a <ix>biskutsu.</ix>

<p id=2946><form>biskwit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>biscuit</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make, make into biscuits.

<p id=2947><form>bisnis</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> business. <i>Bay-ansil ang bisnis níya karun,</i> He is engaged in the business of buying and selling. <number>2</number> prostitute (euphemism). <form>&mdash; manidyir</form> <pos>n</pos> business manager. <form>&mdash; wúman</form> <xr>= <sc>bisnis</sc>, <ix>2.</ix></xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; c]</itype> engage in prostitution. <i>Nagbisnis na si Rus,</i> Rose is &lsquo;in business&rsquo; now.

<p id=2948><form>bispiras</form> <pos>n</pos> evening or <tr>day before</tr> an event. <i>Bispiras sa Pasku,</i> Christmas <tr>Eve</tr>. <i>Bispiras sa tábù,</i> The day before market day. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B56; b4]</itype> be an evening or day before an event or holiday. <i>Mibispiras (nabispiras, nagbispiras) na lang sa pista wà gihápun siya muabut,</i> It&apos;s already the eve of the fiesta, and he has not arrived yet. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> do things on the eve of an event or holiday. <i>Mabispiras sa Pasku ray íyang ipaúlì,</i> He returns home only on Christmas Eve. <number>3</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> spend the eve of a holiday.

<p id=2949><form>bista<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hearing</tr> or <tr>trial</tr> in court. <i>Giabsuwiltu siya niadtung bistáha,</i> He was acquitted in that trial. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> hear a case. <i>Bistáhun karun ang sumbung kuntra nímu,</i> The case against you will be heard today.

<p id=2950><form>bista<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>purbista</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2951><form>bisti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>clothing</tr>. <i>Dunut nga bisti,</i> Ragged clothes. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> <tr>wear</tr>, put on clothes. <i>Unsay ibisti nímu sa ímung kasal?</i> What will you wear to your wedding? <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> put clothes on s.o. <number>3</number> <itype>[AP; cP]</itype> provide with clothes. <i>Pabistíhan (bistíhan) ka námù ug swildúhan pa,</i> We will provide you with clothing and a salary.&dagger;

<p id=2952><form>bistída, bistídu</form> <pos>n</pos> woman&apos;s <tr>dress</tr> of one piece. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, make into a dress. <form>bistidahun</form> <pos>n</pos> dress material. <i>Maáyung bistidahun ang lís,</i> Lace is good as dress material.

<p id=2953><form>bistig</form> <xr>= <sc>bip-istik</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2954><form>bistipul</form> <xr>= <sc>bustipul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2955><form>bistu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>visible</tr>. <i>Bistu kaáyu ang Kanlaun gíkan dinhi,</i> You can clearly see Mt. Canlaon from here. <number>2</number> for a secret to be very much of public knowledge. <i>Bistu kaáyung pagkapalikíru nímu,</i> Your philandering is an open secret. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> get to be visible. <i>Mabistu sa karsádag ibílin dinhi,</i> If you leave it here, it will be visible from the street. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB126; c16]</itype> make s.t. open knowledge, for s.t. to become open knowledge. <i>Ikaw bay nagbistu nga minyù ku?</i> Were you the one who let out the secret that I&apos;m married? <i>Nabistu ang ímung kaláki,</i> Your doings are now an open secret. <form>&mdash; ang baráha, bulitin</form> <xr>= <sc>bistu</sc>, <ix>v2.</ix></xr>

<p id=2956><form>*bísug</form> <form>pakig-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>struggle against</tr> in order to attain s.t. <i>Makigbísug ku sa mga kalisdánan sa kinabúhì,</i> I will struggle against life&apos;s difficulties. <form>pangin-, pangim-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> strive against obstacles. <i>Nangimbísug ang hubákun ug ginháwa,</i> The asthma victim struggled to get a breath.

<p id=2957><form>bisukut</form> <xr>= <sc>pisukut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2958><form>bisul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>yautia</tr>, k.o. <tr>arum</tr>, the roots of which are branching tubers and the lateral branches of which are eaten: <bio>Xanthosoma violaceum</bio>.

<p id=2959><form>bisung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>woman&apos;s genitalia</tr>. <form>hi&N;-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> for women to blossom forth and be robust (humorous). <i>Makapanghimísung diay ning gugma,</i> Love makes a woman blossom forth.

<p id=2960><form>bisyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>vice</tr>. <i>Bisyu sa babáyi,</i> The vice of chasing women. <number>2</number> <formx>mau ra gihápun nga &mdash;</formx> it&apos;s the same process, the same words as had been explained before. <i>Ihúmul sa túbig, butangag asin, kutílun, basta mau gihápung bisyúha,</i> Soak it, add salt, stir, and so forth. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; c16]</itype> indulge in vice. <i>Ayaw bisyuha (ibisyu) ang pagtabakù,</i> Don&apos;t make smoking a vice. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; c16]</itype> do s.t. always. <i>Nagbisyu siyag kantakanta,</i> He has the habit of singing. <form>-sa, -su(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of indulging in vice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become full of vices. <i>Mabisyúsu ang bánag layù sa asáwa,</i> A husband tends to indulge in vice when he is separated from his wife.

<p id=2961><form>bítad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>pull</tr>, usually in the direction of a stationary agent. <i>Bitára nang katri diri,</i> Pull that bed over this way. <form>&mdash; ug hábul</form> <pb n=144><itype>[A12; c6]</itype> afford a scanty amount of nourishment (provide just enough strength to pull a blanket over oneself). <i>Ang panihápun nga ákung gikaun ígù ra giyung ibítad ug hábul,</i> I had a very scanty supper. <form>pa&N;-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> be at the tail end in a race or contest. <i>Namítad siya sa lumbà,</i> He finished last in the race.

<p id=2962><form>bitaki</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Vitamin K</tr>.

<p id=2963><form>bitamin, bitamína</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vitamins</tr>.

<p id=2964><form>bitan-ag</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>tree</tr> of wet areas.

<p id=2965><form>bitang</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bench</tr>. <i>Palingkúra sa bitang ang átung bisíta,</i> Give our visitor a seat on the bench. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make into, install a bench.

<p id=2966><form>bítas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>lacerate</tr>, <tr>rip</tr>. <i>Ang lansang mauy nakabítas sa ákung sinínà,</i> The nail ripped my dress. <i>Ayaw bitása ang kurtína,</i> Don&apos;t rip the curtain in two. <i>Bitási ang kinatáwu níya arun katawhan dáyun,</i> Make a laceration in her vagina to facilitate the birth. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> rip, <tr>slash</tr>, <tr>tear</tr>. <number>2</number> unmarried young woman who has had sexual experience.

<p id=2967><form>bitaug</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>tree</tr> of strand: <bio>Calophyllum inophyllum</bio>.

<p id=2968><form>bítaw</form> <number>1</number> particle affirming interlocutor&apos;s remark. <i>&lsquo;Mahal ra kaáyu.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;<corr sic=Bitaw>Bítaw</corr>,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;It&apos;s too expensive.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;It sure is.&rsquo; <i>&lsquo;Dì ba tu ikaw si Usting?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Aku <corr sic=bitaw>bítaw</corr>,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Aren&apos;t you Osting?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Yes, I am.&rsquo; <i>&lsquo;Tugnaw kaáyu run.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Nagswítir bítaw ku,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;It sure is cold.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Yes, it is. Why do you think I&apos;m wearing a sweater?&rsquo; <number>2</number> particle giving assurance. <number>2a</number> [so-and-so] is the case anyway. <i>Ayaw paghílak. Muabut na bítaw si Máma nímu,</i> Don&apos;t cry. Your mother is coming anyway. <number>2b</number> stop complaining because [so-and-so] happened, is happening in any case. <i>&lsquo;Sígi ming pangítà nímu dà.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Nangítà bítaw pud ku nímu,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;We have been looking for you.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Well, I have been looking for you, too.&rsquo; <i>&lsquo;Ngánung wà ku nímu binlig kík?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Niingun bítaw kang dì ka gustu,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Why didn&apos;t you leave me any cake?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Well, you said you didn&apos;t want any.&rsquo; <number>2c</number> don&apos;t worry about it, [so-and-so] is the case with s.o. else and it&apos;s all right. <i>Ayaw <corr sic=paghilak>paghílak</corr>. Aku bítaw, wà ku tagái,</i> Don&apos;t cry. I didn&apos;t get any either, so there. <number>2d</number> don&apos;t worry about it. I&apos;m just joking. <i>Ambi nà bi. Ayaw bítaw. Nagkumidiya lang bítaw ku,</i> Give that to me. Don&apos;t really. I&apos;m just joking. <number>2e</number> seriously now, please do [so-and-so]. <i>Sígi bítaw. Adtu na ta,</i> OK. OK, let&apos;s go now. <i>Ayaw bítaw ku dad-a sa lawum,</i> Oh, stop now. Don&apos;t pull me into the deep water. <i>Usà pa bítaw. Unsa tuy ímung túyù pag-anhi?</i> Seriously, though, what did you have in mind in coming here? <number>3</number> see, [so-and-so] had to happen. <i>&lsquo;Sakit ákung úlu.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Bítaw. Giingnan ta bítaw kang dì magsígig ínum,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;I have a headache.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;See, I told you not to drink so much.&rsquo; <i>Aligri man tà tu silang duha. Naabtan bítaw nas amahan,</i> They were just having fun, but would not you know it, their father caught them.

<p id=2969><form>bítàw</form> <xr>= <sc>bítaw</sc> (before a pause).</xr>

<p id=2970><form>bítay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12S; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>hang s.t. up</tr> suspended, be hanging. <i>Kinsay nagbítay sa parul?</i> Who hung the lantern up? <i>Ang ímung ranggu nagbitay sa usa ka lugas lánut,</i> Your rank is hanging by a single thread (i.e. you are in imminent danger of demotion). <i>Bitáya (ibítay) sa bintánà ang bandíra,</i> Hang the flag in the window. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>execute</tr>. <i>Bitáya (ibítay) siya sa silya iliktrika,</i> Execute him in the electric chair. <number>3</number> <itype>[A123P; a3]</itype> <number>3a</number> be beneath the other cock when fighting on the wing. <i>Nabíhag ang ákung manuk kay nabítay man paglupad,</i> My cock was defeated because it was beneath its opponent when they fought on the wing. <number>3b</number> be far behind in a game or contest. <number>4</number> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> perform the <ix>bítay</ix> ceremony in the <ix>súgat</ix> (<xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>bítay</sc>, <ix>n3</ix></xr>). <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> death by hanging or execution. <number>2</number> distance one is behind in a contest. <number>3</number> the lifting of the <ix>alilúya</ix> in the <ix>súgat</ix> ceremony. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to <tr>droop</tr>. <i>Bitay siya ug ngábil,</i> She has drooping lips. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4]</itype> become drooping. <i>Wà na siya ganáhi. Nagbitay na lang,</i> He didn&apos;t feel like it any more. It (the penis) just drooped. <form>bitaybítay</form> <pos>n</pos> the hanging part of dangling earrings. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> place of execution. <form>ma&N;-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>executioner</tr>. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the lower <tr>wattles</tr> of a chicken. <number>2</number> hanging decorations in a window. <form>tingbitay sa irù, iring</form> <pos>n</pos> the month of July when food is scarce (and they hang dogs up to butcher them), or the period just before payday. <form>-únun, -un</form> <pos>n</pos> condemned person. <form>kulum-</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>kulumbítay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2971><form>bitbit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>carry</tr> or hold s.t. in the hand. <i>Bitbíta ang baskit,</i> Carry the basket.

<p id=2972><form>bitì</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> snapping, <tr>popping sound</tr>. <number>2</number> popcorn. <number>3</number> <tr>white speck on the iris</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> make a rather soft, snapping sound. <i>Mibitì ang íyang tiil pagkabálì,</i> His foot snapped when it broke. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make popcorn. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2B; b4]</itype> get a speck on the eyeball. <i>Gibit-an ang ákung mata,</i> My eyes got a white speck on them.

<p id=2973><form>bitíis</form> <xr>= <sc>batíis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2974><form>bitik</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>catch with a noose</tr> or lasso. <i>Bitika (bitka, bikta) nang irù,</i> Catch that <pb n=145>dog with a lasso. <number>2</number> <itype>[A123P; a123]</itype> become entangled or caught in. <i>Nabitik ákung tiil sa bágun,</i> My feet got entangled in the vine. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>trap</tr> a person into saying s.t. <i>Maáyu nang abugadúha mamitik ug bakákung saksi,</i> That lawyer is good in tripping up lying witnesses. <number>4</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> become a victim of s.o.&apos;s clever manipulation. <i>Nabitik ku sa matam-is níyang sáad,</i> I was entrapped by his sweet promises. <form>&mdash; sa hunsuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> do s.t. else rather than engage in s.t. useless. <i>Magbitik na lang ku sa hunsuy ug magnigusyu kug alkansi,</i> I&apos;ll do better to trap my pipe than go into business and lose. <form>&mdash; sa utut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> do s.t. impossible (humorous). <i>Bitkun kung ákung utut ug kadama ka níya,</i> I&apos;ll eat my hat (lit. trap my fart) if you can make it with her. <pos>n</pos> any flexible device for trapping animals that snaps shut tightly when stepped on or jiggled.

<p id=2975><form>bitikbitik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2N; b6]</itype> give a <tr>hint</tr> as to what one is about to do. <i>Wà man ka magbitikbitik (mamitikbitik) námung magminyù ka,</i> You never gave us a hint that you were getting married.

<p id=2976><form>bitin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>snake</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be bitten by a snake. <i>Mu ra ka mag gibitin (gibítin) kun musyágit,</i> You scream as if you had been bitten by a snake. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> infested with snakes. <i>Bitinan kanang langúba,</i> That cave is infested with snakes.

<p id=2977><form>bítin</form> <xr>= <sc>bíking</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2978><form>bitiránu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> war <tr>veteran</tr>. <number>2</number> having long experience in s.t. <i>Bitiránu kaáyu siyang panday,</i> He&apos;s a veteran carpenter. <i>Bitiránu kaáyu ning báraw ku sa dinunggábay,</i> This knife of mine is veteran of many knife fights. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> become experienced in s.t. <i>Nagkabitiránu ku sa ínum,</i> I am becoming a veteran drinker.&dagger;

<p id=2979><form>bitirinaryu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>veterinarian</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> become, make into a veterinarian.

<p id=2980><form>bitlì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tiny growths</tr> on the face, like pimples, cysts. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> for shoots, buds, leaves to sprout. <i>Namitlì na giyud ang mga sáhà sa ságing,</i> At last my banana shoots have sprouted.

<p id=2981><form>bitlig</form> <xr>= <sc>bitlì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2982><form>bits<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>beets</tr>.

<p id=2983><form>bits<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bates</tr>, k.o. plain, finely woven cotton <tr>cloth</tr>.

<p id=2984><form>bitsikurnu</form> <xr>= <sc>pitsikurnu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2985><form>bitsin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>monosodium glutamate</tr> food seasoning. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> flavor with monosodium glutamate.

<p id=2986><form>bitsubitsu</form> <pos>n</pos> delicacy consisting of shredded sweet potatoes, fried and sugared. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make <ix>bitsubitsu.</ix>

<p id=2987><form>bitsukuy</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>pancake</tr> consisting of flour, sugar, and eggs, deep fried and sprinkled with sugar. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> prepare, make into this k.o. pancake.

<p id=2988><form>bitsuylas</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>habitsuylas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2989><form>bítu</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>cave</tr> with a small opening but with a very large and spacious interior. <i>Dúnay bítu sa tiilan niánang bungtúra,</i> There is a cave at the foot of that mountain. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB126; a]</itype> dig a <tr>hole</tr>, become a cave or deep <tr>pit</tr>. <i>Mubítu ang sundálu ug way kapasalipdan,</i> Soldiers dig a hole if they have no place to stay. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> throw in a hole. <i>Ibítu ang mga sagbut,</i> Dump the garbage in the pit.

<p id=2990><form>bitudbitud</form> <pos>n</pos> tiny <tr>lumps</tr> formed when s.t. is mixed into s.t. else and the mixing is not well done. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> be, become lumpy. <i>Mubitudbitud ang písì ug dílì ángay nga pagkalúbag,</i> The rope will turn out lumpy if you don&apos;t twist it evenly. <i>Ayaw bitudbitura ang ímung pagtimpla sa litsi,</i> Don&apos;t mix the milk so that it comes out lumpy.

<p id=2991><form>bitugul</form> <xr>= <sc>tibugul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2992><form>bítuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>roundworm</tr> in the digestive tract. <i>May bítuk nang batáa kay dakug tiyan,</i> That child has worms because he has a big belly. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> have worms. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having roundworms. <form>bitukbítuk</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. children&apos;s <tr>game</tr> played by two teams. Each team is formed into a line and the team that reaches the goal first wins. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; b6]</itype> play this game. <form>bitukbituk</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to pipefishes of worm-like size and appearance.

<p id=2993><form>bitulbitul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>form lumps</tr>. <i>Mubitulbitul ang litsi ug madugayan,</i> Milk will <tr>curdle</tr> if you let it stand. <i>Ang inagian sa iniksiyun nagbitulbitul,</i> The place they injected me is all full of lumps.

<p id=2994><form>bítuls</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>The Beatles</tr> singing group. <number>2</number> Beatles&apos; <tr>hairstyle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c16]</itype> arrange the hair in the Beatles style. <i>Bitúla (ibítul) ang buhuk mu,</i> Let your hair grow long like the Beatles. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> get a Beatle hairdo.

<p id=2995><form>bitun</form> <pos>n</pos> shoe polish in solidified form. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> apply shoe polish. <i>Bituni (bitni) ang sapátus,</i> Apply shoe polish to the shoes.

<p id=2996><form>bitut</form> <pos>n</pos> female genital organ (humorous euphemism).

<p id=2997><form>bitúun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>star</tr>. <number>2</number> star in a movie. <number>3</number> star-shaped Christmas lantern. <number>4</number> k.o. tree of strand, the star-shaped fruits of which are used as fish poison: <bio>Barringtonia asiatica</bio>. <number>5</number> <formx>&mdash; sa dágat</formx> <tr>starfish</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> star in a movie production. <i>Ang salídang íyang gibituúnan,</i> The picture he starred in. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>bitúun</sc> <ix>4.</ix></xr> <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <number>1</number> for stars to be out. <i>Mamitúun gánì, lagmit dì muulan,</i> <pb n=146>When there are stars, it is not likely to rain. <number>2</number> for oily spots to form on the surface of a liquid. <i>Mamitúun ang sabaw basta tambuk ang lutúun,</i> The soup sparkles with fat if you cook fat in it.&dagger;

<p id=2998><form>bíu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>body odor</tr>. <i>Bahúang bíu nímu uy,</i> Jesus, what strong <xr><sc>b.o</sc>.</xr> you&apos;ve got. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> have <xr><sc>b.o</sc>.</xr> <i>Mabíu (biúhun) ka ug dì ka malígù,</i> You&apos;ll have <xr><sc>b.o</sc>.</xr> if you don&apos;t take a bath. <form>biúhun</form> <pos>a</pos> having strong <xr><sc>b.o</sc>.</xr>

<p id=2999><form>biúung</form> <pos>n</pos> female genitalia (euphemism for <ix>bisung</ix>).

<p id=3000><form>bíyà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>leave</tr> a place, s.t. behind. <i>Ngánung mibíyà ka man dinhi?</i> Why did you leave? <i>Kinsay nagbíyà ning libru diri?</i> Who left this book here? <i>Dì ku makabíyà sa ákung búhat,</i> I can&apos;t leave my work. <i>Byái ang pagtabakù,</i> Quit your smoking habit. <i>Hibyaan siya sa trin,</i> She missed the train (i.e., failed to get married). <i>Gibyáan na nà nákù sa buut,</i> I have already forgotten that insignificant matter. <i>Ang ímung pamisti hibyaan na sa urug,</i> Your clothes are way out of style (have been left behind by the styles). <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>abandon</tr>, <tr>desert</tr>. <i>Mibíyà ang bána sa asáwang yawyawan,</i> The husband deserted his nagging wife. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>die</tr>. <i>Gagmay pa mi sa dihang mibíyà si Tátay námù,</i> We were still kids when our father died. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12; b26]</itype> win by a certain distance, amount. <i>Dílì makabíyà si Usminya ni Markus ug usa ka gatus ka líbu dinhi sa Sugbu,</i> Osmeña can&apos;t garner a majority of one-hundred thousand votes over Marcos here in Cebu. <i>Hibyaan siyag duha ka dupa sa mananáug,</i> He was behind the winner by two arm&apos;s lengths. <number>4</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> become the underdog. <i>Nabíyà siya kay Ilurdi ang kuntra,</i> He was the underdog because Elorde was his opponent. <number>5</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> become leftover waste material. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <number>1</number> amount by which s.o. is behind in a contest. <number>2a</number> be left behind. <i>Biyà na kaáyu sa panahun,</i> You are very much behind the times. <number>2b</number> things not in use, cast off. <i>Átung ihátag ang biyà nga sinínà sa mga pubri,</i> We&apos;ll give our old clothes to the poor. <number>2c</number> by-products. <i>Ang biyà sa pamanday magámit nga sugnud,</i> The leftovers from carpentry work can be used as fuel. <number>3</number> the <tr>underdog</tr> in a fight. <i>Ug parángan ang bisayà ug tiksas, biyà ang bisayà,</i> If a Visayan cock is matched with a Texas, the Visayan is the underdog. <number>4</number> <tr>homely</tr>. <i>Biyag nawung,</i> Homely looking. <number>5</number> <tr>poor</tr> in quality. <i>Biyang panaptun,</i> Poor quality cloth. <number>6</number> s.o. who behaves in a bad way. <i>Biyà ug batásan. Isipan,</i> He is an awful sort. He counts favors he renders. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>bíyà</sc> <ix>4.</ix></xr> <number>2</number> get to be poor in quality. <i>Nagkabíyà ang íyang ági nadúgayng sinuwat,</i> His penmanship got worse and worse the longer he wrote. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> allow oneself or s.t. to be left behind. <i>Dì ku magpabíyà sa íyang buut,</i> I won&apos;t allow her to forget me (to be left out of her thoughts). <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> bet on the underdog. <i>Ug pabíyà ta, dakù tag daug,</i> If we bet on the underdog, we will win more. <form>-um-r-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> given to deserting one&apos;s family.

<p id=3001><form>biyaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small shiny <tr>beetle</tr> found in trees.

<p id=3002><form>biyin</form> expression denoting <tr>approval</tr> of s.t. done which is necessary for the next thing to do. <i>Biyin, sunud ímu nang lat-an hangtud mahúmuk,</i> Fine. Next, boil it until it becomes tender. <form>u &mdash;</form> or else. <i>Nanglampásu tà ka u biyin nanglaba ba,</i> You should have polished the floor or else washed the clothes.

<p id=3003><form>bíyu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> <tr>twirl</tr> or <tr>whirl</tr> on its axis, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Nagbíyu nga lílù,</i> A whirling whirlpool. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB; c]</itype> go around an area. <i>Ibíyu ang sakyanan sa syudad,</i> Take the car around the city. <number>3</number> <itype>[C; ac3]</itype> have a contest spinning tops. <i>Byúhun nátù, kun kinsay mauna,</i> Let&apos;s have a top-spinning contest to see who goes first.

<p id=3004><form>blag</form> <pos>n</pos> word used in writing to represent a thudding sound.

<p id=3005><form>blak-anwayit</form> <pos>n</pos> black and white shoes.

<p id=3006><form>blak-áwut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>blackout</tr> in wartime. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> have, cause a blackout. <i>Átung iblak-áwut (blak-awtun) ang tanang sugà sa syudad,</i> We will black out all the lights in the city.

<p id=3007><form>blak-ay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>black eye</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB26; a1b2]</itype> give, have a black eye. <i>Miblak-ay (nablak-ay) íyang mata,</i> He got a black eye.

<p id=3008><form>blakbins</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to <tr>salted black beans</tr> (<ix>tahusyu</ix>) sold in cans. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> eat salted black beans with the staple food. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> cook with salted black beans.

<p id=3009><form>blakbur, blakburd</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>blackboard</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c16]</itype> make into a blackboard.

<p id=3010><form>blakbúting</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>block voting</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> engage in block voting.

<p id=3011><form>blakdyak</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> game of <tr>blackjack</tr>. <number>2</number> blackjack in cards. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23; a]</itype> play blackjack. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get blackjack. <i>Nakablakdyak ku,</i> I got a blackjack. <number>3</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> for cards to be blackjack.

<p id=3012><form>blakhart</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>spades</tr> in cards. <i>Ilábay ang blakhart nga alas,</i> Discard the ace of spades.

<p id=3013><form>bláking</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>blocking</tr> in games. <i>Dì ku makabláking sa íyang kúmù kay hilabihang kusúga,</i> I couldn&apos;t block his blows because they were so fast. <number>2</number> block the progress of s.t. <i>Giblakíngan ang ákung apuyíntmint <pb n=147>sa mayur,</i> The mayor blocked my appointment.

<p id=3014><form>blakmarkit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>black</tr> market. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> sell s.t. on the black market.

<p id=3015><form>blakmil, blakmíling</form> <pos>n</pos> blackmail. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> blackmail s.o.

<p id=3016><form>blak plin</form> <pos>n</pos> a carpenter&apos;s <tr>plane</tr> for cutting across the grain on board ends.

<p id=3017><form>blakrámi</form> <pos>n</pos> way of playing rummy in which one can meld all the sets of cards at once. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> go &lsquo;<tr>block rummy</tr>&rsquo;.

<p id=3018><form>blaktin</form> <pos>n</pos> the combination of an ace and ten in blackjack, sometimes given higher value than other combinations totalling twenty-one. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a2b2]</itype> make an ace-ten combination.

<p id=3019><form>blangku</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>blank</tr>, empty. <i>Daghan kag blangku. Malagmit kang mahagbung,</i> You left lots of blanks. You&apos;ll probably fail. <i>Blangkug nawung,</i> Blank-faced. <i>Butangi ang blangku sa hustung tubag,</i> Put the right answer in the blank. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> leave a blank. <i>Blangkúhi lang ang pangutánang wà nímu hikamahui,</i> Leave the questions you don&apos;t know blank.

<p id=3020><form>blap</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. false said to make s.o. act in a desired way. <i>Ang búnus nga gitahù blap lang,</i> The bonus he kept talking about was all a <tr>hoax</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make s.o. believe s.t. to obtain compliance. <i>Blapun nátù siyang wà tay kwarta,</i> Let&apos;s hoax her into thinking that we don&apos;t have any more money.

<p id=3021><form>blátir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> blotting paper. <number>2</number> a police <tr>blotter</tr>. <i>Naintra na sa blátir ang ímung kásu,</i> Your case has been entered in the police blotter. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> enter in the police blotter. <i>Iblátir nákù ang inyung mga ngálan,</i> I&apos;ll enter your names into the police blotter. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6(1)]</itype> blot s.t.

<p id=3022><form>bláwus</form> <xr>= <sc>blúsa</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3023><form>blid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>bleed</tr>. <i>Gablid ákung samad,</i> My wound is bleeding. <form>-ing(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> have bleeding after an operation or delivery. <i>Nagblíding ang íyang upirasyun sa paglíhuk níya,</i> He bled where he had been operated when he moved.

<p id=3024><form>blíd</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>razor blade</tr>.

<p id=3025><form>blits</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>bleach</tr> one&apos;s skin or hair.

<p id=3026><form>blú</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>blue</tr> in color. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; bc1]</itype> become, make s.t. blue.

<p id=3027><form>bluáwut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>give a party</tr> with substantial food and drinks in celebration of s.t. <i>Magbluawut kug makapasar ku sa bár,</i> I&apos;ll give a big party if I pass the bar.

<p id=3028><form>blúbuk</form> <pos>n</pos> booklet with a blue cover for answers to examinations.

<p id=3029><form>blúki</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> large solid piece of ice with a flat surface. <number>2</number> town or city <tr>block</tr>. <number>3</number> market stall. <number>4</number> political block, faction. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c16]</itype> form, divide into blocks. <i>Blukíha (iblúki) nang yílu,</i> Form the ice into blocks.

<p id=3030><form>blúmir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bloomers</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, make into bloomers.

<p id=3031><form>blúsa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>blouse</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> wear, make, make into a blouse.

<p id=3032><form>blúsil</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> American smuggled cigarettes (named from their blue seal). <number>2</number> American or European person (slang). <i>Nakaasawa siyag blúsil,</i> He married a blue seal (American).

<p id=3033><form>blúwir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>blower</tr>, ventilating fan. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> install a blower.

<p id=3034><form>bra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bra</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear a bra.

<p id=3035><form>brad</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> intimate term of address to a man. <i>Mangáun ta, brad,</i> Come over here and eat with me, friend. <number>2</number> term of address to a brother.

<p id=3036><form>brádir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>brother</tr> in a fraternity.

<p id=3037><form>brandi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>brandy</tr>.

<p id=3038><form>brandilya, brandilyas</form> <xr>= <sc>barandilya</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3039><form>bras, brás</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>brush</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> brush s.t. <i>Brasi ang makinilya,</i> Clean the typewriter with a brush.

<p id=3040><form>brása, brásas</form> <pos>n</pos> measurement the length of an arm. <i>Usa ka brása (brásas),</i> One <tr>arm-length</tr>. <i>Kwatru brásas,</i> Four arm-lengths.

<p id=3041><form>brásu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>biceps</tr>. <form>brasúhun</form> <pos>a</pos> having well-developed biceps.

<p id=3042><form>*brásus</form> <form>&mdash; dimirsídis</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. dessert made from cake baked in a thin layer, rolled up and filled with a sweet mixture of egg yolk and condensed milk.

<p id=3043><form>bráwun</form> <pos>a</pos> brown in color. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> dye s.t. into, become brown.

<p id=3044><form>brayids míd</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bridesmaid</tr>.

<p id=3045><form>brayit</form> <pos>a</pos> mentally quick, clever. <i>Púrus mga brayit nà sila,</i> They are all <tr>intelligent</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> become mentally quick, clever.

<p id=3046><form>bríd</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>breed</tr> animals. <i>Nagbríd kug mga manuk dirása,</i> I&apos;m breeding imported fighting cocks. <i>Ibríd ang manuk mung bisayà ug lighurn,</i> Breed your native chickens with leghorns.

<p id=3047><form>*brid</form> <form>amirikan &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> bread baked in a box-shape like what is usually packaged in the States.

<p id=3048><form>brids</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bridge</tr> of teeth, a device for securing artificial crowns where teeth are missing, by anchoring it to the natural teeth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> put in a bridge.

<p id=3049><form>brik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ice-cream brick</tr>.

<p id=3050><form>brík<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>break</tr> from work. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> take a break.

<p id=3051><form>brík<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>brakes</tr> of a vehicle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> apply the brakes. <i>Bríki ang awtu, kay dulhugun,</i> Brakes! We&apos;re going down on a steep incline. <number>2</number> stop a vehicle.

<p id=3052><form>brík<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A123PC; c3]</itype> break off a relationship between two lovers. <i>Bríki nang ímung <pb n=148>trátu,</i> Break up with your sweetheart.

<p id=3053><form>brík<sub>4</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> separate two boxers. <i>Kun maggákus ang buksidur, bríkun,</i> When boxers clench each other, they are separated.

<p id=3054><form>brík<sub>5</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> in bowling, the action of downing the ten pins on the third throw. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; c16]</itype> make a break. <i>Kinahanglang bríkun (ibrík) nímu kining labáya arun ka makaigwális,</i> You must make a break on this throw if you want to even up the score.

<p id=3055><form>brikdáwun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; c16]</itype> have a <tr>breakdown</tr>. <i>Nalángan mi kay nabrikdáwun ang trák,</i> We were delayed because the truck had a breakdown. <form>nirbus &mdash;</form> <tr>nervous breakdown</tr>.

<p id=3056><form>brilyanti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>diamond</tr> polished to a high brilliance.

<p id=3057><form>brilyantin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>brilliantine</tr>.

<p id=3058><form>brilyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>brilliance</tr>, <tr>sparkle</tr> of precious stones. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> be glittering, sparkling. <i>Brilyúhi ang sapátus mu,</i> Make your shoes shine with brightness.

<p id=3059><form>brinda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bridle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> put a bridle on a horse.

<p id=3060><form>bringhawus</form> <pos>n</pos> food given to a guest at a party, feast, etc. to bring home. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for a guest to take food home. <i>Bringhawsan ta kag inasal sa pista,</i> I&apos;ll bring you some roast pig home from the fiesta.

<p id=3061><form>bríp</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>brief</tr> or panty <tr>underwear</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> wear briefs. <i>Nagbríp lang kung nalígù,</i> I went swimming in my briefs.

<p id=3062><form>bris, brís</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>brace</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> brace. <i>Makalakaw lang siyag magbrís,</i> She cannot walk without her brace. <i>Gibrísan nákung mga síya,</i> I strengthened the chairs with braces. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make into a brace.

<p id=3063><form>briskas</form> <xr>= <sc>buriskas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3064><form>brislit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bracelet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, make into a bracelet.

<p id=3065><form>britsis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>short pants</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> wear, make into short pants.

<p id=3066><form>brudkas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>broadcast</tr> a radio program. <i>Gibrudkas sa radiyung mibutung Hibukhíbuk,</i> It was broadcast over the radio that Mt. Hibokhibok erupted. <number>2</number> spread information, gossip. <i>Ayaw ibrudkas sa mga silíngan ang mga nahitabù,</i> Don&apos;t broadcast what happened here to the neighbors.

<p id=3067><form>brudklut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>broadcloth</tr>.

<p id=3068><form>brunda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>veil</tr> worn by women to church. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, make into a veil. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get a veil.

<p id=3069><form>brungkítis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bronchitis</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; a4]</itype> become bronchitis, get bronchitis. <i>Patambáli nang ubu sa dì pa nà mabrungkítis,</i> Treat your cough before it turns into bronchitis. <i>Gibrungkítis ku,</i> I got bronchitis.

<p id=3070><form>brungkurab</form> <pos>n</pos> Broncho Rub, trade name for a medicated rub.

<p id=3071><form>brunsi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bronze</tr>. <form>&mdash; dulsi</form> <pos>n</pos> bronze that is reddish in color. <form>&mdash; pína</form> <pos>n</pos> bronze that is golden-yellow in color.

<p id=3072><form>brutsa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>brush</tr>. <i>Brutsa sa pagpintal, sapátus,</i> Paint, shoe brush. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> brush s.t. <i>Gibrutsáhan níya ang sapátus,</i> He brushed the shoes. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>lick</tr> a woman&apos;s sexual parts to induce excitement. <i>Dì mubulag ang babáyi basta brutsáhun (hibrutsáhan),</i> As long as you lick a girl, she&apos;ll never break off from you. <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a brush. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> <tr>brush</tr> one&apos;s hair. <i>Mambrutsa ku,</i> I will brush my hair.

<p id=3073><form>brútu</form> <pos>a</pos> like a <tr>brute</tr>, <tr>cruel</tr> and <tr>gross</tr> in behavior. <i>Gihagkan ku dihàdihà sa brútu,</i> The brute kissed me then and there.

<p id=3074><form>brúwa, brúwas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>spongy <corr sic=cooky>cookie</corr></tr>, <tr>ladyfingers</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make ladyfingers.

<p id=3075><form>bú<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>boo</tr>. <i>Gibú (gibúhan) sa mga táwu ang disisyun sa kuymi,</i> The crowd booed the umpire&apos;s decision. <pos>n</pos> booing.

<p id=3076><form>bú<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>búlu<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3077><form>buad</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bulging</tr>, stretched outward in <corr sic=fulness>fullness</corr>. <i>Táwung buad,</i> Man with his stomach sticking out. <i>Ang panà buad,</i> A bow is bent forward. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <tr>bulge</tr>, <tr>bend</tr>, <tr>curve</tr> outward in fullness. <i>Mubuad (mabuad) ang sákung punù,</i> A sack that&apos;s full will bulge. <i>Hángin ang nakabuad (nakapabuad) sa láyag,</i> The wind caused the sail to balloon. <form>pabuadbúad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> walk, sit with the stomach sticking out. <i>Nagpabuadbúad ang mabdus sa íyang linakwan,</i> The pregnant woman is walking with her stomach sticking out.

<p id=3078><form>buágas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> <tr>flow</tr> profusely. <i>Nagbuagas ang túbig,</i> Water is flowing profusely.

<p id=3079><form>buagsa, buagsà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; b2]</itype> for several things to fall and be <tr>scattered</tr> in every direction. <i>Pagkabuak sa alkansíya, nabuagsà ang kwarta,</i> When the piggy bank broke, the money fell all over the place. <pos>a</pos> scattered because of falling or having been dropped.

<p id=3080><form>buagya</form> <pos>a</pos> be <tr>scattered</tr> all over the place. <i>Buagya ang mga butang sa ímung kwartu,</i> The things in your room are strewn all over the place. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> scatter, be scattered all over the place. <i>Way láin nga mubuagya niánang balità, si Síta ra,</i> No one but Zita would broadcast that news. <i>Wà na gániy inahan magbuagya (mabuagya) na giyud ang mga anak,</i> If the mother is gone, the children will scatter. <form>ti-</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tibuagya</sc>.</xr>

<!-- Sub-entry babáyi nga - out of order -->

<p id=3081><form>buak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>break</tr> s.t. open, to pieces; for s.t. to break<corr>.</corr> <i>Nakabuak siya sa alkansíya,</i> He broke the piggy bank open. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> break the silence. <i>Usa ka singgit mibuak <pb n=149>sa kahílum,</i> A shout broke the silence. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> change money. <i>Átung buakun (buk-un) ning diyisun,</i> Let&apos;s break this ten-spot. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> break in a virgin. <number>5</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> for the voice to break. <i>Mibuak ang íyang tíngug sa tantu níyang sinyágit,</i> His voice broke after shouting so much. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> broken open, with a piece broken off. <i>Dì maáyung gamítun ang sáming buak,</i> It&apos;s no good to use a broken mirror. <form>babáyi nga &mdash;</form> a woman who is no longer a virgin. <number>2</number> broken in voice. <form>buak, (&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1C12; a]</itype> <tr>split</tr> coconuts to make copra. <i>Buk-an tung ákung útang,</i> I will repay my debt by splitting coconuts. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> season for making copra. <form>ting-(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>búak</sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make s.t. break. <i>Ang pagbanggà sa awtu nakapabuak sa bildu,</i> The crash caused the car&apos;s window to break.

<p id=3082><form>búang</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>insane</tr>, <tr>crazy</tr>. <i>Gigaugáu sa kabatáan ang búang,</i> The children are making fun of the insane person. <i>Irung búang,</i> A rabid dog. <number>2</number> lacking sense. <i>Búang nímung mubáyad kag diyis,</i> You must be crazy to pay ten pesos! <i>Ayaw ku tudlúi. Dì ku búang,</i> You don&apos;t have to show me. I&apos;m not stupid. <number>3</number> <tr>naughty</tr>, pranking. <i>Búang kaáyung bat-ána kay manglìlì,</i> What a naughty child! He peeps at people. <number>4</number> the one who is &lsquo;it&rsquo; in games. <number>5</number> defective coconut with no water and no meat. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126; b3]</itype> go crazy. <i>Hápit ku mabúang dihang ímung gitalikdan,</i> I almost went crazy when you left me. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make s.o. insane. <i>Gibúang siya sa bugsikan,</i> The sorcerer inflicted madness on him. <number>2</number> <itype>[a2]</itype> <tr>fool</tr> s.o., think s.o. a fool. <i>Ayaw kug buánga kay nasáyud ku sa nahitabù,</i> Don&apos;t try to fool me because I know what happened. <i>Gibuángan ka ba nákù?</i> Do you take me for a fool? <number>3</number> <itype>[B12; b3(1)]</itype> go crazy about s.t. <i>Nabúang siya sa súgal,</i> He&apos;s crazy over gambling. <i>Babáying íyang gikabuángan,</i> The woman he was crazy about. <number>4</number> <itype>[B125; a12]</itype> have a hard time doing s.t. for which one has little time. <i>Nagkabuang kug pinangítà nímu,</i> I was going crazy looking for you. <number>5</number> <itype>[B1245]</itype> do s.t. in an irrational, crazy way. <i>Nagkabuang ang mga táwug dágan pagbutu,</i> The people ran every which way in panic upon hearing the explosion. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <xr>= <sc>búang</sc>, <ix>5.</ix></xr> <form>buangbuang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>búang</sc>, <ix>v 4, 5.</ix></xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A12C; b6]</itype> play a game of tag hide-and-seek. <pos>n</pos> tag hide-and-seek. <form>pabuangbúang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> pretend to be a fool, crazy. <i>Magpabuangbúang ug pangutan-un. Mu rag dílì siya,</i> You ask him and he pretends not to know. As if it wasn&apos;t him. <form>paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> act, treat like a fool or crazy person. <i>Ayaw pagpakabúang dihà. Gamítang ímung úlu,</i> Don&apos;t act like a fool. Use your head. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>stupidity</tr>, unreasonable <tr>foolishness</tr>. <i>Usa ka binúang ang pagpakamatay tungud sa gugma,</i> It&apos;s <tr>stupid</tr> to kill oneself for love. <number>2</number> foolish prank. <i>Binúang sa mga iskuyla kining pagsuwat sa bungbung,</i> This writing on the wall is just one of the children&apos;s pranks. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> do foolish <tr>mischief</tr>. <i>Way mubinúang nímu dinhi samtang nía ku,</i> No one will do you any mischief as long as I am here. <i>Ayaw kug binuángi, ha,</i> Don&apos;t try any foolishness on me, understand! <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> insanity. <number>2</number> serious mischief. <i>Mu nay sangputánan sa ímung kabúang,</i> That&apos;s where your mischief will end you. <form>kina-</form> <xr>= <sc>ka-</sc>, <ix>2.</ix></xr> <form>kina-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> not done in seriousness. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6(1)]</itype> do s.t. without being serious about it. <i>Nagkinabuang mig aplay ug nadáwat mi,</i> We just applied for the fun of it, and we were hired. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> acting insane, stupid.&dagger;

<p id=3083><form>buaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN]</itype> for the eyes to get swollen. <i>Mibuaw (namuaw) íyang mata ug kinatúlug,</i> Her eyes got swollen from sleeping too much.

<!-- particle should actually be a pos element here -->

<p id=3084><form>búaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> for a part of the body to <tr>swell</tr> after being struck. <i>Nabúaw ang kumagkù níyang natudturan sa martilyu,</i> He accidentally struck his thumb with a hammer, and it swelled. <pos></pos> <ix>particle:</ix> magical expression used to qualify a statement which praises s.o., said for the purpose of avoiding harm to the person praised. <i>Maáyu búaw kang mulútù,</i> You cook well, evil spirits beware. <i>Gwápu búaw kag anak,</i> You have a beautiful child, evil spirits beware.

<p id=3085><form>buáya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>crocodile</tr>. <number>2</number> lend or gamble in such a way that there is no chance of getting any but huge returns. <i>Buáya nà siyang mupahulag kwarta. Dakug garantíya. Dakug pátung,</i> He is a real crocodile in his money-lending. He demands a huge security and huge interest. <i>Buáya nga mupúkir,</i> He plays poker ruthlessly. <number>3</number> hogging the ball in basketball. <number>4</number> <xr>= <sc>dispatsir</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> get to <tr>be greedy</tr> in lending, gambling, or with the ball. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> catch crocodiles. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> for s.o. to entrap s.o. into playing against him by pretending not to know how. <i>Gipamuáya kug ahidris níya,</i> He trapped me into playing chess with him. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>dispatsir</sc>, <ix>v</ix>.</xr> <form>buayáhun</form> <pos>a</pos> having a configuration in the lines of the palm resembling a crocodile and which signifies that the bearer will never have living children and further his brothers and sisters will not live to maturity. This configuration can be changed by magical means.

<pb n=150>

<p id=3086><form>búba</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>búbu<sub>1</sub></sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=3087><form>bubhu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> wash the hair. <i>Bubhúig bawnus ang ákung buhuk,</i> <tr>Shampoo</tr> my hair with gogo. <number>2</number> put s.t. in the hair as dressing. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. to wash hair with. <number>2</number> hair dressing. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> wash, dress one&apos;s hair. <i>Mamubhu kug lubi,</i> I will rinse my hair with coconut juice.

<p id=3088><form>bubhuan</form> <xr>= <sc>abubhuan</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>*abubhu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3089><form>búbu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> deeply stupid, <tr>idiotic</tr>. <i>Búbu ang íyang anak. Dì gánì makasulti,</i> Her child is a moron. It cannot even talk. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a12b6]</itype> turn out to be an idiot.

<p id=3090><form>búbu<sub>2</sub>, búbù</form> <pos>n</pos> box-like <tr>trap</tr> woven from bamboo slats allowing entrance but no egress, used to catch fish or monkeys. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, make into such a trap. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2N; a]</itype> catch things with the <ix>búbu.</ix> <i>Bubúun (bubúhun) nátù ang ungguy arun búhing dakpan,</i> Let&apos;s trap the monkey with a <ix>búbu</ix> so he can be taken alive. <i>Kining sapáa maáyung bubúan,</i> This river is a good place to set a fish trap.

<p id=3091><form>bùbù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>pour</tr> s.t. out, into s.t. <i>Namayur siya kay mibùbù mag kwarta,</i> He became mayor because he poured money out for it. <i>Bùbúi ang lub-angun,</i> Pour water on the seedlings. <i>Ibùbù ang túbig sa akwaryum,</i> Pour the water into the aquarium. <i>Ibùbù ku kanímu ang tanan kung pagmahal,</i> I will shower all my affection on you. <i>Ibùbù ku sa trabáhu ang tanan kung kabudlay,</i> I will pour my every effort into the job. <number>2</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> flush a land crab out by pouring water in its hole. <pos>n</pos> action of watering. <i>Kuwag bùbù ang rúsas,</i> The roses haven&apos;t been watered enough. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> catch land crabs by flushing them out. <form>-anay, -ay(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c6]</itype> for employees to put a fixed amount in a kitty each month. The kitty goes to each member in turn. <i>Magbùbuay tag tagbayinti káda kinsína,</i> We chip in twenty for the revolving kitty every two weeks. <form>-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> place into, through which liquid is poured.

<p id=3092><form>búbud</form> <xr>= <sc>budbud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3093><form>bubun</form> <xr>= <sc>hubun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3094><form>bubung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> covering at the ridge of the <tr>roof</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>household</tr> unit living under one roof. <i>Paamútun nátung káda bubung ug singku písus,</i> Every household shall contribute five pesos. <number>3</number> <tr>house</tr>, <tr>home</tr>. <i>Nag-ípun mig puyù sulud sa usa ka bubung,</i> We live together under one roof. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> cover the space between the upper edges of the roof, at the ridge. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>bubung</sc>, <ix>n 1, 2.</ix></xr>

<p id=3095><form>búd<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>búlud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3096><form>búd<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>bátud</sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr>

<p id=3097><form>búda</form> <pos>n</pos> formal <tr>gown</tr>. <i>Daw rayna siyang tan-áwun sa íyang búda,</i> She looks like a queen in her wedding dress. <form>&mdash; dipláta</form> silver wedding anniversary, or silver jubilee in the priesthood. <form>&mdash; diúru</form> golden wedding anniversary or golden jubilee in the priesthood. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> wear, make into a wedding dress.

<p id=3098><form>budabil</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>vaudeville</tr>. <number>2</number> combination of mahjong pieces consisting of dagger, mirror, and grass pieces. <form>-ay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> play with extra money on the <ix>budabil</ix> combination.

<p id=3099><form>búdas diúru, pláta</form> golden, silver wedding anniversary or jubilee in the priesthood.

<p id=3100><form>budbud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>wind</tr> string, wire, strips, etc. around s.t. or into a ball. <i>Budbúri nag bandids ang ímung samad,</i> Wind a bandage around your wound. <i>Ibudbud ang lúbid sa lápis,</i> Wind the rope around the pencil. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a stick of <tr>dynamite</tr> out of. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make the delicacy <ix>budbud.</ix> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> coil, spoolful. <i>Usa ka budbud hílu,</i> A spoolful of thread. <number>2</number> stick of dynamite. <number>3</number> sweet prepared from crushed ingredients (rice, corn, pili nut, millet, etc.) formed into sticks, wrapped in banana leaves, and steamed. <form>budburan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>reel</tr>, <tr>spool</tr>. <form>budburun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small cylindrical <tr>mackerel</tr>.

<p id=3101><form>budhì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>betray</tr> a faith or trust. <i>Patyun ta kag budhían ku nímu,</i> I&apos;ll kill you if you betray me. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>traitorous</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>unfaithful</tr>.

<p id=3102><form>budhì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> for s.t. to be not thoroughly cooked in the center.

<p id=3103><form>budíding</form> <xr>= <sc>buríring</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3104><form>budíga</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>warehouse</tr> for holding heavy materials. <number>2</number> place in the hold of a ship for cargo, often open. <number>3</number> <tr>cargo compartment</tr> of a plane, truck, car, etc. <number>4</number> stomach of a person (slang). <i>Dakug budíga kay dakug káun,</i> He has a big stomach because he eats a lot. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a warehouse. <i>Budigáhun kung katungà ning bildínga,</i> I&apos;ll make the other half of this building into a warehouse. <number>2</number> <itype>[b]</itype> make a cargo compartment in s.t. <form>budigíru</form> <pos>n</pos> one who works in a warehouse.

<p id=3105><form>budígus</form> <pos>n</pos> earthen <tr>jug</tr> with a long slender neck and a small opening.

<p id=3106><form>budlat</form> <pos>a</pos> bulging eyes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN6; b6]</itype> for the eyes to <tr>bulge</tr>. <i>Mibudlat íyang mata sa kasukù,</i> His eyes bulged in anger. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to fishes with bulging eyes, e.g. k.o. slipmouth (<ix>palutput</ix>) with this appearance: <bio>Gazza minuta</bio>. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> having bulging eyes.

<p id=3107><form>budlay</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>tiring</tr>, <tr>tiresome</tr>. <i>Budlay kaáyu ning magguna sa ínit,</i> It&apos;s tiring to cut grass in the sun. <i>Budlay kaáyu ang magpaábut,</i> It&apos;s tiresome to wait. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2b3]</itype> <number>1a</number> be inconvenienced, put to great effort. <i>Mibudlay giyud <pb n=151>ku pag-anhi,</i> I took the trouble of coming here. <i>Ayaw kug budláya sa ímung mga prublíma,</i> Don&apos;t trouble me with your problems. <number>1b</number> <tr>toil</tr>. <i>Nagbudlay siya arun mabúhì,</i> He toils in order to live. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>tire</tr>. <i>Ayaw budláya ang masakitun,</i> Don&apos;t tire the patient. <number>3</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> consider s.t. tiresome. <i>Gitilipunuhan ta ka kay gibudláyan kung muanhà,</i> I phoned you because it&apos;s easier than going to your house. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> effort exerted to get s.t. done. <i>Nasalbar siya tungud sa kabudlay sa duktur,</i> The doctor&apos;s efforts saved him. <form>-in-an, kina-an</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. earned by labor. <form>hi&N;-, ha&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ANP; b6]</itype> take a <tr>rest</tr>. <i>Anhà ku sa landung sa mangga manghimudlay (muhimudlay, magpahimudlay),</i> I&apos;ll rest under the mango tree. <form>tinghi&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> rest period.

<p id=3108><form>budlis</form> <pos>n</pos> long, thin mark, <tr>stripe</tr>, <tr>smear</tr>. <i>Lagmit buláwan ang dág nga budlis sa batu,</i> The yellow streaks in the stone are probably gold. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; b6(1)]</itype> mark with streaks or stripes. <i>Ayaw budlísi ug úling ang salug,</i> Don&apos;t <tr>streak</tr> charcoal on the floor. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to fishes with streaks.

<p id=3109><form>budlísiw</form> <xr>= <sc>bidlísiw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3110><form>budlung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> dig out plants with deep-running roots. <i>Kinahanglan budlúngun gayud ang kúgun kay lawum ug dulut,</i> You have to really dig out the cogon grass, because it runs deep. <pos>n</pos> heavy metal bar for digging out weeds with deep roots.

<p id=3111><form>budlung<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> sweet made of cornstarch (<ix>tik tik</ix>), brown sugar, shredded coconut meat, wrapped in banana leaves to form a stick and steamed.

<p id=3112><form>budlut</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sticking out</tr>, <tr>protruding</tr>. <i>Budlut ug simud,</i> Lips that stick out. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46N; b(1)c16P]</itype> <tr>bulge</tr>, <tr>protrude</tr>. <i>Mibudlut (namudlut) íyang kaunuran pag-alsa níya sa barbil,</i> His flesh bulged when he lifted the barbell. <i>Nagbudlut ang íyang mata,</i> His eyes bulge.

<p id=3113><form>budluy</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. mackerel scad or round scad: <bio>Decapterus macrosoma</bio>.

<p id=3114><form>búdu</form> <xr>= <sc>búru<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3115><form>budyas</form> <xr>= <sc>bugyas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3116><form>budyung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> helmet <tr>shells</tr>, <tr>conchs</tr>, or any large univalve with a pointed caudal apex. <number>2</number> <tr>horn</tr> for signaling made from the <ix>budyung</ix> or one similar in appearance made from a carabao horn. <number>3</number> horn or whistle blown as a signal. <i>Wà ku makabatì sa budyung sa alas síti,</i> I didn&apos;t hear the seven o&apos;clock whistle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> sound a <ix>budyung</ix> or any warning device. <form>&mdash; kamwà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tuns</tr>. <form>&mdash; lungga</form> <pos>n</pos> true conchs. <form>&mdash; sa lubut sa anay</form> <pos>n</pos> frog shells, so called from their openings which resemble a pig&apos;s anus. <form>&mdash; tambúlì</form> <pos>n</pos> helmet shells. <form>&mdash; tangali</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tritons</tr>.

<p id=3117><form>búg</form> <xr>= <sc>bulug<sub>1, 2, 3, 4</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3118><form>buga</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> emit s.t. with force or in great quantity. <i>Ang adlaw mibuga sa íyang naglagiting nga kaínit,</i> The sun emitted its stinging rays. <i>Nagbuga ug átà ang kugíta,</i> The octopus <tr>spewed</tr> out his ink. <i>Tugtug nga gibuga sa amplipáyir,</i> The song which the amplifier <tr>blared</tr> out. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> treat an illness by expectorating chewed medicinal herbs on a sore spot or at the person. <i>Naáyu ang nagsakit nga tiyan nga gibugahan,</i> His stomach ailment got better after the herbalist spat on it. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> do s.t. with force or energy. <i>Ug bugahan nig trabáhu, human dáyun,</i> If you do this with energy, it will get done right away. <number>3b</number> hit s.o. hard with the fist (slang). <i>Ang íyang úlu mauy gibugahan pag-áyu ni Ilurdi,</i> Elorde kept smashing at his head.

<p id=3119><form>búgà</form> <pos>n</pos> side arm (slang). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a1]</itype> shoot s.o. with a side arm.

<p id=3120><form>bugaguy</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stupid</tr>, having little or no judgment or common sense. <i>Ang mga bugaguy nagtangà lang. Maung nakaiskápu ang dinakpan,</i> The idiots were so <tr>careless</tr>, so the prisoner escaped. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a2]</itype> be, become a person with little common sense. <i>Mubugaguy (mabugaguy) nang ímung anak kun dì tagáag rispunsibilidad,</i> Your child will never develop common sense if he is never given responsibilities. <i>Gibugaguyan kaáyu ku níya nga mukatáwa lag walay sinugdánan,</i> I consider her a <tr>fool</tr> because she laughs for no reason whatsoever.

<p id=3121><form>bugáis</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>ringworm</tr>, k.o. skin disease marked by circular scaly patches. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1246; a4b5]</itype> infect with ringworm. <i>Gibugáis (gibugaisan) ang ákung búgan,</i> My groin got infected with ringworm.

<p id=3122><form>bugal</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>braggart</tr>, <tr>boastful</tr>. <i>Ang táwung bugal magdáyig sa íyang kaugalíngun,</i> A braggart extols himself. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> get to be a braggart. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> braggart in one&apos;s ways. <form>bugalbugal, bugalbúgal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ridicule</tr>, a comment about s.o. that is humorous and disrespectful. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>deride</tr>, make s.o. the object of contemptuous laughter. <i>Bugalbugalan aku sa usa ka bungì?</i> Me, be ridiculed by a harelip? <form>ma-un, -un</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of ridiculing.

<p id=3123><form>búgan</form> (from <ix>bulug</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>groin</tr>. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> hit s.o. in the groin. <i>Bugana siya pagpátid,</i> Kick him in the groin.

<p id=3124><form>bugang</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to various tall tufted grasses and reeds (<ix>tangbù, taláhib,</ix> et al.). <form>-in-</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>pidgin</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> speak a language brokenly. <i>Nagbinugang siya pag-ininglis,</i> He spoke bamboo English.

<pb n=152>

<p id=3125><form>bugarak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; c]</itype> <tr>gush</tr>, flow out with a rush. <i>Mibugarak ang túbig sa sandayung,</i> The water gushed out of the spout. <pos>n</pos> gushing, rushing flow. <i>Bugarak sa bahà,</i> The onrush of the flood.

<p id=3126><form>bugarut</form> <pos>a</pos> giving an impression of weight or ponderousness, having thick heavy features. <i>Bugarut ug nawung, mu rag alíwas,</i> He has coarse features, like an ape. <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish that looks ugly.

<p id=3127><form>bugas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>husked rice or corn</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>pimple</tr>, <tr>cyst</tr>. <i>Dì makáun ning babúya kay may bugas,</i> You can&apos;t eat this pig because it is infested with cysts. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> husk rice or corn. <i>Pínu kaáyung mubugas ning galingána,</i> This mill produces fine grains. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1246; a4]</itype> get pimples, cysts. <i>Gibugas íyang nawung,</i> She has pimples on her face. <form>&mdash; mais</form> <tr>corn grits</tr>. <form>&mdash; humay</form> husked rice. <form>-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> container for husked rice or corn. <number>2</number> rice or corn <tr>mill</tr>. <form>-ánan</form> <pos>n</pos> rice or corn mill. <form>-íru</form> <pos>n</pos> one who engages in the buying and selling of husked corn or rice. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> money to buy rice with. <number>2</number> s.t. done in all seriousness as if it were the source of one&apos;s livelihood. <i>Pamugas nang íyang pagpusta,</i> His betting is strictly for the money. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; c6]</itype> buy husked rice or corn. <i>Ígù ra gayung ikapamugas ning sapía,</i> This money is just enough to buy husked rice (or corn). <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> pimply.&dagger;

<p id=3128><form>bug-at</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>heavy</tr>. <number>2</number> difficult to accomplish, <tr>onerous</tr>. <i>Bug-at nga taríya,</i> Difficult task. <i>Bug-at nga kaakúhan,</i> Heavy responsibility. <number>3</number> heavy punishment, <tr>sorrows</tr>. <i>Bug-at nga sílut,</i> Heavy punishment. <number>4</number> grave, serious accusation. <i>Bug-at ang pasángil nga gipahamtang kanímu,</i> A grave accusation has been leveled against you. <number>5</number> for the muscles to be fatigued. <i>Bug-at ning ákung buktun pagkinúgus nímu,</i> My arms are exhausted from holding you. <number>6</number> <formx>&mdash; ang balatían</formx> dislike s.t. strongly. <i>Bug-at ang balatían nákù ánang nangulitáwu sa ákung anak,</i> I dislike the man that is courting my daughter very much. <number>7</number> <formx>&mdash; ang buut</formx> <number>7a</number> <xr>= <sc>&mdash; ang balatían</sc>.</xr> <number>7b</number> be against one&apos;s will. <i>Gitugtan ku níya bisan bug-at sa íyang buut,</i> He allowed me to do it even if it was against his will. <form>&mdash; ang dughan</form> be heavy-hearted, depressed. <form>&mdash; ang dugù</form> <xr>= <sc>&mdash; ang balatían</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; ang kúmù</form> pack a heavy punch. <form>&mdash; nga masúgù</form> gives commands in such a way that they must be accomplished rapidly and well. <form>&mdash; ang nawung</form> long-faced, unsmiling. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> become heavy, onerous, grave. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; ang balatían, buut, dughan, dugù, nawung</formx> be disgusted, against one&apos;s wishes, get a heavy heart, long-faced, etc. <i>Ug manamkun ang ákung asáwa mubug-at ang íyang dugù magtan-aw nákù,</i> When my wife is in the early stages of pregnancy, she can&apos;t stand to look at me. <i>Mubug-at íyang nawung ug sugúun,</i> She gets a long face when I tell her to do s.t. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>lift heavy things</tr>. <i>Nabughat siya kay namug-at man,</i> He had a relapse because he lifted heavy things. <number>2</number> to stiffen in order to become heavier. <i>Lisud kang sakwátun kay mamug-at ka,</i> You are hard to lift because you make yourself rigid. <form>panghi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>pa&N;-</sc>, <ix>2.</ix></xr> <form>pahi&N;-</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>pa&N;-</sc>, <ix>2.</ix></xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> load s.t. on s.o. else. <i>Gipahimug-atan ang mutsatsa sa trabáhu maung mipaúlì,</i> The work was loaded on the maid, so she returned home. <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> weight to weigh s.t. down. <form>ka-un(&rarr;), gi-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>weight</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>importance</tr>, <tr>influence</tr>. <i>Ayawg tagáig gibug-atun tung kasabáa,</i> Don&apos;t give his reprimands any importance. <xr><ix>see also</ix> <sc>tumuy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3129><form>bug-átan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. cockles.

<p id=3130><form>bugáud</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish of the type called <ix>gunggung:</ix> <bio>Therapon sp</bio>.

<p id=3131><form>bugáung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish, the <tr>jarbua</tr>: <bio>Therapon jarbua</bio>. <form>-un</form> resembling the <ix>bugáung.</ix> <number>1</number> k.o. bird, a <tr>cuckoo shrike</tr>: <bio>Lalage nigra</bio>. <number>2</number> fish resembling the <ix>bugáung.</ix>

<p id=3132><form>búgaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> drive s.t. s.w., <tr>drive</tr> away. <i>Ang musika makabúgaw sa kaláay,</i> Music can drive away boredom. <i>Bugáwa ang isdà ngadtu sa púkut,</i> Drive the fish into the net. <i>Bugáwi ku sa lángaw,</i> Drive the flies away from me. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> act as a <tr>pimp</tr>. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>búgaw</sc>, <ix>2.</ix></xr> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. used to drive s.t. away. <number>2</number> pimp. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> one who assists s.o. in driving away animals or birds.

<p id=3133><form>bugawísan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large salt-water fish.

<p id=3134><form>bugay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bride price</tr>; gift originally given to the bride&apos;s family, but now often to the bride. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give a bride price. <i>Bugayan man gánì untà kadtu siyag duha ka gatus,</i> She could have gotten a dowry of two hundred pesos.

<p id=3135><form>bugay<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>buguy</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=3136><form>bugbug</form> <xr>= <sc>balugbug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3137><form>bugdu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bulging</tr>, full and round. <i>Ang bugdu níyang dughan,</i> Her full and round breasts. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be, become bulging. <i>Nagbugdu ang íyang likud kay buktut man,</i> His back bulges because he is a hunchback.

<p id=3138><form>bughà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>split</tr>, chop wood lengthwise. <i>Mubughà kug káhuyng igsusugnud,</i> I&apos;ll split some wood for firewood. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> for s.t. long to break. <i>Nagkabughà ang sakayan nga gihampak sa balud,</i> The boat was gradually breaking apart as it was being beaten by the waves. <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> hit with a piece of firewood. <pos>n</pos> piece of firewood.

<pb n=153>

<p id=3139><form>bughat</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. sickness which results from leaving a sickbed or rising from childbirth too early, or from the return of a disease. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a1]</itype> have a <tr>relapse</tr> (<ix>bughat</ix>). <i>Nabughat siya kay nagkáug danggit,</i> He had a relapse because he ate <ix>danggit</ix> fish. <i>Bughátun ku nímug patrabáhu?</i> You want me to have a relapse with all the work you&apos;re making me do? <form>pa&N;-, hi&N;-, tali&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> medicine for <ix>bughat.</ix>

<p id=3140><form>bughaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>faded</tr>, <tr>pale</tr> in color. <i>Bughaw nga itum,</i> A faded black color. <number>2</number> light blue in color. <i>Pinintálag bughaw,</i> Painted light blue. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> for colors to <tr>fade</tr>, get to be dull. <i>Nabughaw ang íyang sinínà kay gihayhay sa ínit,</i> Her dress faded because she hung it in the sun.

<p id=3141><form>bughuan</form> <xr>= <sc>abubhuan</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>*abubhu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3142><form>búgi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>boogie</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> dance the boogie.

<p id=3143><form>bugì</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. skin disease characterized by intense itching and development of scales. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1246; a4]</itype> get infected with <tr>scabies</tr>. <i>Bugiun ka ug makighagwà ka ánang irù nga pulgasun,</i> You will be infected with scabies if you frolic with that flea-infested dog. <number>2</number> <itype>[a4]</itype> light curse expressing irritation. <i>Gibugì man ning trabahúa, wà magkadimáu,</i> Damn this work. It&apos;s done all wrong.

<p id=3144><form>bugimbilya, buginbilya</form> <xr>= <sc>bumbil</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3145><form>buging</form> <pos>n</pos> small ear of corn.

<p id=3146><form>bugírit</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>boastful</tr>, putting on airs (euphemism for <ix>hambugíru</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> become boastful.

<p id=3147><form>bugkas</form> <xr>= <sc>bugtas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3148><form>bugkus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>tie</tr> a piece of string or s.t. similar around s.t. long, usually to tie it together with s.t. else. <i>Bugkúsa ang mga lipak,</i> Tie the bamboo slats into a <tr>bundle</tr>. <i>Bugkúsi ug panyù ang ímung samad,</i> Tie a handkerchief around your wound. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. used to tie around s.t. <i>Alambri ang gamítang bugkus,</i> Use wire to tie it up. <number>2</number> bundle. <i>Tagtrayinta ang bugkus sa káhuy,</i> Each bundle of firewood costs thirty centavos. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. tied into a bundle.

<p id=3149><form>bugkus<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> slender around the stomach. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become slim in the abdominal region. <i>Ug sígi kang ihirsisyu, mabugkus ímung tiyan,</i> If you keep exercising, your stomach will get trimmed down.

<p id=3150><form>bugkut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> tie s.t. around s.t. to secure it. <i>Bugkúta nang sugung dinhà arun dì matumba,</i> Tie s.t. around that bamboo tube container so that it won&apos;t fall over. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> for supernatural beings to kidnap a person rendering him invisible. This is usually done in the thickets, rocks, etc. where these spirits are thought to dwell. <pos>n</pos> s.t. tied around s.t. to secure it.

<p id=3151><form>bugnà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Book of Revelations</tr>. <i>Ang bugnà usa ka basahun sa Bag-ung Túgun nga nagsaysay sa umalábut,</i> The Book of Revelations is a book in the New Testament that reveals s.t. about things to come. <form>hi&N;-</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>mugnà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3152><form>bugnà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> rub bark scrapings into a fishing line to strengthen it. <i>Bugnáa (ibugnà) nang pasúla arun malig-un,</i> Dye that fishing line to make it strong.

<p id=3153><form>bugnaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>cold</tr> or <tr>cool</tr> to the touch. <i>Bugnaw nga imnun,</i> Cool if you drink it. <i>Bugnaw nga panahun,</i> Weather that makes you feel cool. <number>2</number> gentle, low in sound, not loud or harsh. <i>Bugnaw kaáyung tíngug nang mag-aawíta,</i> That singer has a mellow voice. <number>3</number> cool in temper. <i>Ang táwung bugnaw ug hunàhúnà dúgayng masukù,</i> A cool-tempered person doesn&apos;t get angry easily. <number>4</number> cool, <tr>indifferent</tr>. <i>Bugnaw kaáyu siyag tinagdan sa íyang inaína,</i> She is cold toward her stepmother. <form>&mdash; ug mantíkà</form> lazy (humorous). <form>&mdash; ug simud</form> widower (lit. one whose lips are not so ardent) (humorous). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB3(1)N; a]</itype> cool s.t., be, become cold. <i>Idálit ang sálad ug mubugnaw (mabugnaw, mamugnaw) na,</i> Serve the salad when it cools. <number>1a</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> be exposed to cold, draft. <i>Hibugnawan gánì ku, ubhun dáyun,</i> Whenever I&apos;m exposed to the cold, I readily come down with a cough. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; a1]</itype> dampen one&apos;s enthusiasm for going ahead with s.t. <i>Dì ka makabugnaw (makapabugnaw) nákù pagminyù,</i> You can not discourage me from getting married. <number>3</number> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> for a sound to become soft. <number>4</number> <itype>[AP; a12]</itype> cool s.o. down, pacify his anger. <i>Ang mga asáwa mau giyuy mubugnaw (mupabugnaw) sa kasukù sa ílang mga bána,</i> Wives are the ones who know how to calm their husbands down. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> cool oneself, s.t. off. <number>2</number> take refreshments. <pos>n</pos> s.t. taken for refreshments. <i>Dalítig pabugnaw ang mga bisíta,</i> Serve the visitors some refreshments. <form>pa-an, pa-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> refreshment parlor. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2346]</itype> have the chills, <tr>be chilled</tr> all over. <i>May hilánat ka kay namugnaw man,</i> You (must) have a fever because you have the chills. <i>Namugnaw ku sa kahadluk,</i> I felt cold due to (my) fright. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>calm</tr>, cool-headed.

<p id=3154><form>bugnay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small tree: <bio>Antidesma bunius</bio>.

<p id=3155><form>bugnù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; ab3]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>fight</tr> at close quarters. <i>Walay kukalísang ang irung mibugnù (namugnù) sa bitin,</i> The dog fought the snake bravely. <i>Bugnúun ka nákù,</i> I will fight with you. <number>2</number> struggle with. <i>Ang masakitun nakigbugnù sa kamatáyun,</i> The sick man is struggling against death. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fight at close quarters. <pb n=154><i>Duguun kaáyu ang bugnù sa duha ka rislir,</i> The fight between the two wrestlers is so bloody. <number>2</number> a <tr>struggle</tr>. <number>3</number> <tr>contest</tr>. <i>Kinsay midaug sa bugnù tálì ni Markus ug Usminya?</i> Who won in the contest between Marcos and Osmeña? <form>ma&N;-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fighter</tr>.

<p id=3156><form>bugnúsun</form> <pos>n</pos> rope attached to a sail to raise it.

<p id=3157><form>bugnut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> pull s.t. with a hard <tr>jerk</tr>. <i>Ikaw bay nagbugnut sa buhuk ni Pilang?</i> Were you the one who pulled Pilang&apos;s hair? <i>Ímung bugnútun (bugnutun) ug kalit ang láang arun dílì makalikay ang manuk,</i> You pull the noose all of a sudden so the chicken cannot escape. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b8]</itype> hastily impress s.o. to run an errand. <i>Akuy hibugnutan níyag súgù kay aku ra may didtu,</i> I got trapped into running the errand because I was the only one there.

<p id=3158><form>bugsay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>oar</tr>, <tr>paddle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> <tr>row</tr>, paddle. <i>Mibugsay (namugsay) siya padúlung sa lawud,</i> He paddled toward the open sea. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make into a paddle, oar. <form>-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> the place in the boat where the one who paddles sits. <form>ma&N;-r-/l-</form> <pos>n</pos> one who does the paddling.

<p id=3159><form>bugsù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>drive</tr> s.t. long into the ground or some other surface. <i>Ibugsù ang mga lipak,</i> Drive the stakes into the ground. <number>2</number> <tr>throw</tr> s.t. down with force, as if to ram it into the ground. <i>Ibugsù ta kag ilárun ku nímu,</i> I&apos;ll ram you into the ground if you cheat me. <number>2a</number> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> <tr>fall headlong</tr>, landing hard. <i>Nabálì íyang líug dihang nabugsù siya sa yútà,</i> He broke his neck when he fell headlong to the ground. <pos>n</pos> piece of wood or metal used as a <tr>stake</tr>. <i>Bugsù sa bungsud,</i> The stakes of the fish corral.

<p id=3160><form>bugsù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; b26]</itype> <tr>appear</tr>, show up suddenly or unexpectedly. <i>Mibugsù siyag pamisíta námù,</i> He appeared unexpectedly to pay us a visit. <form>hi&N;-</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>himugsù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3161><form>bugsuk</form> <xr>= <sc>bugsù<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> <tr>dive</tr> with a straight body with either head or feet first. <i>Nagpabugsuk siyang miambak sa swíming pul,</i> He dove into the swimming pool headlong. <form>tali-, ta-<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stakes</tr>.

<p id=3162><form>bugtai</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small tree of waste places.

<p id=3163><form>bugtak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> for clothes to be drooping or loose as if wet or because of s.t. damp sticking to them. <i>Nagbugtak ang íyang sapátus kay namilit ang lápuk,</i> His shoes looked heavy on his feet because of the mud that stuck to them. <number>2</number> look untidy because of loose clothing. <i>Nagbugtak siya sa íyang karsúnis nga dakù níya,</i> He looks a mess in the pants that are too big for him. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> wearing ill-fitting clothes.

<p id=3164><form>bugtas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a]</itype> for string or stitches to <tr>snap</tr>, break suddenly. <i>Nabugtas ang báat sa pakíti,</i> The string of the package snapped. <i>Bugtása ang tinahian,</i> Rip the stitches apart.

<p id=3165><form>bugtaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>chase</tr>, run after. <i>Bugtáwa ang kábaw nga nakabuhì,</i> Chase the carabao that got loose.

<p id=3166><form>bugtaw<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> call out to s.o. at night. <i>Bugtawa lang unyà kug mangadtu na ta,</i> Just call me when it&apos;s time to go. <pos>n</pos> calling out to s.o. at night.

<p id=3167><form>bugtaw<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> keep vigil over s.t. at night. <i>Nagbugtaw kug bantay sa nanganak námung bábuy,</i> I kept awake watching over my pig that was giving birth. <pos>n</pos> <tr>vigil</tr>, keeping watch over.

<p id=3168><form>bugtaw<sub>4</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for muscles to be numb from fatigue. <i>Bugtaw kaáyu ning ákung kamut sa pagsinuwat,</i> My hands are numb from writing so much. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN; a12]</itype> be <tr>numb from fatigue</tr>. <i>Mibugtaw (namugtaw, nabugtaw) ákung buktun ug kinúgus sa bátà,</i> My arms grew numb from carrying the baby.

<p id=3169><form>bugtì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> <tr>swap</tr>, <tr>barter</tr> on a one-to-one basis. <i>Bugtíi ug kabáyù ang ákung awtu,</i> Give me a horse for my car. <i>Wà kuy ikabugtì sa ímung kaáyu,</i> I have nothing to give you in return for your goodness. <pos>n</pos> thing given in exchange for s.t. else. <i>Kini bugtì unyà sa ákung báka,</i> I will take this in return for my cow.

<!-- Weird location for dagger -->

<p id=3170><form>bugtik</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> &dagger; <number>2</number> <itype>[B46]</itype> for the stomach to be distended. <i>Bitúkun tingáli nang batáa kay nagbugtik man ang tíyan,</i> That child must have intestinal worms because his stomach is distended.

<p id=3171><form>bugtù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; a]</itype> <number>1</number> for string, rope, wire, etc. to <tr>break</tr> with a snap, make a string snap. <i>Nakabugtù ang irù sa higut,</i> The dog broke the tether. <i>Mabugtù ang lastiku ug ímung inátun,</i> The rubber band will break if you stretch it. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; ang ginháwa</formx> <itype>[B12; b4]</itype> stop breathing (<tr>die</tr>). <i>Nabugtù na ang gininháwa sa masakitun,</i> The patient has died. <number>3</number> <itype>[A3PC; c1]</itype> cut off ties or relationship. <i>Dílì aku ang makabugtù (makapabugtù) sa átung panaghigála,</i> I cannot break up our friendship. <i>Bugtúun tang átung kasal,</i> Let&apos;s not go through with (lit. break off) our wedding. <form>walay &mdash;</form> without a break. <i>Gipasundáyag ang pilikula nga walay bugtù,</i> The film was shown without interruptions.

<p id=3172><form>bugtuk</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. disease that infects the fruit of bananas and cacao whereby the fruit gets hard spots. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infected with this disease.

<p id=3173><form>bugtung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sole</tr>, <tr>lone</tr>. <i>Pinanggà ku kaáyung bugtung kung anak,</i> I love my only child very much. <form>&mdash; lubi</form> <pos>n</pos> a coconut which grows <pb n=155>all alone and not in a bunch. The oil of such a coconut is said to be highly medicinal. <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>-in-</sc>.</xr> <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1C; a12]</itype> do s.t. alone, single-handedly, do s.t. with another in singles. <i>Binugtúngun (binugtungun) ku nig dárung umáha,</i> I&apos;ll plow this field single-handedly. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> lone scale encircling a leg <corr>of </corr>a chicken. If a cock has such a mark it is believed to be a sign that it is to be a likely winner.

<p id=3174><form>bugtus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sweet potatoes</tr> produced from the first harvest.

<p id=3175><form>bugu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tree.

<p id=3176><form>búgù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>slow</tr> in comprehension, <tr>dull</tr>. <number>2</number> poor in doing things. <i>Búgù kaáyu ku ánang sáyaw,</i> I&apos;m a poor dancer. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> be, become dull. <number>2</number> be poor in doing things. <i>Nagkabugù ka na man run. Dì na man kang kasiyat sa búla,</i> You&apos;re getting poorer and poorer. You can&apos;t even shoot the ball.

<p id=3177><form>búgù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish. <number>1</number> name given to various k.o. gobies. <number>2</number> name given to snakeheads.

<!-- Weird usage of form; shouldn&apos;t it be like the next entry? -->

<p id=3178><form>buguk<sub>1</sub>, -in-</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for an egg to be <tr>rotten</tr>. <number>2</number> rotten in character. <i>Dì maantígung malúuy ang táwung binuguk ug kasingkásing,</i> A man with a rotten heart doesn&apos;t know pity. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> for eggs to fail to hatch, <tr>addle</tr>.

<p id=3179><form>*buguk<sub>2</sub></form> <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> youngest child (humorous).

<p id=3180><form>buguk<sub>3</sub>, búguk<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>búgù<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3181><form>búguk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> take a mouthful of liquid to <tr>gargle</tr>, <tr>rinse out the mouth</tr>. <i>Makabúguk ba kug duha ka lab-uk sa ímung tubà?</i> Can I get a mouthful of your toddy to rinse out my mouth? <i>Bugúka (ibúguk) ning tambála,</i> Gargle with this mouthwash.

<p id=3182><form>bugul, búgul</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>rounded</tr> and full, in a lump. <i>Ang búgul nímung áping,</i> Your full and rounded cheeks. <i>Makaiíbug tan-áwun ang búgul mung dughan,</i> Your full breasts are entrancing to look at. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> be, become full and rounded like a lump. <pos>n</pos> <tr>lump</tr>. <i>Butangig yílu ang búgul sa agtang mu,</i> Apply ice to the lump on your forehead. <i>Búgul sa kan-un,</i> A lump of rice. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fullness, roundness.

<p id=3183><form>bugun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lump</tr>. <i>Bugun sa yútà,</i> Clods of earth. <i>Bugun sa kan-un,</i> Lumps of rice. <i>Bugun sa kaláyu,</i> Balls of fire. <number>2</number> <tr>cyst</tr> or any lump growing in the body. <i>Naingun kag táwung nakalamuyg búla nang ímung bugun,</i> You look like a man who has swallowed a ball with that goiter of yours. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); c1]</itype> get full of lumps. <i>Mubugun (mabugun) ang gátas kun mabáhaw,</i> Milk gets curdled when it is sour. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> having a goiter, cyst.

<p id=3184><form>bugung</form> <pos>a</pos> very quick and fast in going. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23P; a12]</itype> move in a hurry. <i>Mibugung (mipabugung) ug dágan ang awtu,</i> The car sped away.

<p id=3185><form>bug-us<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>final</tr>, <tr>resolute</tr>. <i>Bug-us na ba ning ímung hukum?</i> Is this decision of yours final? <number>2</number> given with entirety, nothing held back. <i>Higugmáa ang Diyus sa bug-us mung kasingkásing,</i> Love God with all your heart. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> resolve with finality. <number>2</number> make s.t. complete. <i>Ihátag ang ímung láwas arun mabug-us ang átung gugma,</i> Give your body to make our love complete. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> be a godparent to a child both in baptism and confirmation or wedding. <i>Suud kaáyu mi. Aku gánì nagbug-us ug kúgus sa íyang bátà,</i> We are close friends. In fact I sponsored his child in baptism and confirmation. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the state of being <tr>complete</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>full moon</tr>. <i>Háyag kaáyu rung gabhiúna kay kabug-us man,</i> This evening it&apos;s bright because there&apos;s a full moon. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>finality</tr>. <i>Ihátag ku nímung kabug-úsan sa ákung hukum ugmà,</i> I&apos;ll let you know what my final decision is tomorrow.

<p id=3186><form>bug-us<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> for s.o. to be taken by a supernatural being to its unearthly abode and have substituted for his body a banana trunk which takes the appearance of his dead body. <i>Wà tu siya mamatay. Gibug-us diay,</i> He wasn&apos;t dead but was taken by a supernatural being.

<p id=3187><form>buguy</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>hoodlum</tr>, <tr>hooligan</tr>. <i>Buguy ang nagkuláta níya,</i> He was mauled by a hoodlum. <number>2</number> a <tr>loafer</tr>, <tr>idler</tr>. <i>Gagmay siyag núta kay buguy mang pagkatinun-an,</i> His grades are low because he&apos;s a bum student. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> be, become a <tr>bum</tr>. <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> act, look like a hoodlum. <i>Ug dílì siya atngan, magbinuguy sa íyang pagtuun,</i> If we don&apos;t keep an eye on him, he&apos;ll start bumming around instead of studying.

<p id=3188><form>bugwad</form> <xr>= <sc>bugwal</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3189><form>bugwak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>spit</tr>, blow s.t. out of the mouth. <i>Ayaw ibugwak ang tambal,</i> Do not spit the medicine out. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b1]</itype> <tr>gush</tr> forth, <tr>spew</tr> out. <i>Namugwak ug kaláyu ang bulkan,</i> The volcano spewed fire. <pos>n</pos> s.t. spewed, puffed out. <i>Nagkalidádis ang buluk sa bugwak sa túbig sa pawntin,</i> The fountain emitted a multicolored stream of water. <i>Mailhan nákung klási sa sigarilyu sa usa lang ka bugwak,</i> I can tell the brand of cigarette by just one puff.&dagger;

<p id=3190><form>bugwal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> turn over the earth, usually with a bar, to prepare the ground for cultivation. <i>Bugwálun ku ang baul,</i> I&apos;ll dig the field up. <i>Bugwálan ku ang ákung útang nímu,</i> I&apos;ll pay off my debt by digging your field up.

<p id=3191><form>bugway</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>spike of flowers or fruit</tr> that <pb n=156>branches out. <number>2</number> s.t. plaited together in a <tr>string</tr> or garland to make a unit for sale. <i>Palit ug usa ka bugway áhus,</i> Buy a string of garlic. <number>3</number> anything long resembling s.t. plaited into a <tr>strand</tr>. <i>Bugway nga asu,</i> A <tr>column</tr> of smoke. <i>Bugway sa kaháyag,</i> A <tr>shaft</tr> of light. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> flower or fruit in spikes. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> plait s.t. into a string to form a unit.

<p id=3192><form>bugyas</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small square-bottomed <tr>basket</tr> made of bamboo or rattan strips, woven into a square mesh. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make this sort of basket. <number>2</number> <itype>[c16]</itype> put s.t. in such a basket. <i>Bugyásun (ibugyas) ku ning mga pisù pagdala,</i> I&apos;ll carry these chicks in a small basket.

<p id=3193><form>bugyung</form> <xr>= <sc>budyung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3194><form>búha</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sleeve bearing</tr> for wheels. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> attach, make into, use a sleeve bearing.

<p id=3195><form>buhágay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> <tr>pour forth</tr> in large quantities. <i>Pagkabuak sa sakayan mibuhágay ang túbig sa sulud,</i> When the boat broke, the water rushed into it. <i>Mibuhágay ang kaháyag sa kwartu,</i> Light flooded the room. <i>Nagbuhagay ang pasì sa buslut sa sáku,</i> The grains poured out of the rip in the sack. <pos>n</pos> profuse flowing of s.t.

<p id=3196><form>buhahà, buhàhà</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> talking or laughing loudly. <number>2a</number> <tr>loud-mouthed</tr>, talking boastfully. <number>2b</number> <tr>blabber-mouthed</tr>, unable to keep secrets. <i>Patákà lag tabì nang buhàháa,</i> That blabber-mouth just prattles on without discretion. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> break into loud laughter. <i>Mibuhàhà lag katáwa ang búang,</i> The maniac burst into wild laughter. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> <number>a</number> get to be a loud-mouthed braggart. <number>b</number> get to be a blabber-mouth.

<p id=3197><form>buhakhak</form> <xr>= <sc>bahakhak</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3198><form>buhalhal<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> left <tr>open</tr>, <tr>unbuttoned</tr>, <tr>unfastened</tr>. <i>Nabuhalhal ang íyang sinínà,</i> Her dress was unbuttoned. <i>Nagbuhalhal nga basurahan,</i> An <tr>uncovered</tr> garbage can. <i>Sa ákung pagdinálì nagbuhalhal na lang ning ákung sapátus,</i> In my hurry I left my shoes unlaced. <i>Ayaw buhalhala (ibuhalhal) ang ímung núka,</i> Don&apos;t leave your sore exposed.

<p id=3199><form>buhalhal<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>buhàhà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3200><form>buhang</form> <xr>= <sc>bulhang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3201><form>buhanghang</form> <xr>= <sc>buhalhal<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3202><form>búhat<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>do</tr> s.t., do work. <i>Dì ka pakan-un dinhi ug dì ka mubúhat,</i> If you do not work, you don&apos;t get anything to eat here. <i>Buháta ang tanan arun aku mabúhì,</i> Do everything in your power so that I may live. <i>Ngánung buhátan man ku nímu niíni?</i> Why do you do this to me? <number>2</number> <itype>[AC12; a]</itype> <tr>make</tr>, <tr>construct</tr>. <i>Buhátun kung tangkal kining kawayána,</i> I&apos;ll make this bamboo into a cage. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>create</tr>. <i>Wà pay nakabúhat ug tambal pagpugung sa katigulangun,</i> No one has created a drug to prevent aging. <i>Gibúhat sa Ginúu si Íbà,</i> God created Eve. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> perform the <ix>búhat</ix> ceremony (<xr><ix>búhat,</ix> <ix>n</ix> <bx>5</bx></xr>). <i>Kinahanglan nang buhátan arun mamaáyu,</i> We have to perform a <ix>búhat</ix> ceremony for him so he will get better. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. made, make. <i>Ang radyu búhat sa Hapun,</i> The radio set is of Japanese make. <number>2</number> <tr>work</tr>. <i>Anad ku sa búhat,</i> I am accustomed to work. <number>3</number> <tr>job</tr>. <i>Unyà na pagminyug may búhat ka na,</i> Don&apos;t get married until you have<corr> a</corr> job. <number>4</number> <tr>deed</tr>.<i> Ipakítà sa búhat ang gugma mu,</i> Show your love by deeds. <number>5</number> ceremony of offering s.t. cooked with no salt to spirits to insure harvest, give thanks, diagnose an illness. The one who performs this ceremony is the <ix>diwatahan.</ix> <form>anak sa &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> laborer. <form>babáying &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> lady, a female acting in a way appropriate to her role as a woman. <form>laláking &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> man acting in a way appropriate to a man. <i>Laláking búhat mag-apil-apil sa mga tabì,</i> You, a man joining in the women&apos;s gossip. <form>buhatbuhat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN2; a12]</itype> do a variety of different, small chores. <i>Namuhatbúhat siya sa balay,</i> He putters around the house. <form>mabuhatbuhatun</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of puttering around. <form>pamuhatbúhat</form> <pos>n</pos> food prepared for the <ix>búhat</ix> ceremony (cf. <xr><ix>búhat,</ix> <ix>n</ix> <bx>5</bx></xr>). <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> place of work, <tr>office</tr>. <form>gim-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>-l-un</sc>.</xr> <pos>a</pos> entailing lots of work. <i>Gimbuhatun kaáyu kaning pagrilyínu,</i> It&apos;s a lot of trouble to make stuffed chicken. <form>-in-</form> <number>1</number> <xr><corr>= </corr><sc>búhat</sc>, <ix>1.</ix></xr> <number>2</number> <tr>creature</tr>. <i>Mga binúhat sa Ginúu,</i> The Lord&apos;s creatures. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> deeds performed. <i>Dautan nímung binuhátan,</i> Your evil deeds. <form>-l-un, -l-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> things to do, work to be done. <form>mag-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> The Creator, <tr>God</tr>. <form>mag-r-(&rarr;)</form> <number>1</number> Protestant layman who performs ministral duties. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>MA&N;-R-(&rarr;)<sc>.</xr> <form>ma&N;-r-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> one who makes things. <form>manggi-un, manggim-un</form> <pos>a</pos> hard-working, <tr>industrious</tr>. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> business of making s.t. <i>Maáyung nigusyu ang pamúhat ug mwiblis,</i> Furniture making is a good business. <form>pina-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. made to order. <i>Sapátus nga pinabúhat,</i> Made-to-order shoes. <form>tali-, -um-r-</form> <pos>a</pos> preparing to make s.t.&dagger;

<p id=3203><form>búhat<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>lift</tr>. <i>Buháta ring kahun ug itungtung sa lamísa,</i> Lift this box, and put it on the table.

<p id=3204><form>buháwi, buháwì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>waterspout</tr>, heavy squall, <tr>cloudburst</tr>.

<p id=3205><form>búhay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> be permitted to live and thrive. <i>Dílì magbúhay sa dágat ang kasíli,</i> Fresh-water eels will not survive in the sea.

<p id=3206><form>búhì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>alive</tr>, <tr>living</tr>.<i> Kun búhì pa si Tátay,</i> If Dad were only alive. <i>Búhì pa ang ákung pagláum,</i> My hopes have not died. <number>2</number> <tr>vivid</tr>. <pb n=157><i>Búhì pa sa ákung panumdúman,</i> Vivid in my memories. <i>Búhì kung pagtúu nga wà pa siya mamatay,</i> I firmly believe he is still alive. <form>&mdash; ang búlan</form> phase of the moon the first day after the new moon. <i>Búhì ang búlan ugmà,</i> The moon will enter the first quarter tomorrow. <form>&mdash; nga dugù</form> blood that has freshly issued from a wound. <form>&mdash; ug dugù</form> <tr>active</tr>, not phlegmatic. <i>Búhì siyag dugù. Listung sugúun,</i> She is an energetic person and follows orders in a lively way. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> <tr>live</tr>, come to life. <i>Nabúhì si Kristu sa Duminggu di Glurya,</i> Christ came to life on Easter Sunday. <i>Dílì mabúhì ang isdà ug way túbig,</i> A fish cannot live out of the water. <number>1a</number> <formx>ma- pay ginamus</formx> [so-and-so] is sure to die (literally, preserved fish is more likely to come to life). <i>Mabúhì pay ginamus nímug maligsan ka sa pisun,</i> If the steam roller runs over you, you&apos;ll be dead. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> bring to life, cause to thrive. <i>Akuy nagbúhì sa patay níyang pagláum,</i> I revived his dying hopes. <i>Ang ulan nakabúhì sa mga tanum,</i> The rain revived the plants. <i>Buhía ang kaláyu,</i> Kindle the fire. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>raise animals</tr>. <i>Ang bábuy nga ákung gibuhì,</i> The hog I am raising. <number>2</number> <tr>support</tr>, raise a family. <i>Wà kuy ikabuhig asáwa,</i> I don&apos;t have the means to support a wife. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pet</tr>, domestic animal kept. <i>Ang buhì kung kanding,</i> The goat I am keeping. <number>2</number> animal kept by a supernatural being. <number>3</number> penis (humorous). <i>Dakug buhì,</i> Having a large penis. <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number>  <xr>= <sc>buhì 1</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> adopted child or raised by s.o. <form>buhìbúhì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> do s.t. without being told, <tr>help oneself</tr>. <i>Magbuhìbúhì na lang kug káun diri,</i> I&apos;ll help myself to the food here. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> cause s.t. to be brought to life. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; sa dugù</formx> make s.o. active, energetic. <form>paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b3]</itype> <number>1</number> live for s.t. <i>Nagpakabúhì ku sa ákung mga anak,</i> I live for the sake of my children. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> allow s.o. to live. <i>Unsay dílì nákù isáad ug pakabuhíun lámang siya,</i> What wouldn&apos;t I give, if only he be allowed to live. <form>pani&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> lead one&apos;s life. <i>Buut kaming manimúhì sa ámung kaugalíngun,</i> We want to live our life on our own. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>pangina-</sc>.</xr> <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>kabúhì</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> have a livelihood from s.t. <i>Gikabuhían námù ang gamay námung yútà,</i> We lived off of our small piece of property. <form>panga-, pangina-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>earn a living</tr>. <i>Adtu sila mangabúhì (manginabúhì) sa Mindanaw,</i> They will go to earn their living in Mindanao. <i>Pangabuhían (panginabuhían) ba kanang trabahúa?</i> Can you earn a living from that work? <form>kagi-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>biography</tr>. <form>kina-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>life</tr>. <i>Láwas nga walà nay kinabúhì,</i> A body without life. <number>2</number> <tr>life span</tr>. <i>Taas ug kinabúhì,</i> Long-lived. <number>3</number> mode of life. <i>Lisud nga kinabúhì,</i> A difficult life. <form>manggi-an</form> <pos>a</pos> good at raising things. <form>manggi-un</form> <pos>a</pos> growing well. <form>ma&N;-r-(&rarr;), ma&N;-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> one who raises things. <form>-l-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> animals to be raised. <number>2</number> family to support. <i>Daghan kug buluhíun,</i> I have a big family to support. <form>pa&N;-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> occupation of raising animals. <i>Makasapì ta sa pamuhig manuk,</i> We can get money by raising chickens.&dagger;

<p id=3207><form>búhì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB12346; b6(1)]</itype> set <tr>free</tr>, get free. <i>Kinsay nagbúhì nímu?</i> Who freed you? <i>Nakabuhì ang bigal sa tangkal,</i> The sow escaped from the pen. <i>Buhíi (buy-i) ang kanding,</i> Set the goat free. <i>Wà pa buhíi ang klási,</i> The class has not been dismissed. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> <tr>release</tr> one&apos;s hold on. <i>Maáyu siyang mubisiklíta kay mamúhì (manimúhì),</i> He rides a bicycle well because he can let go. <i>Buhíi (buy-i) ang ákung bag,</i> Let go of my bag. <number>3</number> <itype>[b]</itype> <number>3a</number> release one&apos;s emotions. <i>Gibuhían níya ang íyang paghílak,</i> She let herself go crying. <number>3b</number> let a vehicle go to a certain speed. <i>Gibuhían kug utsinta ang mutursiklu,</i> I let the motorcycle go up to eighty. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> spend money from a certain fund. <i>Walà pa buhíi ang sáping itúkud sa dálan,</i> The money for the road has not been released yet. <number>5</number> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> draw in a lottery. <i>Buhían ang rípa ugmà,</i> The drawing of the lottery will be held tomorrow. <number>6</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> set off dynamite. <i>Gibuhían ug dinamíta ang duut,</i> They set off dynamite on the school of fish. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> setting of s.t. free, esp. cocks in a fight. <i>Pila ka búhì ang ímung nadag-an?</i> How many cockfights (lit. settings free) did you win? <number>2</number> holding of a lottery. <number>3</number> setting off of dynamite. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>búhì</sc>, <ix>v 1, 2.</ix></xr> <form>pani&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <xr>= <sc>búhì</sc>, <bx>2</bx>.</xr> <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> animal that is let to go free. <number>2</number> <tr>unrestrained</tr>. <i>Binuhían nga katáwa,</i> Unrestrained laughter. <number>3</number> fish caught by setting off dynamite. <form>in-an(&rarr;), binuy-an</form> <xr>= <sc>in-an</sc>, <ix>1.</ix></xr> <form>ma&N;-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> fisherman who uses dynamite. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dismissal</tr> of a group. <form>tingpa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> dismissal time.

<p id=3208><form>buhiláman</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>civilization</tr>.

<p id=3209><form>buhimyu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>philanderer</tr>, chasing after women. <i>Daghan ang gipaangkan sa buhimyung dakù,</i> The philanderer has made lots of girls pregnant. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a2]</itype> be, become, make into a philanderer.

<p id=3210><form>buhis</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>taxes</tr>, license fee. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>pa&N;-</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> pay taxes, <tr>tribute</tr>. <i>Gibuhisan na ba nímu ang ímung balay?</i> Have you paid taxes on your house? <i>Walà níya buhisi ang hárì,</i> He did not pay his tribute to the king. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> offer as tribute (poetic). <i>Ibuhis ku <pb n=158>ang ákung kinabúhì sa inahan kung yútà,</i> I&apos;ll offer my life as tribute to my motherland. <form>-l-an(&larr;), <corr sic="l-an">-l-an</corr></form> <pos>n</pos> taxes levied. <form>mag-r-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>taxpayer</tr>. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> system of taxation.

<p id=3211><form>buhíyas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>watts</tr>, <tr>volts</tr>. <i>Pila ka buhíyas nang bumbilyáha?</i> How many watts is that bulb? <i>Ang linya dinhi dus syintus bayinti buhíyas,</i> The current here is 220 volts.

<p id=3212><form>buhù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do s.t. in one&apos;s own way, do one&apos;s own thing. <i>Magbuhù man giyud kag ímu bisag nakahibawu ka na sa hustu,</i> You insist on doing things your own way even if you know the right way. <i>Ayaw mug buhug inyu ug dapítun mu,</i> When you&apos;re called to join us don&apos;t go off and do your own thing.

<p id=3213><form>buhù<sub>2</sub>, búhù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>dig</tr>, <tr>bore</tr> a hole. <i>Nagbúhù silag lubngan sa irù,</i> They dug a hole to bury the dog in. <i>Buhúi ang kawáyan,</i> Bore a hole in the bamboo. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> hole. <i>Buhù sa bungbung,</i> A hole in the wall. <i>Buhù sa yútà,</i> A hole in the ground. <form>binùhan, binuhúan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hole</tr> made s.w.

<p id=3214><form>buhuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hair</tr> on the head. <form>buhukbúhuk</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. like hair. <i>Buhukbúhuk sa mais,</i> Corn tassel. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> having hair. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; a12]</itype> get to have hair on it. <form>-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to fishes having filament-like ventral and/or dorsal growths.

<p id=3215><form>Buhul</form> <pos>n</pos> the island of Bohol. <form>Bul-ánun</form> <pos>n</pos> one from Bohol. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become a Boholano. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do, speak like the Boholanos.

<p id=3216><form>buhunbúhun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c3]</itype> go in a group or gang. <i>Nagbuhunbúhun sila sa simbahan,</i> They went to church as a group. <pos>n</pos> going around together in a group. <i>Nakaundang siyag iskuyla tungud sa buhunbúhun,</i> He quit school because he spent his time running around with his cronies. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> member of one&apos;s gang.

<p id=3217><form>buhung</form> <pos>a</pos> provided in <tr>abundance</tr>. <i>Buhung sa kalípay ang ámung kaminyúun,</i> Our marriage had an abundance of happiness. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P; a1]</itype> supply s.t. in abundance. <i>Makabuhung (makapabuhung) nga panihápun,</i> A sumptuous meal. <i>Buhungun ta ka sa gugma,</i> I&apos;ll shower love on you. <number>2</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> be surfeited to the point of losing desire. <i>Gibunghan na kug kináug bábuy,</i> I&apos;m fed up with eating pork. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> having things in abundance, <tr>affluence</tr>. <i>Laráwan sa kabuhung ang táwung adunáhan,</i> A rich man is a picture of affluence.

<p id=3218><form>buhus, búhus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>pour</tr> s.t. out. <i>Ibúhus ang pasì ngadtu sa bularan,</i> Pour the grain out into the drying bin. <number>2</number> pour one&apos;s feelings out on s.o. <i><corr sic=Hibuhusan>Gibuhusan</corr> aku sa íyang kalágut,</i> He poured his anger out on me. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> for rain to pour. <i>Mibúhus ang ulan,</i> It poured.

<p id=3219><form>búhut</form> <xr>= <sc>bulhut</sc>, <ix>1, 2, 3.</ix></xr>

<p id=3220><form>buka</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB3(1); bc1]</itype> for the eyes or mouth to <tr>open</tr>, cause them to do so. <i>Ang kalisud mauy mibuka (mipabuka) sa íyang mga mata sa sayup nga íyang nahímù,</i> Hardship opened his eyes to the error of his ways. <i>Nakabuka na bang mga mata sa ituy?</i> Are the puppies&apos; eyes opened yet? <i>Bukha (ibuka) ang bàbà sa punaw,</i> Open the mouth of the clam. <number>1a</number> for the earth to crack open, as in an <tr>earthquake</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> add width to space. <i>Bukhi (bukahi) ang balay,</i> <tr>Widen</tr> the house. <pos>n</pos> <tr>opening</tr>, <tr>aperture</tr>. <i>Buka sa pultahan,</i> The amount the door is opened. <form>&mdash; sa balay</form> the width of the house (lit. the amount of opening between the sides).

<p id=3221><form>búka</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>muzzle</tr> of a firearm. <form>&mdash; insindiyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fire hydrant. <number>2</number> <tr>verbal attacks</tr>. <i>Nagpungasì ang mga búka insindiyu sa duha ka partídu sa pulitika,</i> The two political parties rained verbal abuse on each other. <form>&mdash; abyirta</form> <xr>= <sc>bukabyirta</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3222><form>bukabularyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vocabulary</tr>.

<p id=3223><form>bukabyirta</form> <pos>a</pos> prone to revealing secrets. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> tend to reveal secrets.

<p id=3224><form>bukabyirtu</form> <xr>= <sc>bukabyirta</sc> (male).</xr>

<p id=3225><form>bukad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB3(1)6; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>bukhad</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> for an infection to grow in area. <i>Mibukad ang núka,</i> The infection <tr>spread</tr> out. <form>&mdash; ang atay</form> for one&apos;s pride to <tr>swell</tr>. <i>Mibukad ang atay níyang gidáyig,</i> His pride swelled from all the praise. <number>3</number> <itype>[B3(1)]</itype> for grains or beans to expand and crack open when cooked. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>bukhad</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> spread out. <i>Bukad ang sayal níya,</i> She has a flaring skirt. <form>&mdash; ug ngábil</form> thick-lipped.

<p id=3226><form>búkad<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> get the fish from a trap. <i>Bukára nang mga isdà sa bungsud,</i> Gather the fish caught in the fish corrals.

<p id=3227><form>búkad<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3S; ab2]</itype> dig up s.t. from under the ground. <i>Nagbúkad kug úbi,</i> I am digging for yams.

<!-- bukádu_2 in addenda on page 1148 -->

<p id=3228><form>bukádu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bit</tr> put in a horse&apos;s mouth.

<p id=3229><form>bukag</form> <pos>n</pos> general term for <tr>baskets</tr> with a large mesh. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, make into a basket with a large mesh. <form>mag-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> maker of <ix>bukag</ix>&apos;s.

<p id=3230><form>búkag</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>corncob</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> use corncobs for fuel. <i>Magbúkag lang mi ug wà nay laíng sugnud,</i> We just use corncobs if we have no other fuel.

<p id=3231><form>bukagay, bukaghay</form> <pos>a</pos> for grains to be loose so that they do not adhere. <i>Ang sabaw ampay sa kan-ung bukaghay,</i> Soup goes well with rice cooked <tr>dry</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; a12]</itype> for grains not to adhere because of dryness. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> of a dry sort. <i>Yútang bukagháyun,</i> Sandy soil.

<p id=3232><form>bukagkag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> break s.t. lumpy into fine <pb n=159>particles and give it a uniform consistency. <i>Bukagkága (ibukagkag) ang harína úsà taksa,</i> Break up lumps of flour before measuring it.

<p id=3233><form>bukàkà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1, 2</number> <xr>= <sc>bukìkì</sc>.</xr> <number>3</number> &dagger;.

<p id=3234><form>bukal</form> <pos>n</pos> member of the board of councilors of the province. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make s.o. a <tr>provincial board member</tr>.

<p id=3235><form>búkal<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB2S3(1); a2P]</itype> <tr>boil</tr> s.t., for s.t. to boil. <i>Nagbúkal (nagpabúkal) kug túbig,</i> I boiled some water. <i>Nagbukal nga arníbal,</i> Boiling syrup. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2S46]</itype> be <tr>agitated</tr>. <i>Ang nagbukal nga dágat,</i> The <tr>seething</tr> waters. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; ang dugù</formx> <number>a</number> <itype>[B2S46; a12]</itype> <tr>seethe</tr> with anger. <i>Mubúkal ang ákung dugù ug makakità ku sa táwung nag-ílug sa ámung humstid,</i> I seethe with anger when I see the man who stole our homestead. <number>b</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> feel a strange attitude of kinship for a stranger who turns out to be a relative. <i>Bantug ra nga mibúkal ang ákung dugù pagkakità nímu. Paryinti man diay ta,</i> No wonder I felt close to you when I saw you. You are related to me. <form>&mdash; sa dugù sa kasingkásing</form> <number>c</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> suffer a fatal heart attack. <i>Kalit ang kamatáyun sa táwung bukálan sa dugù sa kasingkásing,</i> Death from a fatal heart attack is instantaneous. <form>-in-, pina-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. boiled or boiling.

<p id=3236><form>búkal<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tall, tufted grass of open waste places: <bio>Roitboellia exaltata</bio>.

<p id=3237><form>bukána</form> <pos>n</pos> area where the waters of a river merge with the open sea.

<p id=3238><form>bukarilyu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. sweet made from young shredded coconut meat, sugar, and flavoring boiled with a syrup and hardened. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6c1]</itype> make <ix>bukarilyu.</ix>

<p id=3239><form>bukas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB13(1); b]</itype> <tr>open</tr> s.t., be opened. <i>Ang kusug nga hángin mibukas sa íyang sayal,</i> The strong wind made her skirt fly up. <i>Nagbukas ang pwirta,</i> The door is standing open. <i>Buksi ang sulat,</i> Open the letter. <pos>a</pos> open. <form>&mdash; ang pultahan</form> always <tr>welcome</tr>, the door is always open. <i>Bukas kanúnay ang ámung pultahan álang kanímu,</i> Our door is always open to you.

<p id=3240><form>bukas<sub>2</sub>, búkas</form> <xr>= <sc>buklas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3241><form>bukasyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vocation</tr>.

<p id=3242><form>bukasyunal</form> <pos>n</pos> vocational training course. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a vocational school.

<p id=3243><form>bukatut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> ugly in face. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be, become <tr>ugly-faced</tr>.

<p id=3244><form>bukatut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> term used to refer to animals that eat crops as a means of avoiding reference to the animal itself. It is believed that pests are raised by supernatural beings and referring to them by name will cause them to multiply.

<p id=3245><form>búkaw<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>búkal<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3246><form>búkaw<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. owl: <bio>Ninox philippensis</bio>. <form>bukawbukaw</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to flat-bodied fishes with large owl-like eyes.

<p id=3247><form>bukáwi</form> <xr>= <sc>bayukáwi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3248><form>búkay</form> <xr>= <sc>abúkay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3249><form>bukáyù</form> <xr>= <sc>bukháyù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3250><form>bukbuk</form> <xr>= <sc>balukbuk<sub>1, 2, 3, 4</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3251><form>bukdu</form> <xr>= <sc>bugdu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3252><form>bukgay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible fresh-water shell similar to the nerite shell but with sharp projections, dark gray to whitish gray in color.

<p id=3253><form>bukhad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB3(1)6; c1]</itype> spread out, unfold s.t. which is rolled or folded up, for s.t. to open up. <i>Mibukhad na kug banig pára nímu,</i> I&apos;ve already spread a mat for you. <i>Mibukhad (nabukhad) nang búlak,</i> The flower has opened. <i>Ang nagbukhad níyang pálad,</i> His open hand. <i>Bukhára (ibukhad) ang papil nga nalúkut,</i> Unfold the roll of paper. a opened up and spread out. <form>&mdash; ug pálad</form> generous (lit. open-palmed).

<p id=3254><form>bukháyù</form> <pos>n</pos> candy made from shredded coconut cooked with brown sugar. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make, make into coconut candy.

<p id=3255><form>buki</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> bouquet of flowers. <number>2</number> set of four consecutive mahjong pieces of the flower design (<xr><ix>búlak, 2a</ix></xr>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make, make into a bouquet.

<p id=3256><form>búkì</form> <xr>= <sc>bukìkì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3257><form>búki digíra</form> <pos>n</pos> warship.

<p id=3258><form>búkid</form> <pos>n</pos> mountain. <i>Taas kaáyu nga búkid,</i> High mountain. <pos>a</pos> deep in the mountains. <i>Búkid kaáyu tung ámù,</i> Our place is high in the mountains. <form>&mdash; sa buut, hunàhúnà</form> <number>1</number> be far from one&apos;s thoughts. <i>Búkid sa buut níya ang pagsungkip sa atup,</i> He never thought of fixing the roof. <number>2</number> against one&apos;s will. <i>Gipugus siya pagminyù nga búkid sa íyang buut,</i> She was forced to marry against her will. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c5]</itype> <number>1</number> be far from one&apos;s thoughts. <number>2</number> against one&apos;s will. <i>Gikabukid ba sa ímung buut ang pagpasaylu nákù?</i> Is it against your will (have you not thought) to forgive me? <form>pa-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> go, bring to the mountains. <i>Nagpabukid sila arun pagtágù,</i> They went to the mountains to hide. <form>bukiran</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> mountain range. <number>2</number> farm. <form>kabukíran, kabukídan, kabukílan</form> <pos>n</pos> the mountains. <form>taga-</form> <pos>n</pos> mountaineer. <form>bukirun</form> <pos>a</pos> mountainous. <form>bukidnun</form> <pos>a</pos> from the mountains. <i>Bukidnung linaktan,</i> Way of walking like a mountaineer.

<p id=3259><form>bukìkì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> push things apart, esp. those which offer a certain amount of resistance. <i>Mibukìkì ku sa íyang pitákag may kwarta ba,</i> I looked in his wallet to see if there was any money. <i>Nagbukìkì ka ba sa mga pinusù?</i> Have you pushed the husks <pb n=160>of the ears aside to examine the grains? <i>Bukìkía ang íyang buhuk kung náa bay kútu,</i> Look in her hair if there are any lice. <i>Ayaw ibukìkì ang ímung kamut sa kúgun,</i> Don&apos;t push the cogon grass apart with your hands. <number>2</number> <tr>reopen</tr> a subject no longer discussed. <i>Gibukìkì ang íyang kagahápun sa kaatbang níya sa pulitika,</i> His political rival brought up his past.

<p id=3260><form>bukilya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>spout</tr>, <tr>nozzle</tr>, small opening through which liquids are poured. <number>2</number> <tr>mouthpiece</tr> of a brass instrument.

<p id=3261><form>buking</form> <pos>a</pos> euphemism for <xr><ix>buku<sub>1</sub>.</ix></xr>

<p id=3262><form>búking úpis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>booking office</tr>.

<p id=3263><form>bukinggan</form> <pos>n</pos> annual ornamental flowers similar to but smaller than bachelor&apos;s buttons: <bio>Gomphrena globosa</bio>.

<p id=3264><form>bukiskis<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ignorant</tr>, <tr>unfamiliar</tr> with things. <i>Giasinan sa bukiskis ang kapi,</i> The ignorant girl put salt in the coffee. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be ignorant, unfamiliar with things.

<p id=3265><form>bukiskis<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>skin disease</tr>, usually of the legs, characterized by whitish splotches. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1246; a4]</itype> get this skin disease. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having the splotches of this disease.

<p id=3266><form>bukisyunal</form> <xr>= <sc>bukasyunal</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3267><form>bukitkit</form> <xr>= <sc>bukìkì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3268><form>bukitlà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> open s.t. flexible by pushing the sides apart. <i>Human nímug híwà sa bát, bukitláa ug iniwniw sa dágat,</i> After you have cut the sea cucumber open, pull it apart at the sides and rinse it in the water. <i>Gibukitlà ku ang íyang mata kung may puling ba,</i> I pushed her eyelids apart to see if there was s.t. in her eyes. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>bukìkì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3269><form>buklad<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>spread</tr> s.t. out flat. <i>Mubuklad na ku ug banig kay matúlug na ku,</i> I will spread the mat because I am going to sleep. <i>Ibuklad (buklára) ning sáku didtu sa ínit arun mamala,</i> Spread this sack out in the sun to dry. <number>2a</number> for a girl to grow to maidenhood (poetic). <number>2b</number> for a <tr>blossom</tr> to open. <i>Mingbuklad na ang mga rúsas,</i> The roses are starting to open. <form>tingpa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> year (lit. season of blooming) (poetic). <i>Dalága nga napúlug pitu ka tingpamuklad,</i> A girl of seventeen summers.

<p id=3270><form>*buklad<sub>2</sub></form> <form>taga-</form> euphemism for <xr><sc>tagabúkid</sc>, &lsquo;mountaineer&rsquo;.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>búkid</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3271><form>buklas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> take the wash in. <i>Buklása ang linadlad,</i> Take in the laundry you have left out to bleach.

<p id=3272><form>buklat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> pry s.t. <tr>open</tr> that has a slit in it. <i>Bukláta (ibuklat) ang imbaw,</i> Pry the clam open. <number>2</number> <itype>[B3(1)]</itype> for the eyes to open.

<p id=3273><form>bukni</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible white mushroom (black when dried).

<p id=3274><form>buknul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lump</tr>, s.t. bulging. <i>Unsa ning buknul sa ímung bulsa?</i> What is this bulging in your pocket? <number>2</number> <tr>bunch</tr> of fibrous materials. <i>Gisagúlan ug dílì iskuhídu ang buknul sa lánut,</i> The bunch of abaca fibers has lots of second-class fibers mixed in with it. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B]</itype> <tr>bulge</tr>, be <tr>lumpy</tr>. <i>Ang unlan nagbuknul kay daghang pánit sa duldul,</i> The pillow is lumpy because it has a lot of kapok peels. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> tie into a bunch. <i>Ibuknul (buknúla) ímung buhuk,</i> Tie your hair into a bunch.

<p id=3275><form>buksidur</form> <xr>= <sc>baksidur</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3276><form>buksing</form> <xr>= <sc>baksing</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3277><form>buksiyadur</form> <xr>= <sc>baksidur</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3278><form>buktu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. biting sand flea, orange with black spots.

<p id=3279><form>buktun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>arms</tr>, esp. the lower arms. <i>Ang taknaan sa íyang buktun,</i> The watch on his wrist (arm). <number>2</number> <tr>sleeves</tr>. <i>Sinínang way buktun,</i> Sleeveless dress. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> add sleeves to a garment. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> garment with sleeves.

<p id=3280><form>buktut</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>baluktut</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> name given to humpbacked fish, e.g., the Philippine jack: <bio>Hynnis momsa</bio>. <number>3</number> k.o. humpbacked shrimp.

<p id=3281><form>buku<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>reveal</tr> s.o.&apos;s character, true identity, be found out. <i>Bukhun ta ka nga minyù ka,</i> I will reveal that you are married. <i>Nabuku siyang mangingilad,</i> It was revealed that he was a swindler.

<p id=3282><form>buku<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>node</tr> of a stem. <i>Malísù pay buku sa kawáyan,</i> Impossible. (Lit. A bamboo node would sooner get twisted.) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> chop s.t. at the node. <i>Dúgay kang makaputul nang kahúyag bukhun mu pagtigbas,</i> It&apos;ll take you a long time to cut that tree if you hack it on its node. <form>bukubuku</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>back</tr> of a person or animal. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> hit s.t. in the back.

<p id=3283><form>bukubar</form> <pos>n</pos> popsicle made of young coconut. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make, eat <ix>bukubar.</ix>

<p id=3284><form>bukùbúkù</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small cuttlefish.

<p id=3285><form>búkud</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>plump</tr>, <tr>round</tr> due to fullness. <i>Búkud ug áping,</i> Round-cheeked. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13PB2; a2]</itype> be plump and full, make s.t. full. <i>Kinsay nagbúkud (nagpabúkud) sa sáku?</i> Who filled the sack until it was round? <i>Mabúkud ang mga úbas sa ting-ulan,</i> The grapes will become round and full during the rainy season.

<p id=3286><form>bukug</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bone</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>gun</tr>, usually <tr>sidearm</tr> (slang). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b3]</itype> for a bone to stick in the throat. <i>Dílì makabukug ang ginamus,</i> The small grates of salted fish can&apos;t choke you. <i>Nabukug ku,</i> I got a bone in my throat. <i>Unsang isdáa ang nabukgan nímu?</i> What k.o. fish did you choke on? <form>&mdash; sa buut, kabubut-un</form> <pos>a</pos> contrary to one&apos;s principles. <i>Táwu nga bukug kaáyu sa ákung buut,</i> A person completely repulsive to me. <form>&mdash; ug pánit</form> <pb n=161><pos>n</pos> skin and bones&mdash;i.e., <tr>thin</tr>. <form>walay &mdash;</form> without anything getting in the way. <i>Way bukug ang íyang diskursu,</i> His speech was fluently delivered. <i>Musyát pirmi lang way bukug,</i> He shoots cleanly (his shots never touch the basket). <form>walay &mdash; ang dílà</form> speaking unrestrainedly without any consideration. <form>hi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> take the fish grates out. <i>Himukugi ang isdà únà kan-a,</i> Remove the fish grates before you eat it. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bones</tr>. <i>Nanakit ákung kabukugan sa pagtinarbáhu,</i> My bones ache from too much work.

<p id=3287><form>bukul, búkul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>protruding lump</tr>. <i>Unsa nang bukul sa ímung úlu?</i> What&apos;s that lump on your head? <number>2</number> <tr>lump</tr>, <tr>clump</tr>. <i>Búkul sa kan-un,</i> Lump of rice. <i>Búkul sa yútà,</i> Lumps of soil. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; aP]</itype> <number>1</number> get a lump. <i>Mibúkul ang úlu nga nabunalan,</i> His head swelled where I had struck him. <number>2</number> form lumps. <form>bukulbukul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B14]</itype> be full of lumps. <i>Dautan ning litsi kay nagbukulbukul man,</i> This milk is no good because it is full of lumps. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> for the breasts to develop in adolescence. <i>Unsa? Manarátu ka na nga wà pa ka gánì pamukli (pamukúli)?</i> What is all this about boy friends when your breasts have not even started to develop?

<p id=3288><form>búkung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> husk and shell of a coconut split lengthwise without the meat.

<p id=3289><form>búkung<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>freeloader</tr>, one who gets s.t. for free, either by mooching or by not paying the bill, buying a ticket, etc. <i>Naglabi ang búkung sa pasahíru ning tráka,</i> There&apos;s more freeloaders than passengers on this bus. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>freeload</tr>. <i>Mamúkung ta nímug sigarilyu,</i> May I <tr>mooch</tr> a cigarette off of you? <i>Namúkung ku sa sini, amígu man nákù ang takilyíra,</i> I got in the movie for free because the ticket seller is a friend of mine.

<p id=3290><form>bukut</form> <pos>n</pos> swarm of black wasps that build nests in trees. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> have a hornet&apos;s nest built in it. <i>Gibukutan ang santul,</i> The santol tree has a hornet&apos;s nest in it.

<p id=3291><form>búkut</form> <xr>= <sc>balúkut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3292><form>bukwas</form> <xr>= <sc>buklas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3293><form>bukway</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> for long, thin things to <tr>stretch out</tr>: tendrils, flowers, sunrays, etc. <i>Nagbukway na ang mga bánay sa mais,</i> The corn tassels are spreading out now. <i>Wà pa makabukway ang sílaw sa adlaw ug nakaligù na siya,</i> He took his bath before the sun had spread its rays. <number>2</number> for the arms, tentacles to <tr>spread out</tr> and wave or wiggle. <i>Mibukway ang mga gaway sa kugíta pagkakitag kaáway,</i> The octopus spread his tentacles in all directions when he spotted an enemy. <number>3</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> in a game of <ix>takyan,</ix> to fail to hit the shuttlecock squarely and thus lose one&apos;s turn to be served. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> taro shoots before they develop leaves. <number>2</number> failure to return the serve in <ix>takyan.</ix>

<p id=3294><form>bukya</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. white, transparent jellyfish, round, growing to 9&Prime; in diameter, with tentacles that inflict a slight sting.

<p id=3295><form>bukyàbukyà</form> <xr>= <sc>bukya</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3296><form>búl</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mason jar</tr>, used as a measure for toddy.

<p id=3297><form>búla<sub>1</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ball</tr>. <number>2</number> game of ball. <form>&mdash; dimánu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cue ball</tr> in billiards. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> form s.t. into a ball. <number>2</number> <itype>[A26; b6]</itype> play a ball game. <form>bulabúla</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> make meat balls. <number>2</number> be bounced around like a ball. <i>Ang sakayan gibulabúla sa dagkung balud,</i> The boat was tossed about like a ball in the high seas. <number>3</number> for several persons to maul s.o. bouncing him around among themselves. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> dish consisting of little meat balls. <number>2</number> <tr>plimsoll line</tr>, indicating the load line of a ship. <form>-dur(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ball player</tr>.

<p id=3298><form>búla<sub>2</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> heave s.t. heavy onto s.o.&apos;s shoulders. <i>Ibúla (buláhun) ni nátù sa íyang abága,</i> Let&apos;s heave this onto his shoulders. <pos>n</pos> action of heaving s.t. onto one&apos;s shoulders. <i>Káda búla makadá kug siyin kílus,</i> I can take one hundred kilograms on my shoulders at one time. <form>-da</form> <xr>= <sc>búla<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr> <form>-dur(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> one who heaves heavy things onto others&apos; backs.

<p id=3299><form>búla<sub>3</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> flattery. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> flatter. <i>Ug ímu siyang buláhan (buláhun) túgut dáyun,</i> If you flatter him, he&apos;ll let you do it. <form>-da</form> <xr>= <sc>búla<sub>3</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3300><form>búla<sub>4</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> drawing in a lottery. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> hold a drawing in a lottery.

<p id=3301><form>bulà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bubbles</tr>, <tr>foam</tr>. <pos>a</pos> <tr>foamy</tr>, forming bubbles. <i>Bulà kaáyu ning sabúna,</i> This soap forms lots of suds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B346]</itype> form bubbles, foam. <i>Nagbulà ang láway sa kabáyù,</i> The horse is foaming at the mouth. <form>&mdash; ang bàbà pagkáun</form> eat one&apos;s fill. <i>Mibulà ang íyang bàbàg kináus kík,</i> He had his fill of cake.

<p id=3302><form>bul-a</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish.

<p id=3303><form>bulábid</form> <xr>= <sc>balunábid</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3304><form>bulábung</form> <xr>= <sc>bungabung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3305><form>bulad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> stay out <tr>in the sun</tr>. <i>Nagbulad siya pagbantayg trák,</i> He waited for the bus in the sun. <i>Ayawg bulara (ibulad) nang bátà sa ínit,</i> Don&apos;t expose the child to the heat of the sun. <number>2</number> dry s.t. in the sun. <i>Bulara (ibulad) ang kupras,</i> Dry the copra. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> be, put out under the moon. <i>Nagbulad siya sa búlan nga nagdáru,</i> He stayed out plowing under the moon. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> expose one&apos;s body brazenly. <i>Láwas nga gibulad sa kadaghánan,</i> A body exposed to public view. <number>5</number> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> lay down an open card, <pb n=162>esp. the starting card in a game. <i>Nakabulad na ang naglíbud,</i> The dealer has opened. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> dried fish. <i>Bulad lay ámung isuwà,</i> The only thing we have for lunch is dried fish. <number>2</number> card laid open, esp. the starting card. <form>binlad, -in-</form> <pos>n</pos> unhusked rice or corn set out to dry under the sun. <i>Naningáun ang manuk sa binlad,</i> The chicken is feeding on the rice you have left out to dry.

<p id=3306><form>buláda<sub>1</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> the portion of a roof which projects beyond the wall. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> provide a building with an overhanging roof.

<p id=3307><form>buláda<sub>2, 3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>búla<sub>2, 4</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3308><form>buladur</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>búla<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3309><form>bulag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2B2; bc]</itype> separate from, get separated. <i>Adtu ku mubulag nímu sa iskína,</i> I will leave you at the corner. <i>Mibulag ang úlu sa íyang láwas,</i> His head got cut off (separated from his body). <i>Dílì siya bulagan ug basahun,</i> She is never without s.t. to read (lit. left by reading matter). <i>Ibulag ang anak sa inahan,</i> Separate the child from the mother. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> desist, cease doing s.t. <i>Wà siya mubulag paglìlì,</i> He didn&apos;t take his eye off the peephole. <i>Bulagi nang bisyúha,</i> Cease that vice of yours. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123PC; a]</itype> separate from each other, cause to separate. <i>Nagbúlag ang managtrátu,</i> The engaged couple separated. <i>Bulága ang hilawg hinug,</i> Separate the unripe and the ripe ones. <form>ha&N;-/hi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a3]</itype> <number>1</number> get separated from involuntarily. <i>Nahimuwag siya sa grúpu,</i> He got separated from the group. <number>2</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> have s.o. close die (be left involuntarily). <i>Nahimulagan kami sa usa ka buuk anak,</i> One of our children died.

<p id=3310><form>bulagaw</form> <pos>a</pos> hair lighter in color than black, ranging from blond to reddish brown. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6c1]</itype> be, become this color. <i>Mubulagaw ang ímung buhuk ug hingári kag sálum,</i> Your hair will get reddish brown if you keep diving in the sea.

<p id=3311><form>bulagsak</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <xr>= <sc>bagsak<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3312><form>buláhan<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> blessed, fortunate. <i>Buláhan ka sa mga babáyi nga tanan,</i> Blessed art thou above all women. <i>Buláhan ka kay dátù ka,</i> You are fortunate because you are wealthy. <number>2</number> in order to, so that. <i>Musulud tag sayu buláhan makaundang ug sayu,</i> Let&apos;s go to work early so we can quit early. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be fortunate, blessed. <i>Ang ákung anak ang mabuláhan ning ákung kasapían,</i> My child will be benefited from my wealth. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> welfare.

<p id=3313><form>buláhan<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>lansúnis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3314><form>bulahug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b8]</itype> step inadvertently into a hole. <i>Nabuwahug ku sa bangag sa salug kay ngitngit,</i> I inadvertently stepped into a hole in the floor because it was dark.

<p id=3315><form>búlak</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>flower</tr>, <tr>blossom</tr>. <number>1a</number> <tr>woman</tr> (metaphor). <i>Ikaw ang búlak nga ákung gipangítà,</i> You are the maid (lit. flower) I have been looking for. <number>2</number> suit of cards. <number>2a</number> suit in mahjong composed of eight pieces which have pictures of flowers on them. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2345N; b6]</itype> flower. <i>Mibúlak (namúlak) nang rúsas,</i> The rose plant is flowering. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put a flowery design on s.t. <number>3</number> <itype>[B236N; b6]</itype> get moldy. <i>Namúlak ang kan-un,</i> The rice is all moldy. <form>ka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be bestrewn with flowers. <form>bulakbúlak</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sweet things in life. <i>Bulakbúlak sa kinabúhì ang pagpanugal,</i> Gambling adds spice to one&apos;s life. <number>2</number> <tr>flowery design</tr>. <number>3</number> ad lib, cadenza in a musical piece. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> add spice to life. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; b6(1)]</itype> add a flowery design. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> play ad lib music. <i>Nindut ang sunátang gibuwakbuwákan sa trumpíta,</i> It was a beautiful song with the ad lib trumpet. <form>-ay(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> game of cards wherein a card is placed face up and bets are made as to the number of the next card of the same suit turned up. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12C]</itype> play this game. <form>-an</form> <xr>= <sc>payil sa búlak</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>payil</sc>.</xr> <form>hi&N;-</form> <pos>a</pos> bearing flowers in abundance. <i>Himulak kaáyung tanum ang rúsas,</i> Roses tend to bear flowers in abundance. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> a patch of flowering plants, <tr>young women</tr>, <tr>women</tr> collectively. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>flowery</tr>. <form>tingpa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>season of flowers</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>years</tr>. <i>Sa ikanapúlug walu níyang tingpamúlak,</i> In her eighteenth year.

<p id=3316><form>bulákaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. harmful supernatural being that takes the form of a ball of fire, with trailing sparks. If it brushes or gets close enough to smell the skin, it makes a permanent white spot. <number>2</number> <tr>ball of fire</tr> used as transportation for <ix>unglùs.</ix>

<p id=3317><form>bulakbul</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> slow in comprehension, <tr>dull</tr>. <i>Nahagbung ang tinun-ang bulakbul,</i> The dull student flunked. <number>2</number> <tr>loafing</tr>, <tr>truant</tr>. <i>Bulakbul kaáyu sa trabáhu,</i> A slacker on the job. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> <tr>be dull</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>loaf</tr>, <tr>play truant</tr>.

<p id=3318><form>bulalakaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; a4]</itype> for the juice squeezed from coconuts to be in a condition such that it yields very little oil when boiled, but instead turns to foam. <i>Way nalána sa túnù kay gibulalakaw (mibulalakaw),</i> We didn&apos;t extract any oil from the coconut milk. It just foamed.

<p id=3319><form>bulalákaw</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>shooting star</tr>.

<p id=3320><form>bulalhug</form> <xr>= <sc>bulahug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3321><form>bulálu, bulálù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> general term for good-sized or <tr>large cowries</tr>. <number>2</number> unit of measure <number>2a</number> for a rice cake (<ix>bibingka</ix>). <i>Tagbayinti ang <pb n=163>bulálu sa bibingka,</i> The <ix>bibingka</ix> are twenty cents each. <number>2b</number> a small-sized ball of cotton sewing thread. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into the size of the <ix>bulálu</ix> measure, sell by the <ix>bulálu.</ix>

<p id=3322><form>bulálù<sub>2</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>stupid</tr>, <tr>dull</tr>. <i>Bulálù ka kay dúgay nga makasabut,</i> You&apos;re stupid. It takes you long to catch on. <number>2</number> poor, unskillful in doing or executing things. <i>Bulálù siya nga musyát. Pirming musipyat,</i> He is a lousy shot. He always misses. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be stupid or poor in doing things.

<p id=3323><form>bulálung</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <xr>= <sc>bulálù<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3324><form>búlan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>moon</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>month</tr>. <ix>phases of the moon:</ix> <bx>patay, lunud ang &mdash;</bx> new moon. <bx>bag-u, bag-ung subang ang &mdash;, búhì ang &mdash;, bulhut sa punúan, primírung subang</bx> first day of the waxing crescent. <bx>subangsúbang, ikaduhang (ikatulung) subang</bx> waxing crescent. <bx>udtu nga &mdash;</bx> half moon, usually of the waxing moon. <bx>lákad</bx> second quarter (lit. going toward the noon position&mdash;so called because the moon is in the east when darkness falls). <bx>dail, daktul, takdul ang &mdash;</bx> full moon. <bx>primíru, ikaduhang piluk, dulum nga &mdash;</bx> first and second days of the third quarter. <bx>udtung lunud, kátin ang &mdash;</bx> half moon of the third quarter. <bx>himatayun ang &mdash;</bx> third quarter (lit. dying moon). <bx>bispiras sa himatayun</bx> last day before the new moon. <ix>shapes of the moon:</ix> <bx>inúlug amù</bx> waxing gibbous moon (lit. monkey&apos;s head). <bx>hayà ang &mdash;</bx> crescent in a horizontal position. <bx>páyung sa &mdash;</bx> ring around the moon. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B236; b4]</itype> be a month. <i>Mubúlan nang wà mi magkítà,</i> It&apos;s been a month since we last saw each other. <i>Wà pa mabúlan sukad si Tátay mamatay,</i> It hasn&apos;t been a month since Father died. <i>Wà pa gánì makabúlan sukad pagtrabáhu nákù giumintuhan ku,</i> It wasn&apos;t even a month after I had started working that I was given a raise. <i>Wà pa gánì ka buláni dinhi mupaúlì ka na?</i> You haven&apos;t been here a month and you want to go home already? <i>Ugmang adláwa mauy ibúlan nákug puyù dinhi,</i> Tomorrow it will make exactly a month that I have stayed here. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; b]</itype> <tr>hire</tr> a servant. <i>Magbulan akug bátà pagtrápu sa kutsi,</i> I&apos;ll hire a child to keep the car washed. <form>pa-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab]</itype> hire oneself, s.o. out as a servant. <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> once a month, <tr>monthly</tr>. <i>Binulan nga sakit,</i> The monthly sickness (menstruation). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do on a monthly basis. <i>Ákù lang binulanun (ibinulan) ang ímung swildu,</i> I&apos;ll pay your salary once a month. <form>-in-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> household help. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>moonlight</tr>. <number>2</number> having weak vision (as if looking at things by moonlight). <form>bulanbúlan</form> <number>1</number> every month. <i>Pila ímung dawátun bulanbúlan?</i> How much do you receive every month? <number>2</number> k.o. tarpon: <bio>Megalops cyprinoides</bio>. <number>3</number> k.o. moon shell with edible flesh.

<p id=3325><form>bul-an</form> <pos>n</pos> corn at the stage where it is almost but not quite mature and where the kernels are no longer soft. <i>Maánag pa ang mais nga bul-an,</i> Corn at the <ix>bul-an</ix> stage can still be roasted. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> for corn to reach the nearly mature stage.

<p id=3326><form>bulandus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB12; c]</itype> push s.t. into going forward, slip and fall down with feet forward. <i>Nabulandus siya kay nakatunub ug pánit sa ságing,</i> He slipped and fell because he stepped on a banana peel. <i>Ibulandus ang kaban ilálum sa hagdan,</i> Shove the trunk underneath the stairs.

<p id=3327><form>búlang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> event (fiesta or market) at which a cockfight is held. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> hold a cockfight. <i>Magbúlang dinhi ug tábù,</i> They hold cockfights here on market day. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> gaff on a gamecock. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> attend a cockfight and bet. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> for a cock to win in a fight. <i>Pwirting pamúwang sa ákung manuk,</i> My cock wins wherever he fights. <number>2a</number> for a man to win several wives in succession after his previous wife died (humorous). <i>Giayran ang byúdu. Pwirti nang pagpamúwang,</i> The widower has gotten himself a wife many times, but this time he was spurned. <pos>n</pos> action of betting, attending cockfights to bet. <i>Way kaláki ang pamúlang. Way daug,</i> The betting at the cockfights was no good. We didn&apos;t win a thing. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> cockpit for holding cockfights. <form>-ig-r-, ig-l-</form> <pos>n</pos> fighting cock.

<p id=3328><form>búlang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> smash a hard object against s.t. hard. <i>Ang hubug mauy mibúlang sa básu dihà sa sáwug,</i> The drunk smashed the glass on the floor. <i>Nagbúlang ang duha ka trák,</i> The two trucks smashed into each other. <i>Bulángun ku ang inyung mga úlu,</i> I&apos;ll knock your heads together. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12C; a]</itype> for two people to have a contest of hitting two examples of s.t. against each other, each person hitting his against the other person&apos;s in turn, to see who can break the other person&apos;s. <i>Makigbúlang ku nímug lubi,</i> I will engage in a coconut-breaking contest with you.

<p id=3329><form>bulanghug</form> <xr>= <sc>bulahug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3330><form>bulanghuy</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> general term for all varieties of cassava: <bio>Manihot esculenta</bio>.

<p id=3331><form>bulanglang</form> <pos>n</pos> dish of various vegetables and meat originating in Tagalog regions.

<p id=3332><form>bulangsud</form> <xr>= <sc>bulandus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3333><form>bulanit, bulánit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> pull s.t. out or <pb n=164>away from s.t. <i>Ímung gibulanit ang hábul sa ímung pagkatúlug,</i> You pulled the blanket away from me in your sleep.

<p id=3334><form>bulansud</form> <xr>= <sc>bulandus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3335><form>bulanti</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>flywheel</tr> of a machine. <number>2</number> business not set in one place. <form>tindáhan nga &mdash;</form> small <tr>mobile store</tr> on wheels.

<p id=3336><form>bulanting</form> <pos>n</pos> color combination of red, black, brown, and white in chickens.

<p id=3337><form>bulantis</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> printed advertisements scattered from the air. <form>úhas &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>bulantis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3338><form>bularat</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. soldier fish.

<p id=3339><form>búlas</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <corr>smegma, </corr>white odorous accumulation found under the foreskin. <form>hi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> remove this accumulation. <form>panghi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> remove this accumulation from one&apos;s penis.

<p id=3340><form>bulásut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b8]</itype> accidentally step into a hole. <i>Nabulásut ang ligid sa trák sa gawang sa taytáyan,</i> The wheels of the truck ran into a rut on the bridge.

<p id=3341><form>bulátik</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>flatter</tr> s.o. <pos>n</pos> <tr>flattery</tr>.

<p id=3342><form>bulatsíra</form> <pos>a</pos> female habitual <tr>drunkard</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> for a woman to become a habitual drunkard. <i>Ug magbulatsíra ka, hala sawum sa tubà,</i> If you want to be a sot, all right, swim in the toddy!

<p id=3343><form>bulatsíru</form> <xr>= <sc>bulatsíra</sc> (male).</xr>

<p id=3344><form>bulaus, buláus</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>boastful</tr>, <tr>braggart</tr>. <i>Mutúu ka níya nga buláus kaáyu?</i> Would you believe him when he is such a braggart? <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> in a <tr>boasting</tr> manner. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> act in a boasting manner. <i>Nagbinulaus siya atubángan sa mga babáyi,</i> He is showing off in front of the women.

<p id=3345><form>bulaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bronze color</tr> of pigs, brownish green color of army blankets or cloth of similar color. <form>-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gold</tr>. <i>Mahalun nga batu ang buláwan,</i> Gold is a precious stone. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become gold. <form>pa&N;-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> be like gold. <form>-ánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> golden in color. <number>2</number> noble, golden in value. <i>Bulawánun ang ákung tingúhà nímu,</i> I have only noble intentions toward you.

<p id=3346><form>buláwis</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> k.o. <ix>danggit</ix> fish: <bio>Teuthis java</bio>.

<p id=3347><form>bulay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. cultivated bean, the seeds and young pods of which are eaten: <bio>Dolichos lablab</bio>. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>patánì<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> cook <ix>bulay</ix> or s.t. with <ix>bulay.</ix>

<p id=3348><form>bulay-ug</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> k.o. small bird found in bunches in bushes: <bio>Dicaeum bicolor</bio>. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> small and <tr>frail</tr> like this bird, <tr>weakling</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>poor</tr> in doing things. <i>Bulay-ug nga sinayawan,</i> Dancing in a poor way.

<p id=3349><form>bulbug</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. jellyfish with a brown color and blueish spots. <pos>a</pos> <tr>sluggish</tr>, slow-moving. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> get to be sluggish.

<p id=3350><form>bulbul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pubic hair</tr>. <number>2</number> name given to the green dragon piece in mahjong. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> grow pubic hairs. <i>Gibulbul ku pag-idad kug kinsi,</i> I grew pubic hairs when I was fifteen. <form>hi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b7]</itype> <number>1</number> dress fowl or birds by <tr>plucking the feathers</tr>. <number>2</number> clean s.o. out, take all his money. <i>Ang íyang asáwa mauy mihimulbul sa íyang pitáka,</i> His wife cleaned his wallet out. <i>Gihimulbúlan (gihimulbulan) siya sa íyang babáyi,</i> His mistress milked him dry. <number>2a</number> <formx>&mdash; ang swildu</formx> for a salary to be the sole source for a large number of expenditures. <i>Ang ákù rang swilduy himulbúlan sa tanang galastuhan,</i> They get all of the money for the expenses from my salary. <number>3</number> <tr>strip</tr> machines or vehicles of spare parts to be used elsewhere. <i>Himulbúli ang ayruplánu arun makalupad ang uban,</i> Strip the airplane of spare parts so the others can fly. <number>4</number> look over a person to size him up. <i>Gihimulbulan sa inahan ang pamanhunun sa íyang anak,</i> The mother inspected her daughter&apos;s fiancé carefully.

<p id=3351><form>buldu</form> <xr>= <sc>burdu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3352><form>buldug</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bulldog</tr>. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> big and stout in comparison to one&apos;s age group. <number>2</number> fat like a bulldog. <number>3</number> having the ugly face of a bulldog. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> get to be fat or ugly like a bulldog.

<p id=3353><form>buldúsir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bulldozer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> work on s.t. with a bulldozer, bulldoze s.t. <i>Gibuldúsir ang mga payag sa iskuwátirs,</i> The squatter shanties were bulldozed.

<p id=3354><form>buldyak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; ac]</itype> throw s.t. at a downwards angle by raising the hand over the head. <i>Buldyáka tung íyang gipatirúhan,</i> Throw your marble at the marble he aimed at. <pos>n</pos> a throw executed in this manner.

<p id=3355><form>bulgan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish with bulging eyes.

<p id=3356><form>bulgar</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> secret which has become public knowledge, an <tr>open secret</tr>. <i>Bulgar na kaáyu ang ílang panaghigugmaay,</i> Their love affair is public knowledge. <number>2</number> <tr>vulgar</tr>, <tr>coarse</tr>. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c16]</itype> <tr>reveal</tr> a secret. <i>Ayaw bulgara (ibulg&acaron;r) nang tabía,</i> Don&apos;t bring that gossip to public knowledge.

<p id=3357><form>bulhang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB6; b]</itype> <tr>burst</tr> open with a great gaping hole, make a great opening in s.t. <i>Gilunúpan ang dapit dihang mibulhang ang díki,</i> The area was flooded when the dike burst. <i>Bulhángi ang lubut sa táru,</i> Make a wide hole in the bottom of the can.

<p id=3358><form>bulhay</form> <pos>a</pos> for s.t. packed in a solid to be loose and dry so that it could crumble easily. <i>Bulhay kaáyu ang báy sa umígas,</i> The ant hill is very dry and loose. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> become dry and loose so as to crumble easily. <i>Nagkabulhay <pb n=165>ang yútà nga wà maulani,</i> The soil became dry and loose after it hadn&apos;t rained for a long time.

<p id=3359><form>bulhug</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>blinded</tr> because of cataracts. <number>2</number> partially blinded. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; a1]</itype> get cataracts. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; a1]</itype> get to be, make s.o. partially blind. <i>Nabulhug siya dihang hibuthan sa dinamíta,</i> He became partially blind when a dynamite charge exploded on him.

<p id=3360><form>bulhun</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>aláyun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3361><form>bulhut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>blow</tr> s.t. out of s.t. <i>Bulhúta ang kandílà,</i> <tr>Blow out</tr> the candle. <i>Gibulhútan aku níyag túbig,</i> He spurted water at me from his mouth. <i>Ibulhut nang asu,</i> Puff out the smoke. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b1]</itype> for the wind to blow. <i>Mibulhut ang amíhan,</i> The northeast wind blew. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> treat a sickness, usually of stomach, by blowing cigar smoke on the affected area. <i>Bulhútan sa mananambal ang nagbutud kung tíyan,</i> The folk doctor will blow smoke on my stomach because I have gas. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; c6P]</itype> move at great speed. <form>Bulhut!</form> Step on the gas! <i>Nakabulhut ug dágan ang kawatan,</i> The thief ran away on the double. <pos>n</pos> action of blowing. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>puff</tr> on a pipe or cigar. <form>-ay</form> <pos>n</pos> game involving blowing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> play this game.

<p id=3362><form>buli</form> <pos>n</pos> buri palm: <bio>Corypha elata</bio>. The fibers from the unopened leaves are used in weaving hats, baskets, etc. It is also a source of toddy (<ix>guhang</ix>), vinegar, and sugar. The shoots are used as a vegetable and the trunk is a source of starch.

<p id=3363><form>bulì</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>penis</tr> of man or animal. <number>2</number> exclamation expressing contempt or disgust. <i>Bulì, ay kug patuúha ánà,</i> Hmm, don&apos;t try to make me believe that. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; mu, sa ímung &mdash;</formx> irked statement of denial. <i>Bulì mu! Mahímu pa giyud ni!</i> What do you mean! This is still in good shape. <i>Barátu sa ímung bulì! Trayinta písus ni,</i> Cheap my foot! This costs thirty pesos. <form>bulìbulì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125; a12]</itype> be hard-pressed to do s.t. because of the large amount it is. <i>Nagkabulìbulì kug báyad sa ákung mga útang,</i> I&apos;m going crazy trying to pay my various debts.

<p id=3364><form>bulibard</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>boulevard</tr>.

<p id=3365><form>bulíbud<sub>1, 2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>balíbud<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3366><form>bulibul</form> <xr>= <sc>balibul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3367><form>bulíbul</form> <xr>= <sc>bulíbuy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3368><form>bulíbuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>cowlick</tr>. <number>2</number> person&apos;s <tr>temper</tr> (said to be indicated by the presence of a cowlick). <i>Manguláta siyag mulíhuk íyang bulíbuy,</i> When his temper is provoked, he&apos;ll maul people. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> a person with a cowlick.

<p id=3369><form>búlig<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>help</tr>. <i>Bulígi ku,</i> Help me. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>helper</tr>.

<p id=3370><form>búlig<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bunch</tr> of large fruit, coconuts, or bananas. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12346N]</itype> form a bunch of fruit. <form>panghi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> grow forth in bunches. <i>Nanghimúlig (namúlig) nang ságing,</i> The banana tree has a bunch of fruit on it. <form>hi&N;-</form> <pos>a</pos> producing lots and lots of bunches.

<p id=3371><form>bulíkat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> spread the labia of the vagina apart with the fingers. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>bukitlà</sc>.</xr> <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>bukìkì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3372><form>bulílis</form> <pos>n</pos> weed of medicinal value: <bio>Biophytum sensitivum</bio>.

<p id=3373><form>bulilit</form> <pos>a</pos> small child, <tr>small and short</tr> person. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> become small and short.

<p id=3374><form>bulilyus</form> <pos>n</pos> bowling pin.

<p id=3375><form>bulimánu</form> <xr>= <sc>búla dimánu</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>búla</sc>, <ix>1.</ix></xr>

<p id=3376><form>bulinaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. anchovy commonly eaten in Cebu: various <bio>Engraulidae</bio>, esp. <bio>Stolephorus indicus</bio>. <form>útuk ug &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> bird-brained, <tr>stupid</tr>.

<p id=3377><form>buling</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dirt</tr> on clothes, face, etc. <number>2a</number> <tr>smear</tr> on one&apos;s reputation. <i>Way buling ang ákung kadunggánan,</i> My reputation is spotless. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB12; b5]</itype> <tr>dirty</tr> s.t., become dirty. <i>Nagkabúling íyang karsúnis,</i> His pants got covered with dirt. <i>Ayaw bulingi (bulinga) ákung sinínà,</i> Don&apos;t get my dress dirty. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> smear one&apos;s reputation. <i>Gibulingan ang íyang dungug,</i> His reputation was sullied. <form>-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. dirty, esp. clothes ready for washing. <number>2</number> dirty deeds of the past. <i>Ang mga pulitiku isig yagyag sa ílang mga bulingun,</i> The politicians are washing their dirty linen in the public. <form>-it, -ut</form> <pos>a</pos> covered with dirt, <tr>dirty</tr> in appearance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> get covered with dirt.

<p id=3378><form>búling</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bowling</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; b6]</itype> go bowling. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> a bowling alley.

<p id=3379><form>bulinga</form> <pos>n</pos> female egg or egg cell.

<p id=3380><form>bulinggit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stye</tr> in the eye. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> have a <corr sic=sty>stye</corr>.<i> Gibulinggit ákung mata,</i> I have a <corr sic=sty>stye</corr> in my eye.

<p id=3381><form>bulingit</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>buling</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3382><form>bulingut</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>buling</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3383><form>buliníyu</form> <xr>= <sc>buluníyu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3384><form>bulintang</form> <xr>= <sc>balintung<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3385><form>bulíraw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be <tr>hazy</tr>, not clear about s.t. <i>Nabulíraw ku ug unsay ángay kung buhátun ning ákung prublíma,</i> I am <tr>confused</tr> as to what to do about this problem. <i>Ang ímung katin-áwan nakabulíraw nákug samut,</i> Your explanation has gotten me all the more confused. <pos>a</pos> hazy, <tr>blurred</tr>. <i>Bulíraw ákung panan-aw,</i> I see only hazily.

<p id=3386><form>bulíring</form> <xr>= <sc>buríring</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3387><form>bulíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bolero</tr> music. <number>2</number> bolero vest. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; c16]</itype> set the <corr sic=rythm>rhythm</corr> of a song to the <ix>tempo di bolero.</ix> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> wear, make into a bolero vest.

<pb n=166>

<p id=3388><form>búlis</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. mackerel.

<p id=3389><form>buliskad</form> <xr>= <sc>baliskad</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3390><form>búlit<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>caulk</tr>, plug up a hole or crack with <corr sic=viscose>viscous</corr> substances. <i>Bulíti ug simintu ang likì,</i> Fill up the crack with cement. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> put paste on s.t. <i>Bulíti ang likud sa kalindaryu,</i> Put paste on the reverse side of the calendar. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. used to plug up holes or caulk s.t. <number>2</number> <tr>paste</tr>.

<p id=3391><form>búlit<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>cover</tr> over completely with s.t. <i>Nabúlit ang íyang nawung sa kinawrarasan,</i> His face was covered with scratches. <i>Gibúlit ku siya sa hawuk,</i> I covered her with kisses. <number>2</number> <tr>burden</tr> with problems, debts, etc. <i>Nabúlit mi sa mga útang,</i> We are burdened with debts.

<p id=3392><form>bulítas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ball bearings</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> put ball bearings on s.t.

<p id=3393><form>bulitik</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. pitch used for caulking.

<p id=3394><form>bulitin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dice</tr>. <form>bistu ang &mdash;</form> be on to s.o.&apos;s tricks, evil doings. <form>&mdash; upisyal</form> <tr>official bulletin</tr>.

<p id=3395><form>bulitsi</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. raffle with Spanish cards. One set of cards is spread out on the table for the bettors to place their bets on. Another set of the same cards are rolled up individually and inserted into a small metal cylinder. The cylinders are placed in a large metal drum, jumbled about, and one cylinder is drawn. The card in the cylinder drawn is the winner. There are variations using balls with numbers to replace the cards in the cylinders. Usually the dealer sings out verses while rolling the drum and waiting for the bettors to place their bets. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> play <ix>bulitsi.</ix>

<p id=3396><form>bulíyus</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. flying fish.

<p id=3397><form>bulkan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>volcano</tr>. <number>2</number> fifty-peso bill (slang).

<p id=3398><form>bulkas</form> <xr>= <sc>buklas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3399><form>bulpin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ballpoint pen</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> use a ballpoint pen.

<p id=3400><form>bulsa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pocket</tr>. <i>Rilu dibulsa,</i> <tr>Pocket watch</tr>. <number>2</number> cavity in a fishing net which holds the fish. <number>3</number> an external pocket-like cavity s.w. on one&apos;s person (said to bring good fortune to the possessor). <number>4</number> <formx>isulud sa &mdash;</formx> fool s.o. into doing s.t. <i>Tuntúha dù. Dílì na ku nímu masulud sa bulsa,</i> Don&apos;t try to fool me, boy. You can&apos;t pull anything on me. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put a pocket, make into a pocket. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> pocket dishonestly. <i>Ug ibulsa (bulsáhun) nímu ang ganansiya, sigúrung ikíha ka,</i> If you pocket the profit, you surely will be brought to court. <form>bulsáhan</form> <pos>a</pos> having a pocket-like cavity on any part of the body. Such a person is believed likely to become rich.

<p id=3401><form>buls-ay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bull</tr>&apos;s-eye. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> make a direct hit.

<p id=3402><form>bulsíta</form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>bag</tr>. <i>Pagpalit ug usa ka bulsíta nga pán,</i> Buy a bagful of bread. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, make into paper bag.

<p id=3403><form>bult</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bolt</tr>. <form>&mdash; trídir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bolt threader</tr>.

<p id=3404><form>bultáhi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>voltage</tr>.

<p id=3405><form>bultimitru</form> <pos>n</pos> voltmeter.

<p id=3406><form>bultu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> large and <tr>bulging</tr>. <i>Bultu kaáyug dughan,</i> Having large breasts. <pos>n</pos> <tr>mass</tr> of s.t. that has been put together or is in one piece. <i>Bultu sa paldu,</i> The mass of a bale. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> be, become bulgy. <i>Mibultu sa íyang kílid ang pistúla,</i> The pistol is bulging on his hips. <form>-in-</form> in <tr>bulk</tr>, great volume. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; c16]</itype> do s.t. by bulk. <i>Binultúha (ibinultu) pagpalit arun barátu,</i> Buy them in bulk so it will be cheaper.

<p id=3407><form>búlu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>Indian wrestling</tr>, where the elbows are placed on a table and the opposing partners try to force each other&apos;s arms to bend. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12C; b6]</itype> engage in Indian wrestling.

<p id=3408><form>búlu<sub>2</sub>, búlù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> heavy weeding knife with a blunt rectangular end. <form>&mdash; bataliyun</form> <pos>n</pos> group of volunteer guards without firearms.

<p id=3409><form>búlù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. unarmed, thin-walled bamboo with straight smooth stems: <bio>Schizostachyum lumampao</bio>.

<p id=3410><form>bulúbud</form> <xr>= <sc>budbud</sc>, <ix>v1, 2; n1, 2.</ix></xr>

<p id=3411><form>búlù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> begin bubbling. <form>bulùbulù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>bubble</tr>. <i>Ug mubulùbulù ang tinula, haúna,</i> Take the stew off when it simmers. <i>Nagbulùbulù ang túbig sa tubud,</i> The water at the spring is bubbling.

<p id=3412><form>búlud</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>low hill</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; a12]</itype> be, become a hill. <i>Búrun man kunu nà arun gamítun sa syúting,</i> They will make a hill there for shooting films.

<p id=3413><form>bulug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>groin</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> pinch s.o. or hit him in the groin. <i>Bulgun ta ka ug buk-un nímu nang básu,</i> I&apos;ll hit you in the groin if you break that glass. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> an infection of the lymph gland in the groin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4b4]</itype> have an infection of the lymph gland in the groin. <form>-an, -an(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>bulug<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3414><form>bulug<sub>2</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> <tr>cheat</tr>, <tr>fool</tr>. <i>Kinsay nagbulug nímu íning kwartang minì?</i> Who cheated you with this counterfeit money? <i>Gibulug ang agáwun sa impliyádu nga pista upisyal run,</i> The employee hoodwinked his boss into believing it was a holiday today. <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to fool, cheat s.o.

<p id=3415><form>bulug<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> whitish growth on the eyes which eventually causes blindness. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> get such a growth.

<p id=3416><form>bulug<sub>4</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. <tr>bolo</tr> around 20&Prime; long with a flat end and curved blade having a pronounced concave bend on both top and bottom edges two-thirds of the way from the end.

<pb n=167>

<p id=3417><form>bul-ug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> for water to <tr>rush</tr> in a <tr>flood</tr>. <i>Naánud ang balay dihang hingbul-ugan sa túbig sa bahà,</i> The house was washed away when it was caught in the onrush of the floodwaters. <number>2</number> for emotions, masses of things to <tr>surge</tr> forth. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> rush of water in a flood. <number>2</number> rush of emotions, masses of things. <i>Bul-ug sa kalúuy,</i> A surge of pity. <i>Bul-ug sa mga kaáway,</i> The onrush of the enemy. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>onrushing</tr>. <i>Mabul-úgung lúhà,</i> Rushing tears.

<p id=3418><form>bulúgan</form> <xr>= <sc>bulug<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3419><form>buluk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>slow</tr> in comprehension, <tr>dull</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> be, become dull. <i>Mubuluk (mabuluk) kag dì ka mutuun,</i> You&apos;ll become dull if you don&apos;t study. <number>2</number> being hard to understand. <i>Kabúk gud nímu. Ganíha úu, karun dílì. Dì kung kasabut,</i> How hard it is to understand you. First you say yes, then no. I don&apos;t understand.

<p id=3420><form>buluk<sub>2</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <tr>rotten</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> <tr>rot</tr>, <tr>decompose</tr>. <i>Giaysan ang isdà arun dì mabuluk,</i> They put the fish on ice so this would not rot.

<p id=3421><form>buluk<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a young coconut bud that can be tapped for toddy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> for coconuts to put forth or develop buds.

<p id=3422><form>buluk<sub>4</sub>, búluk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>color</tr>. <i>Putì ang paburitu kung búluk,</i> White is my favorite color. <number>2</number> quality, tone of voice. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b]</itype> <tr>dye</tr> cloth red. <i>Gibugkan ang íyang sinínag pula,</i> Her dress was dyed red. <number>2</number> <itype>[B6; c1P]</itype> for the voice to change in quality. <i>Nagbuluk ang ákung tíngug kay giubu ku,</i> My voice changed because I caught cold.

<p id=3423><form>bulukbuluk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c]</itype> for liquid to <tr>bubble</tr> continuously due to presence of gas, make a bubbling sound. <i>Nagbulukbuluk ang túbig nga íyang gitidlúman,</i> The water was bubbling where he was swimming under the water.

<p id=3424><form>bulúkut</form> <xr>= <sc>balúkut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3425><form>bulung, búlung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>treat</tr> with medicine. <i>Bulnga ang samad,</i> Treat the wound. <pos>n</pos> medicine. <form>mag-r-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> s.o. who treats illnesses.

<p id=3426><form>búlung<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>look</tr> for, <tr>search</tr>. <i>Nagbúlung ku sa kwarta kung nawálà,</i> I&apos;m looking for the money I lost.

<p id=3427><form>*búlung<sub>3</sub></form> <form>hi-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b3(1)c5]</itype> be <tr>surprised</tr>, <tr>perplexed</tr> at s.t. <i>Nahibúlung siyag ngánung napildi sa piliay,</i> He wondered why he had lost the elections. <i>Gikahibudngan kung ílang panag-áway,</i> Their fighting surprised me. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> wonderment at s.t. one cannot understand. <form>kahibudngan, kahibudngánun, kahi-an</form> <pos>n</pos> surprising, bewildering. <i>Kahibudngánung nahitabù,</i> A perplexing thing that happened. <form>mahibudngánun</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>kahibulúngan</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> full of bewilderment. <i>Mahibudngánun nga tinan-awan,</i> A bewildered look.

<p id=3428><form>búlung<sub>4</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a2]</itype> get <tr>tired</tr> of s.t. partaken or done with monotonous regularity or frequency. <i>Nabúlung na ku sa íyang hitsúra,</i> I&apos;m sick of seeing him. <i>Nabúlung na ku sa buwad,</i> I&apos;m tired of dried fish. <i>Gibulúngan na kug pamínaw sa isturiya,</i> I&apos;m sick of listening to her talk.

<p id=3429><form>búlung<sub>5</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> have a <tr>difficult</tr> time doing s.t. <i>Nabúlung kug pangítà sa inyung báy kay wà may numiru,</i> I had a hard time looking for your house. It had no number.

<p id=3430><form>bulúngan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. sweet <tr>banana</tr> with a green peel, similar in flavor to <corr sic=tye>the</corr> type sold in the U.S.: <bio>Musa sapientum var. suaveolens</bio>.

<p id=3431><form>buluníyu</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> long wooden device with a lacerated tip for stirring the chocolate in the chocolate pot (<ix>batirul</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c16]</itype> use as a chocolate stirrer.

<p id=3432><form>bulunt&acaron;d</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>voluntary act</tr>. <i>Bulunt&acaron;d kining ákung gibúhat,</i> What I&apos;m doing is a <tr>voluntary act</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> volunteer, present oneself voluntarily. <i>Mibulunt&acaron;d siyag tubag sa pangutána,</i> He volunteered to answer the question.

<p id=3433><form>bulunt&acaron;r</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <xr>= <sc>bulunt&acaron;d</sc>, <ix>v</ix>.</xr> <form>-yu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>volunteer</tr>, esp. the civilian soldier volunteers during the Japanese occupation. <number>2</number> <tr>voluntary act</tr>. <i>Ang pagpirma ku sa kuntrátu buluntaryu,</i> My signing of the contract is a voluntary act. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>bulunt&acaron;d</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; b]</itype> hold a work bee with work contributed on a voluntary basis. <i>Gibuluntaryúhan sa lungsud ang paglimpiyu sa plása,</i> The people of the town had a work bee to clean the plaza.

<p id=3434><form>bulunt&icaron;r</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <xr>= <sc>bulunt&acaron;d</sc>, <ix>v</ix>.</xr>

<p id=3435><form>bulus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> bamboo or sugar <tr>stem</tr>.

<p id=3436><form>bulus<sub>2</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) a a great <tr>burden</tr>. <i>Bulus kaáyu kining daghang anak,</i> It&apos;s a burden to have so many children. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> overly burden oneself. <i>Ngánung magbulus kag lútù nga dúna kay kusiníra?</i> Why do you burden yourself with cooking when you have a cook? <i>Ngánung buslun siya nímug anhi?</i> Why do you make him trouble himself to come here?

<p id=3437><form>bulut</form> <pos>n</pos> the shiny black <tr>crown of thorns</tr> which covers the tubers of the <bio>Dioscorea esculenta</bio> (<ix>apáli</ix>), esp. the wild varieties (<ix>balyákag</ix>).

<p id=3438><form>buluungun</form> <pos>n</pos> pomelo, a k.o. widely grown <tr>citrus</tr> bearing large spherical or irregularly-shaped fruits, larger, drier, and sweeter than the grapefruit: <bio>Citrus grandis</bio>.

<p id=3439><form>búluy</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>halfbeak</tr>.

<pb n=168>

<p id=3440><form>bulwang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for s.t. <tr>enclosing</tr> an area or an enclosed area to be wide. <i>Bulwang ra ning sayála níya,</i> This skirt is too wide for her. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> be wide in space. <i>Ang pagkawalay mwiblis mauy nakabulwang (nakapabulwang) sa hawanan,</i> The absence of furniture made the room appear wider. <number>2</number> <itype>[bc1]</itype> add to the width of s.t. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>ka-</sc>.</xr> <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> width of an enclosed space or s.t. enclosing an area.

<p id=3441><form>bulwang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> strong <tr>rush</tr> of water. <i>Ang bulwang sa túbig mauy nakaánud níya,</i> The rush of the water carried her away. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> for a liquid to rush out forcefully.

<p id=3442><form>bulyum</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>volume</tr> of sound. <number>2</number> <tr>volume</tr> of a set of books. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)P]</itype> increase the volume of sound.

<p id=3443><form>búm</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>boom</tr> of a ship.

<p id=3444><form>bumba<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bomb</tr>. <i>Bumba atumika,</i> Atomic bomb. <number>2</number> <tr>spike</tr> or a hard drive downwards in a volleyball, pingpong, and like games. <number>3</number> <tr>blows</tr>. <number>4</number> vicious personal <tr>attack</tr> on s.o. in public. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> bomb s.t. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> spike a ball. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> hit s.o. with hard blows. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> lambast s.o. before the public. <i>Ang mga Amirkánu kanúnay níyang bumbáhan sa íyang lindug,</i> He constantly lambasts the Americans in his column. <form>ma&N;-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> bomber. <form>ig-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> thing for which s.o. can be lambasted in public.

<p id=3445><form>bumba<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pump</tr>. <i>Pagkúhag túbig sa bumba,</i> Go get water at the pump. <i>Ambi ang bumba kay daghang lamuk,</i> Give me the spray gun. There&apos;s lots of mosquitoes. <i>Bumba sa pitrumaks,</i> The air pressure mechanism of a lamp. <number>2</number> <tr>erotic show</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>pump</tr>. <i>Bumbáha (ibumba) ang púsu,</i> Pump the well. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> engage in sexual intercourse (slang). <form>di-, ripling di-</form> <pos>n</pos> air rifle. <form>bumbíra</form> <pos>n</pos> actress that appears in erotic shows. <form>bumbíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fireman, fire department. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>bumbíra</sc> (male).</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be, become a fireman. <form>bumbiruhan</form> <pos>n</pos> fire station.

<p id=3446><form>bumbardíyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bombardment</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>bombard</tr>. <i>Pastilan nakabumbardíyu níyag pangutána sa saksi,</i> My! How he bombarded the witness with questions. <i>Gibumbardiyúhan úsang baybáyun,</i> First the beach was shelled.

<p id=3447><form>bumbay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>Indian</tr>, <tr>Hindu</tr>. <number>2</number> k.o. large <tr>goat</tr> with a long beard and curved horns. <number>3</number> <formx>sibúyas &mdash;</formx> large <tr>onions</tr>. <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> speak the Indian language.

<p id=3448><form>bumbil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bougainvillea</tr>.

<p id=3449><form>bumbilya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>light bulb</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6(1)]</itype> install a light bulb.

<p id=3450><form>bumbu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>drum</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>pregnant woman</tr> (humorous). <i>Bumbu nang ákung asáwa,</i> My wife is already pregnant. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>beat</tr> a drum. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make into a drum.

<p id=3451><form>buna</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>forehead</tr>. <number>2</number> analogous structure in the body above the genitalia. <form>bunabúna</form> <xr>= <sc>buna</sc>, <ix>2.</ix></xr>

<p id=3452><form>bun-ag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> for s.t. in a container to be <tr>thrown out</tr> and scattered in a downward motion. <i>Bun-ági ug túbig ang káyu,</i> Throw water on the fire. <i>Ibun-ag ang mga sinakung kupras sa budíga,</i> Empty the sacks of copra into the warehouse.

<p id=3453><form>búnak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b1]</itype> <tr>wash clothes</tr>. <i>Bunáki ang mga bulingun,</i> Wash the dirty clothes. <form>-an(&rarr;), -un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>laundry</tr>.

<p id=3454><form>búnal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>strike</tr> with a club or whip. <i>Ayaw ku bunáli,</i> Don&apos;t beat me. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> for a fighting cock to deliver a <tr>blow</tr> with its legs. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> for a person to <tr>fall</tr> heavily with a thud. <i>Nabúnal ku sa hagdan,</i> I fell with a thud down the stairs. <form>andir di-</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>henpecked</tr>. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> club, whip. <number>2</number> blows of a fighting cock. <number>3</number> <tr>penis</tr> (slang).

<p id=3455><form>búnaw</form> <xr>= <sc>bunal</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3456><form>bunáyus</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>shapeless</tr> figure. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> for the body or dress to be lacking in curves and full shape. <i>Mubunáyus ang tútuy basta way bra,</i> The breasts sag if you don&apos;t wear a bra. <i>Sayun rang tahiun ang mga sinínà karun kay bunayúsun man lang,</i> It&apos;s easy to sew dresses nowadays because they are just cut straight.

<p id=3457><form>bunbun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fine sand</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1245]</itype> be filled with, covered with sand. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> be <tr>defeated</tr>, <tr>lose</tr> overwhelmingly in a race or contest.

<p id=3458><form>bun buyids</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bon voyage</tr>.

<p id=3459><form>bundak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> let s.t. <tr>fall</tr> with force. <i>Ngánung nabuak ang kúlun? Kinsay nagbundak niíni?</i> Why is the clay pot broken? Who threw it down? <i>Ayaw ibundak ang tilipunu,</i> Don&apos;t bang the telephone receiver down. <number>1a</number> <formx>&mdash; sa salà</formx> lay the <tr>blame</tr> on s.o. <i>Gibundákan siya sa salà nga dílì íya,</i> They blamed him for s.t. that was not his fault. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>stomp</tr> one&apos;s feet. <i>Ayaw bundáka (ibundak) ang tiil mug manáug ka sa hagdan,</i> Don&apos;t stomp your feet as you go downstairs. <number>3a</number> <itype>[B346; b2]</itype> for the rain to <tr>fall</tr> heavily. <i>Mibundak ang ulan,</i> The rain came down in sheets. <number>3b</number> for s.t. heavy to come down by itself. <i>Mibundak ang gawang sa garáhi,</i> The garage door came down with a bang. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>4a</number> speak with a gruff voice. <i>Pinabundak ang tíngug, mitawag siya sa íyang suluguun,</i> He called his servant in a sharp voice. <number>4b</number> call s.o. by name with no title of respect. <i>Ayaw ibundak ang ngálan sa ímung magulang. Tawga siyag manang,</i> <pb n=169>Don&apos;t just call your elder sister by name. Give her the title <ix>manang.</ix> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>crashing</tr> down of s.t., stomping of feet. <number>2</number> downpour.

<p id=3460><form>bundù<sub>1, 2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>bungdù<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3461><form>bundul</form> <xr>= <sc>bungdul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3462><form>búng</form> <xr>= <sc>búlung<sub>1, 2, 3</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3463><form>búnga<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fruit</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>result</tr>, <tr>outgrowth</tr>. <i>Búnga sa kahakug,</i> The result of your greed. <form>&mdash; sa katúlug</form> s.t. trivial. <i>Ang púlung nga búnga sa katúlug ángay kalimtan,</i> Trivial words should be forgotten. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; ug singut</formx> <tr>prickly heat</tr>. <number>4</number> <formx>-ng káhuy</formx> <tr>fruit tree</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2N; b2c]</itype> bear fruit. <i>Mibúnga (namúnga) nang bayábas,</i> The guava tree has borne fruit. <i>Gagmay kaáyu ang ibúnga íning klásiha sa ukban,</i> This k.o. tangerine bears small fruit. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2N; b6(1)]</itype> produce results. <i>Gibungáhan ug duha ka buuk anak ang ílang panagtípun,</i> Their life together was blessed with two children. <form>hi&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mother hen</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> raise into a hen. <form>himúnga, himungáun, himungáhun</form> <pos>a</pos> bearing fruit proliferously. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to bear proliferously. <form>mabungáhun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>fruitful</tr>, producing good results. <i>Mabungáhun nga paningkámut,</i> Striving which produced good results. <form>ting-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> season a plant bears fruit. <i>Tingbunga sa mangga,</i> The mango season.

<p id=3464><form>búnga<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>betel nut palm</tr>: <bio>Areca catechu</bio>. Name also given to other palms of similar appearance. <form>&mdash; di Tsína</form> <pos>n</pos> ornamental palm which is similar in appearance to the <ix>búnga:</ix> <bio>Adonidia merrillii</bio>.

<p id=3465><form>bungabung, bungábung</form> <pos>n</pos> the long <tr>feathers</tr> around the neck of male fowl, often used as lures in fishing. <i>Pulang bungabung nga mu rag kwintas tan-áwun,</i> Red hackles that look like a necklace. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B456N]</itype> grow feathers around the neck. <i>Magbungabung na gánì ning manúka, hiktan ku na ni,</i> When this cock starts to grow his hackles I&apos;ll tie him up. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> pluck the neck feathers off.

<p id=3466><form>bungàbungà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1245; b(1)]</itype> <tr>stammer</tr>. <i>Nagkabungàbungà siyang mitubag kay hisakpang namakak,</i> He stammered his answer because they caught him in a lie.

<p id=3467><form>búngad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; c6]</itype> <tr>stumble</tr> headlong onto the face. <i>Ayaw ibúngad ímung nawung sa simintu,</i> Don&apos;t fall on your face on the concrete floor.

<p id=3468><form>bungag</form> <xr>= <sc>balungag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3469><form>bungáhuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fruit tree</tr>.

<p id=3470><form>bungálun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. creeping reed of rice paddies, used for horse feed.

<p id=3471><form>búngan</form> <xr>= <sc>bulúngan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3472><form>bungánga</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3; c1]</itype> for s.t. to be open wide or ajar. <i>Nabungánga íyang bàbà sa dakung katingála,</i> His mouth came open with great surprise. <i>Nagbungánga nga pultahan,</i> Door that is ajar. <i>Pagtárug lingkud. Ayaw ibungánga (bungangáha) ímung atubangan,</i> Sit with your legs together. Don&apos;t expose your genitalia.

<p id=3473><form>bungarul</form> <xr>= <sc>pyápi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3474><form>bungat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>state</tr>, <tr>express</tr> s.t. <i>Bungati siya sa ímung gugma,</i> Express your love to him. <i>Ibungat unsay ímung gustu,</i> State what you want. <pos>n</pos> <tr>price quoted</tr> by a buyer or seller.

<p id=3475><form>bungatngat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> open s.t. wide by pushing the sides away. <i>Bungatngáta (ibungatngat) ang bág arun isúd ri,</i> Open the pocketbook wide and put this in it. <i>Bungatngáta ang sagbut kay muági ku,</i> Move the weeds out of the way so I can get by.

<p id=3476><form>bungátud</form> <pos>n</pos> small hill, <tr>hillock</tr>.

<p id=3477><form>bungaw</form> (from <ix>abungaw</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <tr>absent-minded</tr>, <tr>forgetful</tr>, esp. due to old age. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a4]</itype> be absent-minded. <i>Nabungaw lang ku sa panuklì,</i> My mind was elsewhere when I gave her the change. <i>Gibungaw ka man tingáli. Gidad-an mu akug baskit nga baldi man ang ákung gisúgù,</i> You must be getting old. You brought me a basket when I sent you to get a pail. <pos>n</pos> absent-mindedness, forgetfulness.

<p id=3478><form>bung-aw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chasm</tr>, narrow <tr>gorge</tr>. <i>Natumpáwak siya sa bung-aw sa kasákit,</i> She underwent a great emotional crisis. (Lit. She fell headlong into the chasm of sorrow.)

<p id=3479><form>bungáwu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish.

<p id=3480><form>bungáwuy</form> <xr>= <sc>pyápi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3481><form>bungay</form> <xr>= <sc>bunglay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3482><form>bungbung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>wall</tr> of a building. <number>2</number> <tr>side</tr> covers of any box-like thing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>enclose</tr> with, make into a wall. <i>Bungbúngi ang parul ug papil hapun,</i> Put <corr sic=tissue>rice</corr> paper on the sides of the lantern. <number>2</number> for adverse weather or some other barrier to <tr>confine</tr> people s.w. <i>Ang bahà nga mibungbung námù sa tabuk,</i> The flood that confined us to the opposite bank. <i>Nabungbung sila sa isla tungud sa hángin,</i> They were confined to the island because of the wind. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> cut of meat underneath the short ribs, the plate.

<p id=3483><form>*bungbung<sub>2</sub></form> <form>&mdash; kawáyan</form> <xr>= <sc>búlù<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3484><form>bungdù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pile</tr> or a <tr>heap</tr> of s.t., a <tr>mound</tr>. <i>Bungdù sa yútà,</i> Pile of dirt. <i>Ang bungdù sa sinsilyu sa lamísa,</i> The pile of money on the table. <number>2</number> <tr>grave</tr>. <i>Marmul ang bungdù ni Risal,</i> Rizal&apos;s grave is of marble. <number>3</number> woman&apos;s genitalia (humorous slang). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); a]</itype> for s.t. to pile up or form a mound. <i>Nagbungdù ang dughan,</i> She has bulging breasts. <i>Dì makabungdù ang labhanan ug amnun,</i> The laundry can&apos;t pile up if you take care of it <pb n=170>as it comes along. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bulging outward</tr>.

<p id=3485><form>bungdù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make s.t. hit against s.t. with a big impact. <i>Kinsay nakabundù sa dyíp sa pusti?</i> Who bumped the jeep into the post? <i>Nabundù ang ákung samput sa simintu,</i> I hit the cement with my rump.

<p id=3486><form>bungdul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2c]</itype> <number>1</number> strike s.t. stationary by poking s.t. at it. <i>Bungdúla ang búnga ug dílì nímu masaka,</i> Poke at the fruit if you can&apos;t climb up to get it. <i>Ibungdul ang ímung sungkud sa kisami arun sila muhílum,</i> Knock your cane against the ceiling so they will shut up. <number>2</number> for a vehicle to crash into s.t. not fixed in place. <i>Nibungdul ang taksi sa karumáta,</i> The taxi crashed into the cart. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> have sexual intercourse with (slang). <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> instrument to poke s.t. <number>2</number> action of poking s.t.

<p id=3487><form>bunggalu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bungalow</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; c1]</itype> <tr>construct a bungalow</tr>.

<p id=3488><form>bunggu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bongo drum</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>play the bongo</tr>, <tr>make into a bongo</tr>.

<p id=3489><form>bunggù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P; a]</itype> break off s.t. rigid with pressure. <i>Hángin ang mibunggù sa mga sanga sa káhuy,</i> The wind broke the branches off of the tree. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> reveal s.t. which s.o. had kept secret for a purpose. <i>Bunggùun ta kang dúna kay láing trátu ug ang ákung ig-ágaw ang ímung pangulitawhan,</i> I&apos;ll reveal that you already have a girl friend if you try to victimize my cousin.

<p id=3490><form>bunghan</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>buhung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3491><form>bungháyag</form> <pos>a</pos> voluntary aid or service. <i>Salámat sa inyung bungháyag nga kuntribusiyun,</i> Thank you for your voluntary contribution. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> offer help, services voluntarily. <i>Ibungháyag níya ang íyang sirbisyu sa simbahan,</i> He will offer his services to the church.

<p id=3492><form>bunghug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> tell malicious things about s.o. to s.o. else with a purpose. <i>May nagbunghug nákung gipamabáyi mu kunung ímung súhul,</i> S.o. is trying to get me mad at you by telling me that you&apos;re spending your salary on women. <pos>n</pos> malicious things told about s.o. for a purpose.

<p id=3493><form>bungì</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>harelip</tr>. <number>2</number> for a bottle or jar to have a chip in the mouth. <number>3</number> for s.t. projecting to be broken off. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a]</itype> <number>1</number> make s.o. into a harelip. <number>2</number> make a break in a mouth-like opening or dent in the front of s.t. <i>Siyay mibúngì (nagbúngì) sa awtu kay gidasmag sa pusti,</i> He was the one who dented the front of the car when he smashed it against the post. <number>3</number> break s.t. projecting off. <i>Ang inggranáhi gibungíag tangu,</i> The gear had a tooth broken off it.

<p id=3494><form>bungíngi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b4]</itype> for s.t. to have an abundance of s.t. on it or in it. <i>Mangga nga nagbungíngi sa búnga,</i> A mango tree, laden with fruit. <i>Namungíngi ang mga isdà sa púkut,</i> The net was full of fish. <i>Sanínang gipamungingíhag mga adurnu,</i> A dress laden with decorations.

<p id=3495><form>bungìngì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1</number> for a surface to develop a <tr>crack</tr> and curl at the edges. <i>Ang nangkà nakabungìngì na sa kahinug,</i> The jackfruit broke open when it got overripe. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>bungíngi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3496><form>bungisngis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>supernatural being</tr>, tall and hairy with a wide mouth, said to be grinning literally from ear to ear or laughing boisterously. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>grin</tr> widely, laugh like a <ix>bungisngis.</ix> <i>Mibungisngis íyang dagway,</i> His face burst into a wide grin.

<p id=3497><form>bungiut, bungíut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <corr><number>1</number> </corr>for the face to assume a <tr>frowning</tr>, <tr>disapproving</tr> expression. <i>Sapútun gánì siya mubungíut íyang nawung,</i> His face frowns when he is not in a good mood. <number>2</number> for the sky to get heavily <tr>overcast</tr> (metaphorical). <i>Nagbungiut ang kalibútan,</i> The sky is heavily overcast. <pos>a</pos> frowning face.

<p id=3498><form>bungkag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> take s.t. <tr>apart</tr>, <tr>break</tr> s.t. up into its constituent parts. <i>Kinsay nagbungkag sa rilu?</i> Who took the watch apart? <i>Bungkága ring písus,</i> Change this peso bill. <number>2</number> break up a group, <tr>disarrange</tr> s.t. in a group. <i>Kinsay nagbungkag sa ákung <corr sic="sinína">sinínà</corr>?</i> Who disarranged my clothes that had been stacked nicely? <i>Nakabungkag si Magsaysay sa mga Huks,</i> Magsaysay broke up the Huk rebellion. <i>Nabungkag ang tígum pag-ulan,</i> The gathering broke up when it rained. <number>3</number> break up a relationship. <i>Ikay nakabungkag sa ámung pagpuyù,</i> You broke up our home. <number>4</number> <tr>arrange music</tr> (slang). <i>Ang <corr sic="bítuls">Bítuls</corr> ray magbungkag sa ílang kantáhun,</i> The Beatles arrange their songs themselves. <number>5</number> break the soil in a field that has never been cultivated or not cultivated for some time. <i>Nagbungkag siya sa kaíngin,</i> He plowed the clearing in the forest. <form>-ay</form> <pos>n</pos> children&apos;s game in which a bunch of rubber bands is separated. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; c]</itype> play this game.

<p id=3499><form>bungkal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>dig</tr> up the surface of the earth. <i>Dílì kinahanglan bungkálun ning yutáa kay húmuk,</i> This soil need not be broken up because it is soft. <i>Hibungkalan níya ang usa ka dakung kahun sa nagdáru siya,</i> He turned up a big box as he was plowing.

<p id=3500><form>bungkaliw</form> <xr>= <sc>bungkawil</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3501><form>bungkas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; ab7]</itype> <tr>undo</tr> s.t. sewn. <i>Nabungkas ang tahì sa ákung karsúnis,</i> My pants came apart at the seams. <i>Bungkási ang sákug usa ka dángaw,</i> Open the sack a <pb n=171>couple of inches where it was sewn.

<p id=3502><form>bungkawil</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible <tr>shell</tr>: the <tr>bubble conch</tr>.

<p id=3503><form>bungkig</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>amount</tr> by which s.t. exceeds a certain set. <i>Ug angáyun nátug báhin ang karmilítus, duhay bungkig,</i> If we divide these candies up evenly, there will be two left over. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> become uneven in number, not in complete sets. <i>Ayawg bungkíga ang plátung baligyà. Hinuygu giyud,</i> Don&apos;t sell the plates in odd lots. Sell them by the set.

<p id=3504><form>bungkug</form> <pos>n</pos> the very end of the spinal column, esp., in man or animals, but also said of birds.

<p id=3505><form>bungkul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> place where the bones bulge in the <tr>knuckles</tr>, <tr>ankles</tr>, etc. <number>2</number> <tr>knot</tr> in a tree. <number>3</number> <tr>cyst</tr>. <number>4</number> <xr>= <sc>búkul</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> hit in the ankle bone, knuckles. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> turn into a cyst.

<p id=3506><form>bungkut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b12]</itype> <tr>suck</tr> money from s.o. <i>Bungkútan lang nang byúdáha sa íyang bánang batan-ún,</i> The young husband is just going to suck money out of the widow.

<p id=3507><form>bunglay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>remove</tr> weeds by using a bolo square at the end. <i>Bungláyun ku nang sagbut,</i> I&apos;ll remove the weeds with a bolo. <pos>n</pos> blunt-ended bolo used to remove weeds. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>weeds</tr> to be cleared out.

<p id=3508><form>bungsì</form> <xr>= <sc>busngì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3509><form>bungsud</form> <pos>n</pos> general term for <tr>fish corrals</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> make, make into a fish corral. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>catch</tr> in a fish corral. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> drive s.t. elongated into the ground, dash s.t. straight to the ground. <i>Ang yútang gibungsúran níya sa talibugsuk,</i> The soil where he drove the stakes into. <i>Ibungsud ta kag ímu kung samúkun,</i> I&apos;ll smash you into the ground if you bother me. <form>bungsuran</form> <pos>n</pos> fish corral. <form>bungsuránan</form> <pos>n</pos> place where fish corrals are built. <form>binungsúran</form> <pos>n</pos> fish caught in a fish corral.

<p id=3510><form>bungtud</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>hill</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>anthill</tr>. <form>hi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B236; b8]</itype> reach a place one has gone up to. <i>Nakahimungtud na siya sa kadunggánan,</i> He has arrived at the height of his fame. <form>kabungtúran</form> <pos>n</pos> hills.

<p id=3511><form>búngug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be <tr>deafened</tr>, <tr>stunned</tr>. <i>Makabúngug nga butu,</i> Deafening explosion. <i>Mabúngug kag maigù ka sa ákung kúmù,</i> You&apos;ll be stunned if my fist hits you. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1246]</itype> stunning because of size or the amount, usually said of food. <i>Makabúngug nga bangkíti,</i> A banquet of stunning proportions. <i>Páa nga makabúngug,</i> Thighs that bowl you over by their size. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> yellowish secretion from an infected ear. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> have this yellowish secretion. <i>Gibungug ang íyang dunggan,</i> He has pus coming out of his ears. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having a pussy infection.

<p id=3512><form>bungul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>deaf</tr>. <form>buta &mdash;</form> blind and deaf. <i>Táwung buta bungul,</i> A deaf and blind man. <number>2</number> for a musical instrument or money not to be resonant. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B16; a]</itype> be, become deaf. <number>2</number> <formx>wà maka-</formx> be not able to hear (joking use for <ix>makadungug</ix>). <i>Wà ku makabungul sa ímung gisulti,</i> I didn&apos;t hear what you were saying. <number>3</number> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> for instruments or money to be, become unresonant. <form>&mdash; nga lubi</form> <pos>a</pos> coconut at the stage just prior to ripening where the fruit is still so full of water it does not produce a sound when you shake it. <form>(&larr;)</form> <itype>[A123PC; b(1)]</itype> not to be on speaking terms.

<p id=3513><form>bungul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>unopened</tr> flower bud of a coconut. <i>Ang dugà sa bungul mauy himúung tubà,</i> The sap of the coconut bud is what is made into palm toddy. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for coconuts to develop flower buds.

<p id=3514><form>bungul<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>shark</tr> (<ix>pating</ix>).

<p id=3515><form>bungulan, bungúlan</form> <xr>= <sc>bulúngan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3516><form>búngun</form> <pos>n</pos> space directly underneath the house or tree. <i>Ang kanding túa gihukut sa búngun,</i> The goat is tethered under the house. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> put or place s.t. under s.t. else. <i>Gibúngun ba nímu ug tanum ang mga ságing sa mga lubi?</i> Did you plant the bananas under the coconut trees?

<p id=3517><form>búngut</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>beard</tr>, <tr>mustache</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>pubic hairs</tr> (euphemism). <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>bulbul</sc>, 2.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a4]</itype> for a beard to grow on one. <number>1a</number> have pubic hairs (euphemism). <i>Gibúngut na lang mu piru magbinátà gihápun,</i> You already have pubic hairs, but you are acting like children. <number>2</number> <itype>[c]</itype> put a beard on s.t. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> allow one&apos;s beard, mustache to grow. <form>hi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> pluck or shave a beard or mustache. <form>panghi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> pluck or shave one&apos;s beard, mustache. <form>bungutbungut</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> wooly, hairy material. <number>2</number> name given to grasses of waste places with numerous spikes: <bio>Chloris spp</bio>. <form>bungutbúngut</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>bungutbungut</sc>, <bx>1</bx>.</xr> <number>2</number> <pos>n</pos> tassel fish (<bio>Polynemus spp</bio>.), fishes with filamentous rays coming from under the head. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> general term for catfish. <form>bungtan</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to goat fish (<ix>timbúngan</ix>) with long barbels on the face. <form>hi&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to pluck or shave the beard or mustache. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> bearded. <number>2</number> goon. <i>Mudagsang ang mga bungútun panahun sa piliay,</i> There are goons in droves during elections. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> be a goon. <form>bungutbungutun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>hairy</tr>.

<p id=3518><form>bunguy</form> <xr>= <sc>bungul<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3519><form>bunhayag</form> <xr>= <sc>bungháyag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3520><form>bunhuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mites</tr> infesting fowl. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a124]</itype> for fowl to be infested with lice. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> infested <pb n=172>with fowl mites. <form>babáying -un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prostitute</tr>, esp. one infected with venereal disease.

<p id=3521><form>búni</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; ac]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>fill</tr> a hole to the top. <i>Nabúni ang bangag sa lápuk,</i> The mud filled the hole. <number>2</number> <tr>obliterate</tr> the traces of s.t. <i>Ang panahun mubúni sa kaguul,</i> Time heals the wounds of sorrow.

<p id=3522><form>bun-i</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ringworm</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1246; a4]</itype> be affected with ringworm.

<p id=3523><form>buníta</form> <xr>= <sc>bunítu</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=3524><form>bunítu</form> <pos>a</pos> for a man or boy to be good-looking. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a1b6]</itype> be, become <tr>handsome</tr>. <xr><ix>see also</ix> <sc>ninyu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3525><form>bunkawil</form> <xr>= <sc>bungkawil</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3526><form>bunkul</form> <xr>= <sc>bungkul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3527><form>bunlaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN]</itype> <tr>rinse</tr>. <i>Akuy mibunlaw (namunlaw) sa lapúkung salug,</i> I rinsed the muddy floor off. <i>Kinsay nagbunlaw sa sinabunan?</i> Who rinsed the soapy clothes? <i>Bunláwi ang kúlun únà lutúi,</i> Rinse out the pot before you use it. <pos>n</pos> s.t. to rinse with.

<p id=3528><form>bunlay</form> <xr>= <sc>bunglay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3529><form>bunlud</form> <xr>= <sc>bátud</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=3530><form>bunlut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>pull</tr> with force. <i>Gibunlut níya ang ákung buhuk,</i> She pulled my hair. <pos>n</pos> act of pulling with force. <form>-ay sa tukug</form> <pos>n</pos> drawing lots by sticks. Whoever gets the longest is &lsquo;it&rsquo;. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2]</itype> <tr>draw lots by sticks</tr>.

<p id=3531><form>bunsákà, bunsíkà</form> <pos>a</pos> for hair, spines, and the like to be spreading wide. <i>Ngil-ad tan-áwun ang bunsíkà nga buhuk,</i> Hair that is spread out in all directions is ugly to look at. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); b6]</itype> spread out in all directions. <i>Wà pa makabunsíkà ang dáhun sa pugas,</i> The leaves of the corn seedlings have not spread out yet.

<p id=3532><form>bunsálù</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <xr>= <sc>aguting</sc>, <ix>n 2.</ix></xr>

<p id=3533><form>bunsù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> throw s.t. forcefully downwards. <i>Gibunsù siya sa matun sa asíras,</i> The ruffian smashed him down to the ground.

<p id=3534><form>bunsud</form> <xr>= <sc>bungsud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3535><form>bunsudbunsud</form> (from <ix>bungsud</ix>) <pos>n</pos> murex shells.

<p id=3536><form>buntag</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>morning</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B5]</itype> be morning. <i>Hápit na mubuntag (mabuntag) kay mituktugáuk nang manuk,</i> It is almost morning because the cock crowed. <i>Musimba siyag mabuntag,</i> She goes to church in the morning. <number>1a</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> do s.t. in the morning. <i>Buntága ang kasal,</i> Have the marriage performed in the morning. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> do s.t. until morning. <i>Nagbuntag kug bása,</i> I read until morning. <i>Gibuntágan nákug bayli,</i> I danced until morning. <number>3</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> be overtaken by morning. <i>Nabuntagan mi didtu sa lawud,</i> Morning found us in the open sea. <form>pa-, paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> stay s.w. till morning. <i>Magpakabuntag ta sa barku,</i> Let&apos;s stay in the boat until morning. <i>Pakabuntagi ang kinútil nga itlug úsà imna,</i> Let the beaten eggs set until morning before you eat them. <form>buntagbuntag, Culu-</form> mornings. <i>Malígù siya buntagbuntag,</i> She takes a bath every morning. <form>ka-un</form> <pos>n</pos> morning viewed as a phase of the day. <i>Ang ínit sa kabuntágun,</i> The morning heat. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> being in the morning. <i>Buntagung mantaláan,</i> Morning paper. <number>2</number> palm toddy gathered in the morning.

<p id=3537><form>buntal</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fine, white fiber obtained from the stalks of unopened buri palm leaves, used for making hats. <number>2</number> hat made from <ix>buntal.</ix> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> wear, make into a buntal hat.

<p id=3538><form>buntas</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>famished</tr>, <tr>half-starved</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a4]</itype> get to be famished. <i>Nabuntas siya kay wà may káun gabíi,</i> She is half-starved because she didn&apos;t have anything to eat last night. <i>Mu ra man nà siya ug gibuntas nímu,</i> He must be famished for the sight of you.

<p id=3539><form>buntaug</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>towering</tr>, looming huge. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>loom</tr>. <i>Dakung búkid nga nagbuntaug sa unáhan,</i> A huge mountain that loomed in the distance. <number>2</number> for silence to reign. <i>Kahílum nga nagbuntaug sa lawud,</i> Silence that reigned over the seas.

<p id=3540><form>buntaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>toss</tr>, throw s.t. lightly. <i>Nabuak ang plátu kay gibuntaw man lang,</i> The plate was smashed because he just threw it down. <number>2</number> address an older person without his usual title of respect. <i>Ayaw ibuntaw íyang ngálan. Tawga siyag manang,</i> Don&apos;t just call her by her name. Call her &lsquo;big sister&rsquo;. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> go hook and line fishing, usually in the shallow part of the sea. <pos>n</pos> <tr>hook and line fishing</tr>.

<p id=3541><form>buntay</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>heavy</tr> in weight, <tr>weighty</tr>. <i>Buntay ang ákung dala kay sa íya,</i> The thing I carried was heavier than his. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1PB; a2]</itype> weigh s.t. down. <i>Ang usa ka pirásung puthaw ang nagbuntay (nagpabuntay) sa putus,</i> The piece of iron made the package heavy. <i>Nagbuntay ang mga búnga,</i> The fruits are weighing down (the branches of the tree).

<p id=3542><form>buntis<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pregnant</tr> woman. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26; b6]</itype> be, become pregnant. <number>2</number> <itype>[c]</itype> be carried in the womb. <i>Ang gibuntis ni Inday karun ikaunum níyang anak,</i> Inday is pregnant with her sixth child.

<p id=3543><form>buntis<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tiny fish.

<p id=3544><form>buntud</form> <xr>= <sc>bungtud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3545><form>buntug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>overcome</tr> s.t. <i>Makabuntug ka ba niánang dakung trúsu?</i> Can you lift the large log? <i>Buntúgun ku ang mga kagul-ánan,</i> I&apos;ll overcome my sorrows. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> throw s.t. into the water to sink it. <i>Gibuntug sa kriminal ang pistúla sa dágat,</i> The <pb n=173>killer threw the pistol into the sea. <form>hi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b8]</itype> be set s.w. <i>Ang ílang balay didtu mahimuntug sa pátag,</i> Their house was located on the plain. <i>Ang arka didtu mahimuntug sa Arárat,</i> The ark was <tr>set down</tr> on Mt. Ararat. <form>-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>anchor</tr> made of a forked stick with a stone tied in the fork. <number>2</number> k.o. wrasse found in reefs.

<p id=3546><form>buntug<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>quail</tr>. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> catch quails. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>quail-like</tr> in appearance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> get to be small and round like a quail.

<p id=3547><form>buntug<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> general name for <tr>gobies</tr>.

<p id=3548><form>buntúgun</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>buntug<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3549><form>buntul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> small <tr>hill</tr>. <number>2</number> top of a hill.

<p id=3550><form>buntul<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>bungdul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3551><form>buntul<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> <xr>= <sc>pa-</sc>.</xr> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> take liquids, usually spirits<corr>,</corr> to follow or wash down food. <i>Nagpabuntul silag bír sa ílang gikaung baklarit,</i> They drank beer to go with their dog stew. <pos>n</pos> liquor to take with food.

<p id=3552><form>buntung</form> <xr>= <sc>butung<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3553><form>bunù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; ab24]</itype> <tr>kill</tr>. <i>Nagbúnù sila,</i> They killed each other. <i>Nakabunù ang ákung manuk,</i> My cock killed its opponent. <i>Hibun-an kug duha ka manuk,</i> I lost two roosters. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> a fight to the death. <form>-an(&larr;)</form> place in fish corral where the fish is trapped and taken. <form>mamumúnù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>killer</tr>, <tr>murderer</tr>. <form>pala&N;-(&larr;), tala&N;-(&larr;), tali&N;-(&larr;)</form> <tr>killer cock</tr>.

<p id=3554><form>bunù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>throw</tr> s.t. at s.t. <i>Bun-un ka nákug batu,</i> I will throw a rock at you. <pos>n</pos> action of <tr>throwing</tr>.

<p id=3555><form>bun-u</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fat of fowls</tr>. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> for fowl to have lots of fat. <i>Namun-u ang manuk nga ákung giíhaw,</i> The chicken I slaughtered had lots of fat.

<p id=3556><form>búnug</form> <pos>n</pos> general name given to small, somewhat slender-bodied fishes with extensive dorsal and ventral spines and tail fins in one piece: <tr>gudgeons</tr> and <tr>gobies</tr>. <form>bunugbúnug</form> <pos>n</pos> general name for <tr>snakeheads</tr>.

<p id=3557><form>bun-ug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bruise</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>expenses</tr>, loss of money (slang). <i>Pilay bun-ug nímu sa bangka gabíi?</i> How much did you spend when you treated us? <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bruised</tr>. <number>2</number> for a woman&apos;s chastity to be ruined. <number>3</number> s.t. which has been repeated till it bores. <i>Bun-ug nga áwit,</i> A tired tune. <number>4</number> misused, <tr>over-used</tr>. <i>Bun-ug nga pláka,</i> A worn-out record. <i>Bun-ug na ang bátà sa hináwuk,</i> The baby was smothered with kisses. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> <number>1</number> inflict bruises on. <i>Ayaw bun-úga ang kamátis,</i> Don&apos;t bruise the tomatoes. <number>2</number> ruin a girl&apos;s chastity.<i> Gibun-ug níya ang dalága únà bulagi,</i> He robbed the girl of her chastity before he left her. <number>3</number> cause s.o. to spend a large amount (slang). <i>Gibun-ug aku nílag dakù,</i> They made me spend a heck of a lot. <number>4</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> <tr>over-use</tr>, <tr>misuse</tr>. <i>Dílì giyud undángag gámit ang makinilya hangtud dílì mabun-ug,</i> He won&apos;t stop using the typewriter until it gets completely broken. <number>5</number> <formx>&mdash; ang hilánat</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> for fever to recur a number of times after partial recovery. <i>Mabun-ug ang hilánat nga dílì idiskansu,</i> If you do not rest, your fever will recur. <number>6</number> <formx>&mdash; ang tulug</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> for one&apos;s sleep to get interrupted a number of times. <i>Nabun-ug ang ákung tulug sa paghilakhílak sa bátà kagabíi,</i> My sleep was interrupted last night because the baby kept crying. <form>ma&N;-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> one who inflicts bruises.

<p id=3558><form>bun-ug<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>bul-ug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3559><form>búnuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b2]</itype> for rain to fall in torrents. <pos>n</pos> the torrential falling of the rain.

<p id=3560><form>búnul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>bruise</tr> s.t. <i>Ayaw bunúla ang kamátis,</i> Don&apos;t bruise the tomatoes. <i>Nabúnul na ang íyang láwas,</i> His body is badly bruised. <number>2</number> make soil, clay, firm and compact. <i>Nabúnul na ang daruhan nga inyung giagían kanúnay,</i> The field you keep walking over has become hard. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> infected subcutaneous injury due to a blow. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> for a bruise to become infected. <i>Nabunul ang ákung bun-ug,</i> My bruise turned into a boil. <number>2</number> <itype>[a4b4]</itype> get an infected bruise. <i>Gibunul (gibunulan) ákung pálad,</i> The palm of my hand got an infected bruise.

<p id=3561><form>bunulun</form> <pos>a</pos> for draft animals to be <tr>sluggish</tr>. <i>Bunulun kaáyu ning kabáwa nga idáru,</i> This carabao is too sluggish to use for plowing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become sluggish.

<p id=3562><form>búnus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> tie fibers end to end to form a continuous strand. <i>Bunúsun sà nímu ang abaka parabir hablúnun,</i> Tie the abaca fibers into long strands before weaving it. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> a shallow woven tray or basket where the strands, joined end to end are kept coiled before weaving.

<p id=3563><form>búnus<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bonus</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> give a bonus. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get a bonus.

<p id=3564><form>búnus<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>balúnus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3565><form>bunut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>coconut husk</tr> and shell. <i>Nusnúsig bunut ang salug,</i> Scrub the floor with a coconut husk. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> husk a coconut. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> scrub the floor with a coconut husk. <i>Bunuti ang salug,</i> Scrub the floor with a coconut husk. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> punish or <tr>maul</tr> one severely. <i>Ílang gibuntan ang kawatan,</i> They mauled the thief (lit. husked him).

<p id=3566><form>búnut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> pull s.t. that is in between s.t. <i>Hináyag búnut ang húnus,</i> Pull the drawers out slowly. <i>Ákung bunútun ang madyungan,</i> I&apos;ll draw a piece from the mahjong set. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>pull out</tr> s.t. rooted, stuck <pb n=174>in s.t. <i>Bunúta ang lansang,</i> Pull out the nail. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> pull s.t. out as if uprooting weeds. <i>Ayaw ibúnut (bunúta) pagkúhà ang igtalánum,</i> Don&apos;t just rip out the seedlings. <number>3</number> <itype>[AC12; a]</itype> draw a weapon. <i>Makigbúnut ku nímug pistulahay,</i> I&apos;ll duel you with pistols. <pos>n</pos> action of drawing. <form>&mdash; lábay</form> <pos>n</pos> action of drawing and discarding what was drawn in a game in order to allow the game to continue without anyone&apos;s dropping out. <form>&mdash; madyung</form> in mahjong, the action of getting a piece which enables one to go mahjong. <form>&mdash; paníngit</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>singit</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; supu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> manner of betting in mahjong whereby a player bets that his next draw will cause s.o. (himself or any other player) to get mahjong. <number>2</number> amount bet in this manner of betting.

<p id=3567><form>bunyag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>baptize</tr>. <i>Ugmà bunyági ákung anak,</i> My child will be christened tomorrow. <number>1a</number> acknowledge s.o.&apos;s new clothing or hair style by hitting or knocking the new thing. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; c]</itype> <tr>name</tr> s.t. <i>Mga katsílà ang mibunyag sa átung násud ug Pilipínas,</i> It was the Spaniards who called our country the Philippines. <pos>n</pos> <tr>baptism</tr>. <i>Way bunyag,</i> Unbaptized. <i>Inanak sa bunyag,</i> Godchild in baptism. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> baptismal font. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> garment worn by a child when baptized. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>christian</tr>, baptized person. <number>2</number> christian name. <i>Pidru ang ákung binunyágan,</i> My christian name is Peter. <form>ma&N;-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> one who baptizes.

<p id=3568><form>bunyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <pos>a</pos> protrusion of the bone outwards at the base of the big toe.

<p id=3569><form>bupanda</form> <xr>= <sc>pupanda</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3570><form>bupíti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>law offices</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> establish, make into a law office.

<p id=3571><form>burábug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> short and <tr>pudgy</tr>. <i>Bátang burábug,</i> A pudgy child. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> be, become pudgy.

<p id=3572><form>burábug<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> extraordinarily <tr>tall</tr>. <i>Burábug nga manuk,</i> A chicken taller than ordinary chickens. <i>Burábug nga táwu,</i> Man taller than ordinary men. <i>Burábug nga balay,</i> House taller than ordinary houses.

<p id=3573><form>buradur</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>draft</tr>, rough draft. <number>2</number> <tr>eraser</tr>.

<p id=3574><form>burak</form> <pos>n</pos> fleshy back part of the leg below the knee, the <tr>calf</tr> of the leg, esp. when it is overly prominent.

<p id=3575><form>burakburak</form> <xr>= <sc>bulukbuluk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3576><form>burarà</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>indiscreet</tr>, <tr>tactless</tr> in one&apos;s ways. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> do s.t. indiscreetly or tactlessly. <i>Akuy naúlaw dihang miburarà siya atubángan sa bisíta,</i> I was embarrassed when she talked tactlessly in front of the visitors. <i>Nakítà íyang panti kay nagburarà siyag lingkud,</i> You could see her panties because she sat in an indiscreet way.

<p id=3577><form>buraska</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>abundant</tr>, available in limitless quantity. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13B; c]</itype> be present in <tr>limitless</tr> quantities, do s.t. in plenteous quantities. <i>Maburaska (muburaska) ang búnga sa mangga kun paasuhan,</i> The mango tree will bear huge quantities of fruit if you fumigate it. <i>Magburaska tas káun,</i> Let&apos;s eat plenty. <i>Nagburaska ang kan-unun sa íla,</i> They have food in limitless quantities.

<p id=3578><form>buraw</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>stupid</tr>, having <tr>no sense</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become stupid.

<p id=3579><form>buraybúray</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. coral <tr>fishes</tr> (<bio>Pomecentridae</bio>), similar to <ix>ipus-ipus.</ix>

<p id=3580><form>burd<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>board</tr> in s.o.&apos;s house. <form>-ir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>boarder</tr>. <form>burding hawus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>boarding house</tr>.

<p id=3581><form>burd<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>board examination</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> take a board examination.

<p id=3582><form>burda</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>embroider</tr>, put a lace edge. <pos>n</pos> <tr>embroidery</tr>, <tr>lace edging</tr>. <form>-in-</form> s.t. written or drawn with embroidery. <form>binurdáhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>embroidered</tr> cloth. <number>2</number> <pos>a</pos> face with <tr>smallpox</tr> scars (humorous). <form>-du</form> <pos>a</pos> embroidered. <i>Burdádung (binurdang) dibúhu,</i> Embroidered design. <i>Burdádung (binurdáhang) panyù,</i> Embroidered handkerchief. <form>-dur(&rarr;)</form> instrument for embroidery. <form>-díra</form> <pos>n</pos> woman who embroiders.

<p id=3583><form>burdag</form> <xr>= <sc>buldug</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=3584><form>burdáhi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>travel</tr> in a certain direction. <i>Háin man tu siya miburdáhi?</i> Where did he head for? <form>Culu-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> travel back and forth. <i>Kanúnay siyang magbuburdáhi sa Manílà kay nigusyanti,</i> He travels back and forth to Manila because he is a <corr sic=buisnessman>businessman</corr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> pace back and forth. <i>May prublíma siya kay nagbuluburdáhi man sa sála,</i> He must have a problem because he is pacing in the living room.

<p id=3585><form>burd pit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>board feet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> measure in board feet. <i>Burdpíta nang yakal,</i> Measure that lumber in board feet.

<p id=3586><form>burdu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> go s.w. in a <tr>roundabout</tr>, not direct way. <i>Muburdu ta arun dì ta masagatà sa mga buguy,</i> Let&apos;s go round about so we don&apos;t run into the ruffians. <i>Iburdu (burdúhun) ang prusisyun sa tibuuk lungsud,</i> They will take the procession around the whole town. <number>1a</number> for a sailboat to go at a zigzag or diagonal course to ride against the wind. <number>2</number> <tr>roam</tr>, <tr>walk about</tr>. <i>Nagburdu silag panangkù,</i> They went out to steal palm toddy. <i>Iburdu ning mga tinda,</i> Go around to sell these goods.

<p id=3587><form>burdug</form> <xr>= <sc>buldug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3588><form>burdun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>string</tr> in a string instrument which has fine magnetic copper wire wound around it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put in such a bass string.

<p id=3589><form>burgahuy</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>wandering</tr>, <tr>bumming</tr> around, esp. in a shiftless carefree way. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> <tr>wander</tr>, <pb n=175>usually in a shiftless, carefree way. <i>Nagburgahuy lang siya kay nawad-an sa trabáhu,</i> He is just roaming about because he lost his job. <i>Nagburgahuy ákung hunàhúnà. Wà ku kapamatì sa liksiyun,</i> My thoughts were wandering. I didn&apos;t listen to the lesson. <i>Magkaburgahuy ning batáag patuyángan sa gustu,</i> This child is going to get more shiftless if he gets whatever he wants.

<p id=3590><form>burgis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tough</tr>, <tr>thug</tr>. <i>Mga burgis ang gipanuhúlan sa pulitiku,</i> The politician hired thugs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become a tough.

<p id=3591><form>burídu</form> <xr>= <sc>aburídu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3592><form>burilyus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bowling pin</tr>.

<p id=3593><form>buringug</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dumb</tr>, <tr>stupid</tr>. <i>Buringug ka tingáli kay dúgay mang makasabut,</i> You must be dumb because you can&apos;t understand easily. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> be, become dumb, stupid.

<p id=3594><form>buringut</form> <pos>a</pos> for the face to be <tr>ugly</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be ugly. <i>Nagkaburingut íyang dagway sa nagkalagas siya,</i> She is getting uglier as she gets older.

<p id=3595><form>buríring</form> <pos>n</pos> general name for <tr>puffer fishes</tr>.

<p id=3596><form>buriskas</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. card game similar to whist, but played by any number of people and in which the deck is dealt out bit at a time rather than all at once. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C2; a2]</itype> play <ix>buriskas.</ix>

<p id=3597><form>búrit</form> <pos>a</pos> braggart, offensively <tr>boastful</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become offensively boastful.

<p id=3598><form>burlas</form> <pos>n</pos> artificial <tr>tassel</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make into a tassel. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> ornament with tassels. <i>Giburlásan níya ang bandíra,</i> He ornamented the flag with tassels.

<p id=3599><form>burlis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>burlesque</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> do burlesque. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> be <tr>naked</tr>. <i>Nagburlis siyang nalígù,</i> She took a bath naked.

<p id=3600><form>burnay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible, small white venus clam. <form>ismayling &mdash;</form> grinning stupidly (so called because the <ix>burnay</ix> are often slightly open even when alive). <i>Unsa ka gud dihà nga nagngisi ka man. Mu ra ka lag ismayling burnay,</i> Why are you grinning there like an oaf (with a smile that looks like a clam)?

<p id=3601><form>burnir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>burner</tr> of a stove, lamp, etc.

<p id=3602><form>burniyu</form> <xr>= <sc>buluníyu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3603><form>bursa</form> <xr>= <sc>bulsa</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3604><form>bursigi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>army boots</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, make into army boots.

<p id=3605><form>búru<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> cover s.t. all over with salt, sugar, flour, etc. <i>Burúha (burúhi) sa asin ang karni,</i> Put a lot of salt on the meat. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> serve, eat fish with lots of salt. <pos>n</pos> small dried fish with more salt than the ordinary. <form>-in-</form> <xr>= <sc>búru</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> &dagger;

<p id=3606><form>búru<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bureau</tr>, <tr>governmental department</tr>.

<p id=3607><form>burud</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fresh-water fish.

<p id=3608><form>burúka</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>court case</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>trouble</tr>, <tr>argument</tr>. <i>Unsay ímung gilahugláhug dinhi. Burúka?</i> What are you roving around here for? You want trouble? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; a2b3]</itype> <number>1</number> have, make a court case. <i>Ayaw burukáha ang inyung disgustu,</i> Don&apos;t make your quarrel into a court case. <number>2</number> make a fuss about s.t. <i>Pára kindi, inyu pa giyung burukáhan?</i> Are you going to make a federal case out of the candy? <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a3]</itype> bring out some wrong-doing. <i>Miburúka ang bátà nga naghilabut ang mutsatsa,</i> The child informed us that the maid had been touching our things.

<p id=3609><form>burukburuk</form> <xr>= <sc>bulukbuluk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3610><form>burukinta</form> <xr>= <sc>burukintu</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=3611><form>burukintu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>quarrelsome</tr>, quick to take offense. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become quarrelsome, <tr>troublesome</tr>.

<p id=3612><form>burul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dull</tr>, not sharp. <number>2</number> dull, <tr>stupid</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a2]</itype> for an instrument to become dull. <pos>n</pos> round-tipped, dull-bladed knife for weeding.

<p id=3613><form>burul<sub>2</sub>, búrul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b5]</itype> shave the hair on the head off. <i>Burúlun (burúlan) nátù ang ímung úlu,</i> Let&apos;s shave your head. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bald</tr>, devoid of growth. <i>Ang táwung burul way buhuk,</i> A bald-headed man has no hair. <i>Burul na ang kabukíran nga gisigíhag kaíngin,</i> The mountains have been <tr>denuded</tr> by slash and burn agriculture.

<p id=3614><form>burunda</form> <xr>= <sc>brunda</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3615><form>burung</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>shy</tr> and <tr>introverted</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>ignorant</tr> of the ways of the world. <i>Tungud sa kaburung giílad siya,</i> He was swindled because he was so ignorant. <number>3</number> <tr>stupid</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> be shy. <i>Nagburung ka lang dì ka kamaung makig-atúbang ug táwu,</i> You&apos;re nothing but a wallflower. You don&apos;t know how to face people. <number>2</number> be ignorant. <number>3</number> be stupid.

<p id=3616><form>buruníyu</form> <xr>= <sc>buluníyu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3617><form>burus</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pregnant</tr>. <number>2</number> for rice to form grains in the panicle. <number>3</number> for borrowed things to have been kept too long. <i>Burus na ang librung ímung gihuwaman,</i> You&apos;ve kept the book you borrowed till it got pregnant. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become pregnant. <i>Patakáling anay arun muburus (maburus),</i> Mate the sow so she will become pregnant. <number>1a</number> <formx>&mdash; sa pasálig</formx> be fooled by assurances. <i>Daghan na ang miburus sa pasálig niánang pulitiku,</i> Lots of people have been fooled by the promises of that politician. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> have in one&apos;s womb. <number>3</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for rice to form in the panicle. <number>4</number> <itype>[B]</itype> keep borrowed things too long.

<p id=3618><form>búrut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2S3]</itype> <tr>inflate</tr>, <tr>swell</tr>, esp. into a rounded shape. <i>Mibúrut ang láyag sa sakayan,</i> The sail of the boat billowed out. <i>Pistúla nang nagburut sa íyang kílid,</i> That is a <pb n=176>pistol that is bulging at his side. <i>Butangig yílu ang bun-ug arun dì makabúrut,</i> Put ice on the bruise so it won&apos;t swell. <number>2</number> <itype>[B246]</itype> be, become pregnant (slang). <i>Mibúrut nang ákung asáwa,</i> My wife is pregnant. <number>3</number> <itype>[B46]</itype> be, become rich (slang). <i>Mubúrut kag dalig mag-ismaglir ka,</i> You&apos;ll soon get rich if you engage in smuggling. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <number>1</number> blow s.t. up, make s.t. swell. <number>2</number> <tr>flatter</tr>, <tr>inflate</tr> s.o.&apos;s pride. <i>Nagpabúrut na sad siya sa íyang kaugalíngun,</i> He is blowing himself up again. <pos>n</pos> <tr>balloon</tr>. <form>burutburut</form> <pos>n</pos> crevalles with a pronounced curve outward on the ventral portion: <bio>Caranx gymnostethoides</bio>.

<p id=3619><form>burúwas</form> <xr>= <sc>brúwa</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3620><form>búruy</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. purple jellyfish, hemispherical in shape, reaching 8&Prime; in diameter. <number>2</number> general name for jellyfish.

<p id=3621><form>bus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bus</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> take a bus.

<p id=3622><form>bus<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>boss</tr> (slang). <i>Si Máma muy bus sa ámù,</i> Mother is the boss in our family. <number>2</number> familiar term of address. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> call s.o. boss. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> have a boss. <i>Pait kaáyu ning makabus tag daugdaugan,</i> It&apos;s awful to have a mean boss.

<p id=3623><form>bus<sub>3</sub>, bús</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> exclamation used to drive away pigs. <number>2</number> exclamation used to drive s.o. away (joking or derogatory). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> say <ix>bus</ix> to drive away.

<p id=3624><form>bús<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>bulus<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3625><form>búsa, búsà</form> <tr>therefore</tr>, <tr>consequently</tr>. <i>Mamatay ka. Búsà, pag-ampù,</i> You are going to die. So pray.

<p id=3626><form>busagak, buságak</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sound of liquid flowing. <number>2</number> <tr>flowing liquid</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> for liquids to flow with noise. <i>Nagbusagak ang sandayung,</i> The gutter is making a rushing sound. <number>2</number> flow in plentiful amounts, spoutingly or continuously. <i>Mibuságak ang dugù sa kílid sa gidunggab,</i> Blood flowed from the side of the man that was stabbed.

<p id=3627><form>busak</form> <pos>a</pos> be all over s.t., <tr>abundant</tr> in quantity. <i>Busak sa isdà ning dagáta,</i> Fish <tr>abound</tr> in these seas. <i>Ang ámung yútà busak sa lubi,</i> All of our land is planted with coconuts. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>fill</tr> s.t. to capacity or cover s.t. all over with s.t. <i>Gibusak námug kamúti ang sáku,</i> We filled the sack with sweet potatoes. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for s.t. to grow in abundance. <i>Mibusak (nabusak) ang sagbut tungud sa ulan,</i> The weeds grow lushly because of the rain. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be abundant. <i>Nagbúsak run ang mais búsà barátu,</i> Corn is abundant now. That&apos;s why it&apos;s cheap. <form>hi&N;-(&larr;)</form> <itype>[B3N; b6]</itype> for plants to bear in abundance. <i>Wà makahimúsak (makapanghimúsak) ang humay kay wà man abunúhi,</i> The rice did not bear in abundance because it wasn&apos;t fertilized. <pos>n</pos> time when plants bear the most, height of the harvest season.

<p id=3628><form>busal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>muzzle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> apply a muzzle. <i>Busali ang kábaw arun dì kakaun sa mais,</i> Put a muzzle on the carabao so it can&apos;t eat the corn.

<p id=3629><form>busaug</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>floor joist</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put, make into a floor joist.

<p id=3630><form>búsaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>glutton</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become a glutton. <i>Nabúsaw siya human makatilawg gútum,</i> He became a glutton after having experienced hunger.

<p id=3631><form>búsaw<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> do s.t. to make a magical trick fail. <i>Dúnay nagbúsaw sa mádyik kay wà man makwarta ang papil,</i> S.o. is spoiling the magic act because the paper didn&apos;t turn into money.

<p id=3632><form>bus-aw</form> <pos>n</pos> condition of frequent, urgent urination but by small quantities. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> get this condition. <i>Ságad bus-awun ang mabdus,</i> Pregnant women tend to have frequent urination.

<p id=3633><form>busáwus</form> <xr>= <sc>dusáus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3634><form>busay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>waterfall</tr>.

<p id=3635><form>busbus<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>balusbus</sc>.</xr> <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>defecate</tr> (slang). <i>Iplás ang kasilyas humag pamusbus,</i> Flush the toilet after using it.

<p id=3636><form>busbus<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>alibusbus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3637><form>busdak</form> <xr>= <sc>pusdak</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3638><form>busdik</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>break open</tr> a sack or the like that is filled. <i>Nabusdik ang balun,</i> The balloon burst.<i> Busdíki ang sáku. Tan-áwa kun unsay klási sa humay,</i> Punch a hole in the sack and see what k.o. rice it is. <number>2</number> <itype>[b126]</itype> be filled to satiety. <i>Makabusdik giyud ang inyung gidálit,</i> You served a most filling dinner. <pos>a</pos> full to bursting after eating.

<p id=3639><form>busdù</form> <xr>= <sc>pusdù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3640><form>búsi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <tr>survive</tr>, last to be of some value. <i>Dílì mabúsi ang kaminyúung way pagsinabtanay,</i> A marriage without understanding cannot survive. <i>Usa ray nabúsi sa mga baktin,</i> Only one piglet survived. <i>Way mabúsi sa íyang swildu kay gastadur,</i> Nothing is left of his salary because he is a spendthrift. <i>Dílì mabúsi ang trabáhung biyàbiyáan,</i> Work that you don&apos;t keep after will not result in anything.

<p id=3641><form>busíad, busíkad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B23(1)4]</itype> for s.t. to spread open and out leaving a gap. <i>Mibusíkad íyang sinínà kay huut ug nakítà íyang púsud,</i> His shirt was half open in the front because it was too tight, and you could see his navel. <i>Haúnang papkurn ug makabusíkad na,</i> Take the popcorn off the fire when it has <tr>burst</tr> open. <i>Mibusíkad ang sumbuhan sa paltik pagbutu,</i> The barrel of the rifle burst when it was fired. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> small grass bearing several <pb n=177>spread out spikelets: <bio>Cyperus spp</bio>. The spikelets are used as medicine for fever.

<p id=3642><form>busílak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S]</itype> <tr>radiate</tr> light, esp. the sun. <i>Mata na kay mibusílak na ang adlaw,</i> Wake up because the sun is shining brightly. <i>Nagbusílak sa kalípay ang íyang nawung,</i> His face was beaming with happiness. <pos>n</pos> light radiated, sun&apos;s rays.

<p id=3643><form>busína</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>auto horn</tr>. <number>2</number> sound produced by such a horn. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>honk</tr> the horn. <i>Ibusína ug kusug arun mabátì sa ímung ikasúgat,</i> Blow the horn loud so anyone coming your way will hear it.

<p id=3644><form>*búsing</form> <form>na-, gi-</form> be <tr>out of one&apos;s mind</tr>. <i>Gibúsing (nabúsing) ka dihà?</i> Are you out of your mind?

<p id=3645><form>busing-ut</form> <pos>a</pos> having a <tr>long face</tr>. <pos>n</pos> sour expression on the face. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B346; c1]</itype> have a long face because of displeasure. <i>Ayaw busing-úta (ibusing-ut) nang hitsúra mug makig-atúbang nákù,</i> Get that frown off your face when you talk to me.

<p id=3646><form>busíru</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>búsu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3647><form>busìsì</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a <tr>laceration</tr>, esp. in a surface that is tight due to fullness. <i>Busìsíun sa duktur ímung hubag,</i> The doctor will slit your boil. <i>Busìsía ang sáku arun muágas ang humay,</i> Slit the sack so the rice will spill. <number>2</number> lay out in the open some malicious gossip that has long lain buried. <i>Gibusìsì níya ang húgawng kagahápun sa íyang kaáway,</i> He dug out the dirty secrets of his enemy&apos;s past. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>pressure</tr> s.o. to speed up work. <i>Busìsía siya arun mahuman,</i> Hurry her up so it will get done. <form>busìsíru</form> <pos>a</pos> always putting pressure on people to speed up the work.

<p id=3648><form>buskad<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>bukhad</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; ug ngábil</form> <tr>thick-lipped</tr>. <form>-íra</form> <pos>a</pos> given to spreading <tr>gossip</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125]</itype> get to be a gossip.

<p id=3649><form>buskad<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>buskag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3650><form>buskag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB26; a]</itype> <tr>undo</tr>, <tr>untie</tr> s.t., esp. so that the contents spread; for s.t. wrapped or tied up to open. <i>Mibuskag ang tákung ug migímaw ang mga bungul sa lubi,</i> The coconut sheath opened and its buds spread out beneath. <i>Nabuskag ang íyang bálun,</i> His lunch broke open allowing the contents to spread out. <i>Makabuskag ka ba sa balitùtù?</i> Can you untie the knot? <number>2</number> for hair neatly groomed to get <tr>dishevelled</tr>. <i>Nabuskag íyang hinápay sa hángin,</i> Her hair got all dishevelled in the wind. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> expose s.o.&apos;s secret. <i>Akuy mubuskag sa makauúlaw mung tinagúan,</i> I will expose your shameful secret.

<p id=3651><form>busla</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>confront</tr> s.o. to belie his assertion. <i>Ákù siyang gibusla (gibusláhan) arun matin-aw ang tanan,</i> I confronted her so that everything would be cleared. <form>buslahay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> <tr>confront</tr> each other to disclaim what each said.

<p id=3652><form>buslung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; ab5]</itype> <tr>look at</tr> s.t. squarely without hiding that one is looking. <i>Si Ána ra giyuy nakabuslung kay nag-antipára mag dikulur,</i> Ana was the only one who was able to get a good look because she was wearing dark glasses. <i>Buslungi (buslunga) arun makahibalu mug unsay riaksiyun níya,</i> Look at him square in the face so you will see what his reaction is.

<p id=3653><form>buslut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P; b5]</itype> <tr>make a hole</tr>. <i>Ayaw buslúta ang púyu,</i> Don&apos;t punch a hole in the paper bag. <i>Buslúti ang láta sa gátas,</i> Punch a hole on the milk can. <number>1a</number> knock down bowling pins in a row, thus making a hole in the set-up. <number>2</number> <itype>[A123P; a12]</itype> <formx>&mdash; sa bulsa</formx> make one flat broke. <i>Buslútun nímu ang ákung bulsa?</i> You want to drive me to the poorhouse? <number>3</number> <itype>[A]</itype> break in a virgin. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>hole</tr> through s.t. <i>Dakug buslut ang ákung midyas,</i> My socks have a big hole in them. <number>2</number> knocking down of pins in a row in bowling. <form>&mdash; sa íyang ina</form> euphemism for <xr><sc>bilat sa íyang ina</sc>.</xr> <form>(&rarr;)</form> <number>1</number> having a hole in it. <i>Busl&ucaron;t nga takurì,</i> Kettle with a hole in it. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; ug bulsa</formx> <tr>penniless</tr>. <number>3</number> no longer a virgin. <number>4</number> failing to catch, return a ball, failing to strike the mark. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> instrument for punching holes.

<p id=3654><form>busngal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> cut short s.o. talking by asserting the contrary, often in an impertinent way. <i>Patákà ka lang dihag pamusngal,</i> How dare you interrupt like that? <i>Busngálun nátù ang íyang hambug,</i> Let&apos;s cut his big talk short.

<p id=3655><form>busngì</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>buck-toothed</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> get buck teeth. <i>Ang pagsinupsup sa kumagkù mauy nakabusngì (nakapabusngì) sa bátà,</i> Thumbsucking made the child buck-toothed.

<p id=3656><form>bustipul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pith helmet.</tr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear a pith helmet.

<p id=3657><form>bustu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bust</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c16]</itype> make a representation in bust.

<p id=3658><form>búsu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>dive</tr>, esp. using diving paraphernalia. <i>Busúhun níla ang nawálang káha diyíru,</i> They will dive for the steel safe that sunk. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a2]</itype> be a <tr>diver</tr> in net fishing. <number>3</number> <itype>[AN; a2]</itype> peep to get sexual pleasure. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> paraphernalia for diving. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>busíru</sc>.</xr> <form>busíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> person in net fishing operations who dives to keep the net repaired and collect the catch. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> be, become the <ix>busíru.</ix>

<p id=3659><form>busug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>full</tr>, <tr>sated</tr>. <i>Busug na ku. Dì na ku layhang mukáun,</i> I am full, I don&apos;t feel like <pb n=178>eating any more. <i>Busug run ang íyang pitáka kay bag-ung giswilduan,</i> His wallet is full now because he has just received his salary. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a]</itype> fill oneself to satisfy. <i>Magbusug ku kay lamì ang sud-an,</i> I&apos;ll eat my fill because the food is tasty. <i>Busgun kung ákung mga mata pagtan-aw sa ímung katahum,</i> I&apos;ll let my eyes have their fill in gazing at your beauty. <form>way ka-un, kabulusgun</form> without ever getting satiated.

<p id=3660><form>busug<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>fluff up</tr> cotton or kapok in preparation for further use. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fluffer of cotton or kapok fibers. <number>2a</number> bow for shooting arrows (so called from the cotton fluffer which is a small bow)<corr>.</corr> <number>2b</number> a tube with a tie at the end which propels a spear in spear fishing.

<p id=3661><form>búsug</form> <pos>n</pos> downward movement of the baby during labor. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for the baby to move downwards during labor. <i>Nagbúsug na ang bátà. Dad-a siya sa uspital,</i> The baby is struggling to come out. Bring her to the hospital.

<p id=3662><form>bus-uk</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>compact</tr>, <tr>dense</tr> of flesh. <i>Bus-uk ug brásu,</i> With firm muscles. <number>2</number> for rice or corn to be cooked into hard clumps from lack of water. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> be compact, full. <number>2</number> for rice or corn to be cooked into clumps. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>firmness</tr>, compactness. <number>2</number> old variety of paddy rice producing white, round grains. <number>3</number> variety of round <ix>úbi</ix> with white and firm flesh.

<p id=3663><form>busun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mailbox</tr> into which mail is dropped for collection. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> drop a letter in a mailbox. <i>Gibusun nákung sulat,</i> I dropped the letter in the mailbox.

<p id=3664><form>búsung</form> <pos>n</pos> the punishment inflicted by God on s.o. for misusing the blessings bestowed on him. The punishment usually consists of deprivation of the thing which had been bestowed by God. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> <number>1</number> earn God&apos;s punishment for being wasteful. <i>Busúngun ka sa Diyus sa ímung kausikan,</i> God will punish you for being wasteful. <number>2</number> get stomach pains from overeating. <i>Busúngun kag magpalábi kag káun,</i> You will have stomach pains if you overeat.

<p id=3665><form>buswak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B46]</itype> for the pod containing grains to open prior to the development of the grains. <number>2</number> <itype>[B236]</itype> <tr>burst forth</tr>, show itself from a place where it was covered. <i>Inigbuswak sa adlaw gíkan sa luyung bungtud,</i> When the sun comes out from behind the mountain. <i>Mibuswak sa íyang mga ngábil ang kalit nga pahiyum,</i> A sudden smile flashed onto her lips. <number>3</number> for a girl to grow to full womanhood.

<p id=3666><form>buswang</form> <pos>n</pos> strong and sudden rush of water. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>flood</tr> out strongly. <i>Mibuswang ang túbig sa pagkagubà sa dakung tangki,</i> The water rushed out when the tank broke.

<p id=3667><form>buswat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>lift</tr> s.t. heavy by putting the arms underneath it. <i>Duha ka táwu ang nagbuswat sa samarun,</i> Two men lifted the wounded person. <i>Ákù siyang buswátun pagtabuk sa sapà,</i> I&apos;ll carry her across the river.

<p id=3668><form>busyad</form> <pos>a</pos> sticking-out <tr>stomach</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> for the stomach to stick out. <i>Ayaw busyára (ibusyad) ang ímung tiyan,</i> Don&apos;t let your stomach stick out.

<p id=3669><form>busyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>goiter</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4b4]</itype> have a goiter. <i>Gibusyuhan (gibusyu) siya,</i> She has a goiter.

<p id=3670><form>bút</form> <xr>= <sc>balyákag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3671><form>búta</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b]</itype> <tr>blind</tr>. <i>Gibutáan sa gugma,</i> Blinded by love. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> blind. <form>(&rarr;) bungul</form> blind and <tr>deaf</tr>. <form>paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> pay no heed to s.t. <i>Ayaw pakabutabunguli ang ákung tambag,</i> Do not disregard my advice. <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> in a blind manner. <form>butabúta</form> k.o. small <tr>swift</tr> commonly nesting in buildings and caves, producing edible nests: <bio>Collocalia troglodytes</bio>. <form>butabuta</form> <number>1</number> k.o. tree of open waste places with milky sap which causes blindness. <number>2</number> k.o. <tr>sorcery</tr> which causes the victim to go blind. <number>2a</number> k.o. seashell used in performing this sorcery. <number>3</number> k.o. rock shell.

<p id=3672><form>bútad</form> <xr>= <sc>bítad</sc>.</xr>

<!-- butáka_2 in addenda, page 1148 -->

<p id=3673><form>butáka<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chaise</tr> lounge. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a chaise lounge.

<p id=3674><form>butakal</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> male <tr>pig</tr>. <number>2</number> man with a voracious sex appetite. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; sa gubirnu</formx> man who will have sex with any woman at all. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> <tr>raise</tr> a male pig for breeding. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> run after women voraciously. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> action of being a <tr>philanderer</tr>. <form>-in-, hi&N;-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>piglet</tr> given to the owner of a stud as his share.

<p id=3675><form>butalhag</form> <pos>a</pos> one who can&apos;t see things under his nose. <i>Náa ay! Kabutalhag nímu,</i> There it is! You must be blind. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> unable to find things right in front of the eyes.

<p id=3676><form>butalid</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>sea cucumber</tr> (<ix>balat</ix>).

<p id=3677><form>butálid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b(1)]</itype> <tr>fall down</tr> flat, be <tr>lying</tr> flat after falling. <i>Mibutálid (nabutálid) ang kuntra,</i> The opponent was knocked down. <i>Hubug nga nagbutálid sa karsáda,</i> A drunk lying in the street.

<p id=3678><form>butaltal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for s.t. bulky to be <tr>lying</tr> in an ungainly way. <i>Mibutaltal si Tambuk sa katri,</i> Fatso is sprawled on the bed. <i>Kuháa ang kaban nga nagbutaltal sa hawanan,</i> Get rid of this trunk sitting in the middle of the room.

<p id=3679><form>butalù</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) a <tr>poor shot</tr>. <i>Butalù siya. Dì makaigù bísag duul,</i> He&apos;s a poor shot. <pb n=179>He can&apos;t hit a target even if it&apos;s near. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> get to be a poor shot.

<p id=3680><form>butang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> put down, in, on. <i>Ikaw bay mubutang sa ákung lip-istik?</i> Will you put my lipstick on me? <i>Butangan nátug utlánan ang átung pagkaamígu,</i> Let&apos;s set limits to our friendship. <i>Súkang gibutangag lamas,</i> Vinegar with spices put in it. <i>Ibutang nà,</i> Put that down. <i>Ibutang sa lista ang ákung útang,</i> Put my debts in the list. <i>Walà ikabutang si Lína sa bayli,</i> Lena could not sit down at the dance. <number>2</number> pay for s.t. in advance. <i>Arun dílì ibaligyag láin gibutangan kug diyis,</i> I put ten down so that he wouldn&apos;t sell it to anyone else. <number>2a</number> put up money or goods for the harvest or anything else produced. <i>Magbutang kug panaptun pára sa panúig,</i> I put up cloth to be repaid from the harvest. <number>2b</number> put up capital, money for a bond. <i>Usa ka líbu ákung gibutang sa tindáhan,</i> I invested one thousand in the store. <number>3</number> <formx>ibutang ta, nátù</formx> supposing it&apos;s like this way. <i>Ibutang tag kinyintus, palitun ba nímu?</i> Let&apos;s say it&apos;s 500 pesos. Will you buy it? <number>4</number> <formx>ibutang sa lugar</formx> do at the proper time. <i>Ibutang sa lugar ang pag-inum,</i> Drink at the proper time. <number>5</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> hit. <i>Butangan ku siya sa nawung,</i> I will hit him in the face. <pos>n</pos> money put down as advance payment. <form>butangbutang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make false accusations. <i>Gibutangbutángan ba ku nímung nangáwat?</i> Are you trying to accuse me of stealing? <pos>n</pos> false accusations. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> put things. <number>2</number> put s.t. on oneself. <i>Mamutang kug lip-istik,</i> I will put lipstick on. <form>hi&N;-/ha&N;-, hi&N;-/ha&N;-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AP1B1256; b6]</itype> be situated, located. <i>Si Bíbi naghimútag (nagpahimútag) lingkud sa silya,</i> Bebe settled down comfortably in the chair. <i>Ang ílang balay náa mahimutang sa ámung duul,</i> Their house is situated near ours. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be classified as. <i>Kining suwáta mahimutang sa sikun klas,</i> This letter is classified as second class. <number>3</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be in peace. <i>Dílì ku mahimutang hangtud dílì mahuman ang ákung trabáhu,</i> I won&apos;t be in peace until I finish my work. <form>pahi&N;-/paha&N;-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> put s.t. s.w. carefully. <i>Gipahimútang ang mga pagkáun sa pridyidir,</i> The food was put away carefully in the frigidaire. <number>2</number> place s.o. in a job. <i>Gipahimútang siya sa munisipyu,</i> He was given a job in City hall. <form>pahamtang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> impose a punishment. <i>Pahamtángan kag bug-at nga sílut,</i> Heavy punishment will be imposed on you. <number>2</number> <itype>[b]</itype> spend money on s.t. <i>Unsay ímung gipahamtángan sa ímung sápì?</i> What did you spend your money on? <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> make charges or accusations, usually maliciously. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>punishment</tr> imposed. <number>2</number> malicious accusation made against s.o. <i>Ang ílang mga pahamtang kanákù walay kapasikáran,</i> Their charges against me are without basis. <form>butangíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ruffian</tr>, <tr>toughie</tr>. <form>ka-</form> <xr>= <sc>pagka- 2, 3</sc>.</xr> <form>kahimtang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> way things are, situation. <i>Pait ang kahimtang sa ámù human sa bagyu,</i> Very difficult conditions obtained in our town after the typhoon. <number>2</number> <tr>circumstances</tr>. <i>Ang kahimtang sa kásu,</i> The circumstances surrounding the case. <form>pagka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> way s.t. is situated. <number>2</number> <tr>financial situation</tr>. <i>Lisud ang ámung pagkabutang karun,</i> We are in a bad financial situation now. <number>3</number> one&apos;s <tr>situation</tr> in general. <number>4</number> <formx>unsang -a</formx> how did it come about. <i>Naunsang pagkabutánga nga wà ka mamatay?</i> How did it come to be that you didn&apos;t die?&dagger;

<p id=3681><form>butang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>thing</tr>. <i>Usa ra ka butang ang kúwang: kwarta,</i> Only one thing is lacking: money. <form>usa ka &mdash;</form> <tr>sexual action</tr> (euphemism). <i>Ampíngi giyud ang usa ka butang,</i> Be very careful with sex. <form>kabtang, kabtángan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>possessions</tr>, <tr>property</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> <tr>acquire</tr> property. <form>pagka-</form> <xr>= <sc>kabtángan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3682><form>butanika</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>botany</tr>.

<p id=3683><form>butaniku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>botanist</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> become a botanist.

<p id=3684><form>butanti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>voter</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become a voter.

<p id=3685><form>butar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> cast a <tr>vote</tr>, <tr>ballot</tr> for.&dagger;

<p id=3686><form>bútas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>boot</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, make into boots. <form>limpiya &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bootblack</tr>.

<p id=3687><form>bútas<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ceremony</tr> similar to the <ix>diwáta</ix> where unsalted food is offered to the spirits to insure good harvest, give thanks, or diagnose an illness. It differs from the <ix>diwáta</ix> in that the participation of the people affected is part of the ceremony. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> perform this ceremony.

<p id=3688><form>butasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vote</tr>, act of <tr>voting</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c16]</itype> put to a vote. <i>Ug butasyunun (ibutasiyun) ni sigúrung dì mahinayun,</i> If it is put to a vote, it won&apos;t go through.

<p id=3689><form>butay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stalk</tr> to which coconuts attach.

<p id=3690><form>butay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bow tie</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> make, wear a bow tie.

<p id=3691><form>butay-ad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> be <tr>lying</tr> flat on the back. <i>Butay-ára (ibutay-ad) paghigdà ang <corr sic="báta">bátà</corr>,</i> Lay the baby on its back.

<p id=3692><form>butbut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lie</tr>, <tr>boast</tr> of s.t. untrue (coarse). <form>&mdash; pula</form> a glaring lie (so called from the homonymy with <bx>butbut<sub>2</sub></bx>). <form>Miuk-uk ang &mdash;</form> back out from a lie (lit. for the hemorrhoids to recede). <i>Miuk-uk ang butbut pagdumílì níya sa pagkanta,</i> He was proven a braggart when he refused to sing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> tell a lie. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> tell a lie. <i>Ayaw kug pamutbúti (butbúti),</i> Don&apos;t lie to me. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>liar</tr>.

<pb n=180>

<p id=3693><form>butbut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the red <tr>flesh of the rectum</tr> which comes out in <tr>childbirth</tr> or when one has <tr>constipation</tr>. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>búwà<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr> <number>3</number> <tr>sea anemone</tr>, black with red center. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> suffer from <ix>butbut.</ix> <number>2</number> <itype>[B1236]</itype> defecate. <i>Nakabutbut siya sa íyang karsúnis,</i> He defecated in his pants. <i>Nagbutbut siya sa kasilyas,</i> He&apos;s defecating in the bathroom.

<p id=3694><form>butbut<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>balusbus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3695><form>buthù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>appear</tr> from nowhere. <i>Mu ra kag gibuthuag (gibuthúag) kalag,</i> You look as if you saw a ghost. <number>2</number> have one&apos;s monthly period.

<p id=3696><form>buti</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>smallpox</tr>. <number>2</number> k.o. contagious swine <tr>disease</tr> characterized by high fever and tiny eruptions at the base of the tongue exuding a sticky fluid. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>get smallpox</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>get swine disease</tr>. <number>3</number> <itype>[a4b4]</itype> be covered with s.t. like smallpox scars. <i>Mau nay dátù nímu nga gibuti sa útang?</i> Do you call him rich when he has debts left and right? <i>Lángit nga gibuti sa mga bitúun,</i> Skies full of stars. <form>butihun</form> <pos>a</pos> having lots of <tr>pockmarks</tr> in the face.

<p id=3697><form>búti<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rowboat</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> take a rowboat s.w. <i>Ang mga pasahírung wà makabúti nangalúmus,</i> The passengers who couldn&apos;t get into the lifeboats drowned.

<p id=3698><form>búti<sub>2</sub></form> <tr>maybe</tr>, probably. <i>Muanhi búti si Insi,</i> Maybe Auntie will come.

<p id=3699><form>butíbut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>sprinkle</tr> powder on s.t. with the thumb and forefinger. <i>Butibútig sulpa ang samad,</i> Sprinkle sulfa on your wound.

<p id=3700><form>butig<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>butlig</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3701><form>butig<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>bisul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3702><form>butígis</form> <pos>n</pos> tiny, white <tr>bivalve</tr>, triangular in shape with longitudinal striae.

<p id=3703><form>butíka</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>drug store</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> establish, make into a drug store.

<p id=3704><form>butikaryu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pharmacist</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> be, make into a druggist.

<p id=3705><form>butíkug</form> <xr>= <sc>buríring</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3706><form>butíkul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. <tr>corn disease</tr> characterized by rust-like spores on the kernels, rendering the grain powdery. <number>2</number> tiny grains that grow in the intestines of pigs, hampering their growth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be <tr>afflicted</tr> with corn rot, intestinal tumors. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> of a type having corn rot, intestinal tumors. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be, become corn or a pig of this sort.

<p id=3707><form>bútil</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>full</tr>, <tr>sated</tr> in eating (coarse). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a2]</itype> fill oneself up, be full. <i>Magbútil kug maáyu arun dì ku gutmun dáyun,</i> I&apos;ll fill myself up so that I won&apos;t feel hungry early. <i>Wà pa ka mabútil, ganíha ka pang kumáun,</i> You are not satisfied yet? You have been eating for some time now. <form>pagka-, ka-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>satiation</tr>. <i>Mu ra siyag way kabutilun (pagkabutil) kay sígi lag káun,</i> He never seems to get satisfied. He just eats and eats.

<p id=3708><form>butilus</form> <pos>a</pos> doing things <tr>poorly</tr>. <i>Dì ka giyud makaigù sa ímung targit? Butilus gud nímu!</i> Can&apos;t you ever hit your target? What a poor shot you are!

<p id=3709><form>butilya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bottle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> put s.t. in bottles. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. <tr>bottled</tr>, esp. alcoholic drinks. <number>2</number> name of plants that are bottle-shaped.

<p id=3710><form>búting</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12C2; b6]</itype> <tr>go boating</tr>. <pos>n</pos> <tr>boating</tr> for leisure.

<p id=3711><form>butingting</form> <pos>a</pos> for rice sheaths to be enlarged prior to blossoming. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for rice sheaths to swell prior to blossoming.

<p id=3712><form>butírik</form> <pos>a</pos> having an <tr>expanded stomach</tr>. <i>Butírik kaáyu siyag tiyan kay dakug káun,</i> He has a big stomach because he eats too much. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6]</itype> <number>1</number> for the stomach to be expanded. <i>Mibutírik man si Kurding. Kinsa kahay nakapaburus?</i> Cording&apos;s stomach is sticking out. Who got her pregnant? <number>2</number> <tr>grow rich</tr>. <i>Kay nakapangawkaw sa surplas, mibutírik dáyun,</i> Because he got his hands on some army surplus he grew rich.

<p id=3713><form>butirus</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bulging of stomach</tr>. <i>Butirus ug tiyan ang bátà nga bitúkun,</i> A child with intestinal parasites has a bulging stomach. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for the stomach to become distended or bulge. <i>Mibutirus (nabutirus) na ang tiyan níya unyà dì pa giyud nà mabdus?</i> Her stomach is already sticking out and still you insist that she isn&apos;t pregnant?

<p id=3714><form>butíti</form> <pos>n</pos> general name for <tr>pufferfishes</tr>. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for rice sheaths to swell prior to blossoming.

<p id=3715><form>butku</form> <xr>= <sc>buktu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3716><form>butkun</form> <xr>= <sc>buktun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3717><form>butlig</form> <pos>n</pos> small cyst-like <tr>skin eruption</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> get cysts on skin.

<p id=3718><form>butlug</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>swelling</tr>, small bulge. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46N]</itype> form a small bulge. <i>Mibutlug (namutlug) ang íyang buktun human sumbága,</i> A bulge appeared in his arm after it was hit. <i>Singut nga namutlug sa agtang,</i> Sweat that formed beads on his forehead.

<p id=3719><form>butsáka</form> term used in playing pool for a certain agreed-to score, where part of the score is made by drawing a numbered marble. <pos>n</pos> container used for the numbered marbles. <pos>a</pos> even in score in this k.o. pool. <i>Way daug, way pildi námù, butsáka ra mi,</i> Neither of us lost; we came out even. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2N]</itype> get even in this k.o. pool. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> draw a marble from the container. <number>2a</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> return the marble back into the container.

<p id=3720><form>butsi</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. sweet made of flour, filled with mongo beans, sweetened coconut meat, et <pb n=181>al and optionally other ingredients, fried brown. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make <ix>butsi.</ix>

<p id=3721><form>butsing</form> <xr>= <sc>baksing</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3722><form>butsir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>voucher</tr> asking for payment. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> make a voucher.

<p id=3723><form>butsu</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. used for dry scrubbing the floor. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>scrub</tr> the floor when it is dry. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a coconut husk for scrubbing the floor.

<p id=3724><form>butsukuy</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>philanderer</tr>. <i>Bísag kinsa lay pangulitawhan. Butsukuy kaáyu,</i> He courts any girl he meets. What a philanderer!

<p id=3725><form>butu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>explosion</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>blister</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B246; b4]</itype> <tr>explode</tr>. <i>Mibutu ang bulkan nga Taal,</i> Taal Volcano erupted. <i>Ug buthan kag ligid may ikarisirba ka?</i> In case you have a blowout, do you have a spare tire? <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> for s.t. to swell and <tr>rupture</tr>. <i>Mibutu ang íyang hubag,</i> His boil burst. <i>Wà pa mubutu ang tumatub,</i> Her bag of waters hasn&apos;t broke yet. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> fall or hit s.t. with a bang. <i>Ang libru mibutu sa salug,</i> The book fell to the floor with a bang. <i>Mubutu ka rug suntúkun ka nákù,</i> I&apos;ll bang you one when I hit you. <number>4</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> <tr>get blisters</tr>. <i>Nabuthan ákung pálad pagbinughà,</i> I got blisters on my palms from chopping wood. <number>5</number> <itype>[B246]</itype> <tr>flunk</tr> an exam, esp. board or bar. <i>Mibutu siya sa bar,</i> He failed the bar. <number>6</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> give birth (humorous). <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>fire</tr>, make s.t. explode. <i>Pabutha ang ripli,</i> Fire the rifle. <i>Daghang kug ribintadur nga ipabutu sa Bag-ung Túig,</i> I have lots of firecrackers to explode for New Year&apos;s. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> <number>1</number> get blisters. <i>Namutu ang ákung pálad,</i> My palms were blistered. <number>2</number> get one&apos;s just deserts after accumulating too much wealth, esp. illegally or at the expense of others. <i>Mamutu ka bayà sa kataas niánang ímung tantu,</i> You&apos;ll get your just deserts from charging such usurious rates of interest. <form>buthanan</form> <pos>n</pos> head of a boil.&dagger;

<p id=3726><form>butu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> hair that looks lighter than the surrounding hair. <i>Butu nà<corr>,</corr> dílì úban,</i> Those are light-colored strands, not gray hairs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B246]</itype> for strands of hair to look lighter in color than the rest. <i>Mubutu ang mga lugas sa buhuk basta sapírun nga basà,</i> Hair gets a light look if you braid it when it is wet.

<p id=3727><form>bútu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vote</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> cast vote for. <i>Butúhi si Usminya,</i> Vote for Osmeña.

<p id=3728><form>bútù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>female genitalia</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>testicles</tr>. <form>sipsip, supsup &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> ass kisser (coarse). <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> male of the species, esp. animals. <number>2</number> castrated male pig raised for meat purposes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> raise a castrated male pig. <form>hi-, hi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>castrate</tr> animals. <i>Hibut-an (himut-an, himutúan) ku run ang bàbuy,</i> I&apos;ll castrate the pig now. <form>butùbútù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>clapper</tr> of a bell. <number>2</number> bob of a plumb line.

<p id=3729><form>butùbútù</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. black biting ant living in the earth.

<p id=3730><form>bútud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B123]</itype> swell with water or gas. <i>Mubútud ang balun,</i> The balloon filled with air. <i>Mibútud ang patay nga gidagsà,</i> The body that was washed ashore was bloated. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>gas pains</tr>. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>butíti</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146; b4]</itype> suffer gas in the stomach. <i>Nagpurhisyu ang bátà kay gibutdan,</i> The baby is crying because he has gas pains. <form>butdánun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>colicky</tr>.

<p id=3731><form>butuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make bundles of rice seedlings. <i>Butuka (butka) ang lawngun nga igtalánum,</i> Bind the seedlings to transplant into bundles. <pos>n</pos> sizeable bundle of rice seedlings for transplanting.

<p id=3732><form>butuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> cut down bamboos. <i>Butkun kug hurut ang kawáyan,</i> I am going to cut down all the bamboos. <pos>n</pos> <tr>bamboo pole</tr>. <i>Usa ka butuk kawáyan,</i> A bamboo pole. <form>butukbutuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cut bamboo or timber into several pieces.

<p id=3733><form>bútuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2346]</itype> <number>1</number> for a burn to form a blister. <i>Mibútuk ang ákung pánit nga nalaswaan sa nagbukal nga mantíkà,</i> My skin was blistered when the boiling fat splashed on it. <number>2</number> for rice or corn or pork to swell in cooking or for dough to rise. <number>3</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for rice or corn to boil gently with a low simmering sound when the water is practically gone. <number>4</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> for the grains of rice or corn to get soft after cooking. <i>Walà pa makabútuk ug maáyu ang mais, maung adúna pa kiniy lísu,</i> The corn grits didn&apos;t get soft and so they still have uncooked grains in the middle. <form>butukbutuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make a throbbing, bubbling sound. <i>Nagbutukbutuk ang linung-ag nga hápit na mahubas,</i> The rice made a popping sound as it was about to evaporate. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>-in-</sc>.</xr> <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> throbbing, bubbling sound. <i>Binutukbutuk sa kasingkásing,</i> Throbbing of the heart.

<p id=3734><form>but-uk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b8]</itype> be <tr>choked</tr> and coughing from swallowing s.t. the wrong way. <i>Hibut-ukan ku pag-inum nákù sa manyan,</i> I choked when I drank the liquor. <form>hi&N;-</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>mut-uk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3735><form>but-uk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; c1]</itype> <tr>bulge</tr>, <tr>swell</tr>. <i>Mibut-uk ang ímung kinusian,</i> The skin swelled where you pinched it. <i>Unsay sulud niánang bulsa nga nagbut-uk man?</i> What is inside your pocket that it is bulging?

<p id=3736><form>butul</form> <pos>a</pos> slow, <tr>unintelligent</tr>, poor in doing things. <i>Butul kaáyu, dúgayng makasabut,</i> He is stupid. It takes him forever to understand. <i>Butul nga musiyat,</i> He&apos;s a terrible shot. <i>Butul nga kabáyù kay gamay rag ági,</i> A slow horse because it hardly accomplishes <pb n=182>anything. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be <tr>slow</tr> and <tr>inefficient</tr>, <tr>unskillful</tr> or <tr>unintelligent</tr>.

<p id=3737><form>butun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>button</tr> of a switch. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>push</tr> the button of a switch.

<p id=3738><form>butung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> young <tr>coconut</tr> at a stage where the meat has just begun to form. <number>2</number> other young <tr>nuts</tr> that are soft and sweet. <number>3</number> young fiber-bearing parts of plants. <i>Abaka nga butung pag tugdan,</i> Abaca with immature stems. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B236; b6]</itype> <tr>develop</tr> into the butung stage. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> <tr>mix</tr> with young coconut. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get some young coconut. <form>pa&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>eat</tr> young coconut.

<p id=3739><form>butung<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. thick, straight, and smooth <tr>bamboo</tr>: <bio>Gigantochloa levis</bio>.

<p id=3740><form>butúnis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>buttons</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> <tr>button</tr> s.t. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>sew</tr> buttons on. <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a button. <form>Culu-</form> k.o. grass of waste places: <bio>Kyllinga spp</bio>.

<p id=3741><form>bútuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S3(1)4; b4]</itype> for flesh to <tr>swell</tr>. <i>Mibútuy ang pinaakan sa buyug,</i> The bee sting swelled. <i>Gibutúyan ang agtang kay napakung,</i> He bumped his head causing his forehead to swell. <pos>n</pos> <tr>swelling</tr>.

<p id=3742><form>butyag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> make s.t. known that was not known before. <i>Nianhi si San Huwan Bawtista arun pagbutyag sa maáyung púlung,</i> John the Baptist was sent to reveal the good news. <i>Ayaw ibutyag ang ákung tinagúan,</i> Don&apos;t reveal my secret.

<p id=3743><form>búud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>sulk</tr>, be sullen. <form>buúran</form> <pos>a</pos> prone to <tr>sulking</tr>.

<p id=3744><form>búug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <number>1</number> be <tr>confined</tr> and become foul. <i>Nagbúug ang hángin sulud sa kwartu,</i> The air in the room is stagnant and foul. <number>2</number> for wounds to <tr>rot</tr> in the absence of air. <i>Nagbúug ang samad nga walà kuhái sa bindáhi,</i> The wound is rotting because the bandage hadn&apos;t been taken off. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>buug</sc>, <ix>n, v</ix>.</xr> <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> an <tr>infection</tr> characterized by a smelly yellow pus. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> get this infection. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> having this sort of infection.

<p id=3745><form>buuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>piece</tr>, <tr>single</tr> one. <i>Usa ka buuk ságing,</i> A banana. <i>Upat ka buuk bátà,</i> Four children. <i>Tutú ka buuk báy,</i> Three houses. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> of <tr>imposing</tr> size. <i>Ang táwung buukan katahaan,</i> A person of imposing size is held in respect. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be imposingly big.

<p id=3746><form>buulbúul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>anklebone</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>adam&apos;s apple</tr> or any bulge in the area of the neck.

<p id=3747><form>buun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>white dove</tr>.

<p id=3748><form>buung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>commit suicide</tr>. <i>Ug dì ku nímu sugtun magbuung ku,</i> I&apos;ll kill myself if you don&apos;t marry me.

<p id=3749><form>búung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> <tr>break</tr> glass or masonry to pieces. <i>Buúngun (ibúung) nà nákù ang tanang mga plátu,</i> I&apos;ll break all the plates to pieces. <number>2</number> <tr>ruin</tr> s.o.&apos;s reputation. <i>Nabúung na ang íyang pagkababáyi,</i> Her chastity has been destroyed. <form>-in-an</form> half a coconut split lengthwise without the meat.

<p id=3750><form>buungun, buúngun</form> <xr>= <sc>buluungun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3751><form>búus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>storehouse</tr> for farm produce. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> keep in a storehouse.

<p id=3752><form>buut</form> <tr>want</tr>, would like to. <i>Buut siyang makig-isturya nímu,</i> He wishes to talk to you. <i>Unsay buut níyang isulti?</i> What does he wish to say? <i>Dì siya buut sa liguylíguy,</i> He does not care for this messing around. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> one&apos;s <tr>desires</tr>. <i>Kuntra sa ákung buut,</i> It is against my will. <form>kaping &mdash;</form> strings attached, ulterior motives. <i>Ihátag ku kini way kaping buut,</i> I give you this with no strings attached. <number>1a</number> <formx>walà sa &mdash;</formx> not meaning to do s.t. <i>Walà tu sa ákung buut pagsultíha,</i> I really didn&apos;t mean to say that. <number>2</number> <tr>thoughts</tr>, mind. <i>Línaw na ang ákung buut kay nasulbad na,</i> My mind is at rest now, because it is solved. <i>Búkid sa ákung buut,</i> Far from my thoughts (it never occurred to me). <i>Wad-un ta sa buut ang átung kabingkílan,</i> Let&apos;s forget our quarrels. <number>2a</number> consciousness, awareness. <i>Didtu siya sa uspital makamatngun ug buut,</i> She regained consciousness in the hospital. <i>Sukad sa pagkatim-an níyag buut,</i> From the time he reached the age of awareness. <number>2b</number> <formx>walay &mdash;</formx> <number>2b1</number> unaware, <tr>innocent</tr> of knowledge. <i>Walay buut nga bátà,</i> An innocent child. <number>2b2</number> unaware of proper social conduct. <i>Walay buut nga tawhána. Magkarsunsilyu lang sa sílung,</i> What an ignorant man! He wears his undershorts downstairs. <number>3</number> <tr>mood</tr>, <tr>disposition</tr>. <i>Magláin ang íyang buut ug mapildi sa súgal,</i> He gets in a bad mood if he loses in gambling. <i>Mabaw kaáyu siyag buut,</i> She is very short-tempered. <form>walà sa &mdash;</form> it didn&apos;t hurt [so-and-so]&apos;s feelings. <i>Wà tu sa ákung buut ang ímung gisulti,</i> I didn&apos;t take to heart what you said. <number>4</number> <formx>útang &mdash;</formx> <number>4a</number> debt of gratitude. <number>4b</number> please, it would be a big favor. <i>Útang buut. Ayaw pagsulti niánà,</i> Please don&apos;t say that. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> have one&apos;s way, <tr>decide</tr> how s.t. is to be. <i>Ikaw lay magbuut kun pila,</i> You decide how much. <i>Ang baláud nagbuut nga ...<corr>,</corr></i> The law stipulates that ... <i>Dì ku makagbuut (makabuut) niánà kay dílì nà ákù,</i> I can&apos;t make a decision concerning that because it isn&apos;t mine. <i>Mau nay gimbut-an sa baláud,</i> That is what is stipulated by the law. <i>Ang tanang kinabúhì gimbut-an sa Diyus,</i> All life is at God&apos;s discretion. <i>Ayaw akug but-i,</i> Don&apos;t dictate to me. <number>1a</number> <formx>unsa pay but-un?</formx> what does [so-and-so] want, anyway? <i>Unsa pay but-un nímu?</i> What in the world did you expect? <number>1b</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> be unmindful, uncomplaining about s.t. <pb n=183>unfavorable. <i>Mubuut kug way kaunkáun. Anad kug puása,</i> I don&apos;t care if I miss meal. I&apos;m used to doing without food. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23; a12]</itype> accept a marriage proposal. <i>Walà pa siya but-a ni Maríya,</i> Maria has not accepted him yet<corr>.</corr> <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP]</itype> do s.t. freely without restraint, to one&apos;s heart&apos;s content. <i>Nagbúut (nagpabúut) ang bátag kundat kay wà didtu si Máma,</i> The child had a ball playing around because Mother wasn&apos;t there. <form>buutbúut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> impose one&apos;s will where one doesn&apos;t have the right. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; b]</itype> take it on oneself to do s.t. <i>Ngánung nagbuutbúut kag palit ánà?</i> Why did you take it on yourself to buy that? <form>mabuutbuútun</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to impose one&apos;s will, take it on oneself to do things. <form>but-anay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C23]</itype> impose each other&apos;s will on each other. <i>Way but-anay kun ása ági,</i> We&apos;ll each go our own way (we won&apos;t impose our wills on each other where to go). <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> allow s.o. to have the say. <i>Ug pabut-un (papagbut-un) aku nímu,</i> If I am allowed to have the say in this matter. <form>paka-, pa-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b1]</itype> take it on oneself to do s.t. forbidden as much as one likes. <i>Mangingisdà nga magpakabuut (magpabúut) pagpabutug dinamíta,</i> Fishermen who allow themselves to do as much dynamite fishing as they like. <i>Gipabut-an níla ang mga bátag káun ug dulsi,</i> They allowed the children to eat as many sweets as they liked. <form>pasi-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b]</itype> allow s.o. to decide. <i>Gipasibut-an lang siya sa kursung íyang kuháun,</i> He was left to decide what course he would take. <form>hi&N;-/ha&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b3(1)c5]</itype> be pleased. <i>Nahimuut siyang nagtan-aw sa íyang anak,</i> He took pleasure in observing his daughter. <i>Wà níya ikahimuut (kahimut-i) ang ímung gibúhat,</i> He wasn&apos;t pleased with what you did. <form>kahi&N;-</form> <pos>n</pos> pleasure. <form>kahimut-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. at which one can take pleasure, be amused. <form>mahimut-un, mahimut-ánun, maham-utun</form> <pos>a</pos> feeling great pleasure. <form>but-an</form> <pos>a</pos> possessing reason, sense. <i>But-an ba siya u búang?</i> Is he sane or mad? <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>-an(&larr;)</sc>.</xr> <form>-an(&larr;)</form> good, well-behaved. <i>Buútang bátà,</i> A good child. <i>Ang buútan niyang asáwa,</i> His good wife. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> get to be well-behaved. <form>-in-an</form> in a well-behaved way. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> act in a well-behaved way. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <number>1</number> intelligence, ability to perceive. <number>2</number> consideration for one&apos;s fellowmen. <form>kabubut-un</form> <pos>n</pos> specific feelings toward s.o. or s.t. <form>útang kabubut-un</form> debt of gratitude to be repaid. <form>ma-(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having a requisite amount of intelligence. <number>2</number> thoughtful, considerate of one&apos;s fellowmen. <i>Ang mga mabúut nga táwu dílì mangdinamíta,</i> Civic-minded people don&apos;t dynamite fish. <form>mag-r-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> one who has the say. <form>pag-</form> will. <i>Pagbuut sa Diyus,</i> God&apos;s will. <form>pani&N;-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>consciousness</tr>, <tr>awareness</tr>. <number>2</number> degree of intelligence. <i>Ang íyang panimúut sáma sa bátang tris anyus,</i> His mental age is like a three-year-old child&apos;s.

<p id=3753><form>búut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> confine in a narrow place so that no air can get in or out. <i>Napan-us ang bíku nga gibúut (gibuútan),</i> The sticky rice spoiled because it was wrapped up too tightly. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> fruit placed in a tight container to hasten ripening.

<p id=3754><form>buútan<sub>1</sub></form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>buut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3755><form>buútan<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>ambuhútan</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ambúhut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3756><form>buúti</form> <xr>= <sc>búti</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3757><form>buwa</form> expression said in driving away pigs: scram! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> drive away pigs by saying <ix>buwa.</ix>

<p id=3758><form>buwa-</form> <xr><ix>see also</ix> <sc>bwa-</sc></xr> <ix>and</ix> <xr><sc>bula-</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3759><form>búwà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> spongy growth inside a coconut shell which is produced prior to sprouting. It is good to eat.

<p id=3760><form>búwà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prolapsed uterus</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> suffer a prolapsed uterus. <form>buwàbuwà</form> <xr>= <sc>butbut<sub>2</sub></sc> <pos>n</pos>, <i>3.</i></xr>

<p id=3761><form>búwà<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lying boast</tr>. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>braggart</tr>.

<p id=3762><form>buwal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>voile</tr>.

<p id=3763><form>buwang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B24]</itype> cease to bear fruits.

<p id=3764><form>buwang<sub>2</sub>, búwang</form> <xr>= <sc>bulwang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3765><form>buway</form> <xr>= <sc>bulay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3766><form>búy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>male servant</tr>, helper to another employee. <i>Búy ku sa bikiri,</i> I am a helper in the bakery. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> hire out as a helper or servant.

<p id=3767><form>búy<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>búluy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3768><form>búya<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>float</tr>, <tr>buoy</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, make into, mark with, use as a buoy.

<p id=3769><form>búya<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> agreement between parents to betroth their young or unborn children. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>betroth</tr> unborn or young children. <i>Buyáhun nátù ang mga bátà,</i> Let us betroth our children. <i>Atung ibúya ang ímung gisabak sa ílang masusu,</i> We will betroth the child you are carrying to their infant.

<p id=3770><form>buyag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN2; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> make a <tr>comment</tr> on s.t. <i>Kusug siyang mamuyag ug gwápa,</i> He makes lots of comments when he sees a good-looking girl. <i>Wà kay katungud sa pagbuyag sa ákung pamisti,</i> You have no right to comment on the way I dress. <number>2</number> call one&apos;s attention to a fault. <i>Buyaga siya kay nangurtína,</i> Tell her her slip is showing. <number>3</number> <tr>admonish</tr> s.o. to stop doing s.t. <i>Buyaga ang mga bátang nagsábà,</i> Tell those noisy kids to be quiet. <number>4</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> be affected by <ix>buyag.</ix> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> disease afflicting a person or his possessions brought <pb n=184>on by a compliment given by a <ix>buyágan</ix> or by a supernatural being. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; sa túbig</formx> k.o. skin eczema. <ix>interjection</ix> <xr>= <sc>puyra &mdash;</sc>.</xr> <form>puyra &mdash;</form> magical formula uttered to ward off the disease <ix>buyag</ix> said where a compliment has been made or is about to be made. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> do s.t. to make s.o. admonish one. <number>2</number> allow s.o. to tell one to stop. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.o. with an inherent supernatural power which causes any living thing he compliments to become ill. <number>2</number> sorcerer who can cure <ix>buyag.</ix> <form>-l-un(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> requiring admonishment.

<p id=3771><form>buyagan</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>bunsudbunsud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3772><form>buyang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. bright-colored paper <tr>umbrella</tr>, in vogue before World War II.

<p id=3773><form>buyang-ang</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>wide open</tr>. <i>Buyang-ang nga pultahan,</i> Wide open door. <number>2</number> for s.t. to be open to view in a brazen or ungainly way. <i>Ang nangalígù nagbuyang-ang (nagpabuyang-ang) sa ílang láwas,</i> The bathers are exposing their bodies. <i>Ayaw buyang-ánga (pabuyang-ánga, ibuyang-ang) ímung balunan,</i> Don&apos;t let everyone see your lunch box.

<p id=3774><form>buyangyang</form> <xr>= <sc>aguyangyang<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3775><form>buyasyas</form> <pos>a</pos> dressed sloppily in such a way that s.t. is exposed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be sloppily covered so that s.t. is exposed. <i>Nagbuyasyas lang siya nga natúlug. Kítà ang páa,</i> She didn&apos;t cover herself well when she slept. You could see her thigh. <i>Buyasyas lang ang ímung púlu,</i> Your shirt is half-open.

<p id=3776><form>buybuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b5]</itype> count favors one has done to s.o. <i>Gibuybuy ku níya sa íyang gihátag nákù,</i> He kept mentioning the things he had given me. <pos>n</pos> action of counting favors. <form>pa&N;-</form> <xr>= <sc>buybuy</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to count favors.

<p id=3777><form>buyinggit</form> <xr>= <sc>bulinggit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3778><form>buykutíyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>boycott</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> boycott.

<p id=3779><form>*buylas</form> <form>hi-, hi&N;-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C3; c3]</itype> pass by and miss seeing each other. <i>Huwata lang siya kay maghibuylas (maghimuylas) unyà mu sa d&amacracu;n,</i> Just wait for him here because you might miss seeing each other on the way.

<p id=3780><form>buylu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>momentum</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> gain momentum, <tr>accelerate</tr>. <i>Mibuylu ang dyip sa pagsubída,</i> The jeep accelerated on the upgrade. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> move with freedom and ease. <i>Dì ta makabuylu sa mga tígum nga purmal,</i> We cannot move with ease in formal gatherings. <form>tina-</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tinabuylu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3781><form>buylug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b7]</itype> <tr>speed</tr>, <tr>rush</tr> forward. <i>Mibuylug ang túbig pagkagubà sa liptung,</i> The water gushed out when the dam broke. <i>Buylúgi (pabuylúgi) arun makaapas ta níla,</i> Give it more speed so we can catch up with them. <pos>n</pos> fast, onrushing forward speed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2; c3]</itype> do s.t. together in a group. <i>Sígi silang magbuylug bísan ása paìngun,</i> They are always together, wherever they go. <form>hi-</form>/<form>ha-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be included in s.o.&apos;s misfortunes. <i>Ang tibuuk níyang bánay nahibuylug sa kadáut,</i> His whole family suffered from the misfortune. <form>ta-</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tabuylug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3782><form>*buyna<sub>1</sub></form> <form>&mdash; mánu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> first <tr>sale</tr> of the day, thought to stimulate further sales. The price is usually reduced to push the <ix>buyna mánu</ix> sale through. <i>Sígi lang, hay buyna mánu ni,</i> All right, I accept your offer, since this is the first sale of the day. <number>2</number> a person who buys the first sale. <i>Napalit nákug barátu kay buyna mánu man ku,</i> I managed to get it cheap because I was the first customer. <form>nutsi &mdash;</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>nutsi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3783><form>buynas</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lucky</tr>, <tr>fortunate</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123S; a12]</itype> be lucky. <i>Mangabir ku, básig buynásun,</i> I&apos;ll take a try. Perhaps I&apos;ll be lucky. <form>&mdash; díyas, nutsis</form> <tr>Good day</tr>, <tr>night</tr>, said to people who are thought to be Spanish-speaking, <form>di-</form> <xr>= <sc>buynas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3784><form>buynu</form> <number>1</number> <ix>particle conceding a situation:</ix> &lsquo;well&rsquo;. <i>Buynu, ug dì ka, ay na lang,</i> Well, if you don&apos;t want to, you don&apos;t have to. <number>2</number> <ix>particle terminating a conversation:</ix> &lsquo;well, all right now&rsquo;. <i>Buynu, mau na lang tu. Dad-a dinhi ugmà,</i> Well, that&apos;s all. Bring it here tomorrow. <i>Buynu, sanggía ang mais ugmà,</i> All right. Harvest the corn tomorrow. <number>2</number> particle in a story preceding a summary of the situation. <i>Buynu, kay nakapangasáwa sa prinsísa, siyay nahímung manunúnud,</i> All right, since he married the princess, he became the heir to the throne.

<p id=3785><form>buyprind</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>boy friend</tr>.

<p id=3786><form>buysit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bad luck</tr> that is permanently associated with a person or thing. <i>Kanang ímung nawung mau rag mauy nagdala sa buysit,</i> Your face brings bad luck with it. <pos>a</pos> having bad luck associated with it. <i>Buysit kining baláya. Pirming kamatyan,</i> This house brings us bad luck. Lots of people have died here. <ix>interjection</ix> <i>Buysit! Gikuútan ku,</i> Damned! S.o. picked my pocket. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be constantly <tr>beset</tr> by bad luck. <i>Nabuysit ákung panágat human nákù mapatay ang íhung putì,</i> My fishing was beset by misfortune after I killed the white shark.

<p id=3787><form>buyu, buyù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> win over, <tr>entice</tr> s.o. to do s.t. <i>Buyuhun ta ka pagtrabáhu sa ámù,</i> I&apos;ll entice you to work for us. <i>Ayaw pabuyu sa íyang mga sáad,</i> Don&apos;t let yourself be hooked by his promises. <pos>n</pos> enticement.

<p id=3788><form>búyù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>betel pepper</tr>, a cultivated and wild vine, the leaves of which are used together with <ix>búnga<sub>2</sub></ix> as a chew: <bio>Piper betle</bio>.

<p id=3789><form>búyud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> be, become <tr>dizzy</tr>. <i>Nabúyud <pb n=185>siya tungud sa kagútum,</i> He is dizzy from hunger.

<p id=3790><form>buy-ud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> be <tr>prostate</tr> and motionless, with arms parallel to the body. <i>Minatay ang nagbuy-ud sa asíras,</i> A corpse lying on the sidewalk.

<p id=3791><form>buyug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. solitary bluish-black <tr>wasp</tr> common near the house, nesting in the soil. <number>2</number> k.o. solitary <tr>bee</tr>, colored black with reddish overtones. <form>-un</form> <pos>n</pos> feather coloration of cocks which is black with reddish overtones.

<p id=3792><form>buyug<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23P; c]</itype> <tr>leave</tr> or <tr>depart</tr> instantly, in a <tr>hurry</tr>. <i>Dílì maáyung mubuyug ug lakaw nga way pananghid,</i> It&apos;s not good to leave instantly without permission. <i>Ayawg ibuyug ug dágan ang búla ni Dyunyur,</i> Don&apos;t run away with Junior&apos;s ball.

<p id=3793><form>búyuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>cook</tr> cereals by pouring into water boiled beforehand (the manner of cooking corn grits or large quantities of rice which otherwise would take long to cook). <i>Buyúka paglung-ag ang mais,</i> Cook the grits by throwing them into boiling water. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pot</tr> with boiling water for cooking in this manner. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>corn</tr> or <tr>rice</tr> cooked in this manner.

<p id=3794><form>búyuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a4]</itype> feel <tr>nauseous</tr>, <tr>dizzy</tr> and <tr>weak</tr>, almost to the point of fainting. <i>Buyúkun (mabúyuk) siya kun mudúngaw ug lawum,</i> She feels dizzy and weak when she looks down from heights.

<p id=3795><form>buy-uk</form> <xr>= <sc>bayúuk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3796><form>buyun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. shrub of thickets: <bio>Mussaenda philippica</bio>.

<p id=3797><form>búyun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c]</itype> be situated <tr>beside</tr> and, usually, in line. <i>Nagbúyun ang mga balay sa subà,</i> The houses are in a line along the river. <i>Makigbúyun siyag higdà nákù,</i> She wants to sleep beside me. <pos>n</pos> next to. <i>Ang ámung kusína búyun ra sa balay,</i> Our kitchen is located next to (or right in back of) the house.

<p id=3798><form>buy-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fat</tr> on the stomach. <i>Buy-un sa bábuy,</i> Fat on the pig&apos;s stomach. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1246]</itype> <tr>get fat</tr> on the stomach. <i>Maáyu ka tingáli rung pagkabutang kay namuy-un ka man,</i> You must be doing well now, as I see by your spare tire. <pos>a</pos> having <tr>rolls of fat</tr> on the stomach. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to have rolls of fat.

<p id=3799><form>buyung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>highwayman</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> for a highwayman to hold s.o. up. <i>Ayaw pagbaktas didtu sa awáaw básig mabuyung ka,</i> Don&apos;t go on foot through deserted areas, you might get held up. <number>2</number> <tr>steal</tr> (humorous). <i>Átung buyungun ang íyang alkansíya,</i> Let&apos;s steal her piggy bank. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>trick</tr> s.o. into doing s.t. <i>Nabuyung ka lang pagpaútang níya,</i> You were tricked into lending her money.

<p id=3800><form>búyung</form> <xr>= <sc>búyud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3801><form>búyut</form> <xr>= <sc>balúyut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3802><form>bwabuwa</form> <xr>= <sc>lansúnis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3803><form>bwágas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for liquids or fine things to <tr>flow</tr> out profusely from a container. <i>Mibwágas ang túbig sa pagkabuslut sa bangà,</i> The water flowed out rapidly when the jar got a hole on it. <i>Dì makabwágas ang bugas sa sáku ug sap-úngan ang lungag ug papil,</i> The rice will not flow out if you cover the hole with paper.

<p id=3804><form>bwáhan</form> <xr>= <sc>lansúnis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3805><form>bwáhat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; c]</itype> <tr>open</tr> one&apos;s eyes wide. <i>Mibwáhat ang íyang mata sa katingála,</i> Her eyes opened wide in surprise.

<p id=3806><form>bwanbúwan</form> (from <ix>búlan</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>moles</tr> on the face appearing in large numbers, so called because they are believed to become darker when the moon is full.

<p id=3807><form>bwáus</form> <xr>= <sc>buláus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3808><form>bwi-</form> <xr><ix>see also</ix> <sc>buy-</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3809><form>bwilta</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5c]</itype> <tr>come</tr>, <tr>go back</tr>, go back to get s.t. <i>Ákù pang bwiltáhun (bwiltáhan) si Míri,</i> I still have to go back for Mary. <i>Ibwilta ni ngadtu,</i> Take this back to them. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> <tr>repeat</tr>, do again. <i>Bwiltáhun (ibwilta) ta nig pangutána,</i> Let&apos;s ask that again. <form>bwiltabwilta</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> go <tr>back</tr> and <tr>forth</tr>. <i>Mubwiltabwilta ka giyud kay dílì makas-a nag dala,</i> You have to go back and forth because you cannot take all of that at once. <i>Ngánung nagbwiltabwilta ka man, unsay suliran mu?</i> Why are you pacing back and forth? What&apos;s your problem? <form>ida-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>round trip</tr>. <i>Milukat ku ug tíkit sa barku nga idabwilta,</i> I bought a round trip boat ticket.

<p id=3810><form>bwinggit</form> <xr>= <sc>bulinggit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3811><form>byábas</form> <xr>= <sc>bayábas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3812><form>byáhi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> trip, <tr>journey</tr>. <i>Bálud tung byahía uy!</i> That was a rough trip. <number>2</number> <tr>trip</tr>, single run of a vehicle between two points. <i>Alas dúsi ang katapúsang byáhi,</i> The last trip is at twelve. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>take a trip</tr>. <i>Nagbyáhi sila sa Amirika,</i> They took a trip to America. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> for a public conveyance to make its run. <i>Ayaw ibyáhi ang dyip ug dì pa punù,</i> Don&apos;t dispatch the jeep before it is full. <form>byahian</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> take a <tr>run</tr> s.w. regularly. <form>byahidur</form> <pos>n</pos> one who <tr>travels</tr> often. &dagger;

<p id=3813><form>byakrúsis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>way of the cross</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC12; b6]</itype> do the way of the cross. <i>Magbiyakrúsis ku inigmahal nga adlaw,</i> I&apos;ll do the way of the cross during the Holy Week.

<p id=3814><form>byamban</form> <xr>= <sc>balanban<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3815><form>byanggas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mange</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a12]</itype> be <tr>afflicted</tr> with mange. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>mangy</tr>. <i>Kinsa man nang byanggasun nga irù?</i> Who does that mangy dog belong to?

<pb n=186>

<p id=3816><form>byantì</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. smooth <tr>shrub</tr> occasionally planted as ornamental which exudes a milky sap irritating to the skin: <bio>Homalanthus populneus</bio>.

<p id=3817><form>byásung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. yellow lemon-shaped <tr>citrus</tr> of pungent odor and somewhat sour, used as a hair rinse or for flavoring salted fish.

<p id=3818><form>byáta</form> <xr>= <sc>byátu</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=3819><form>byatiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Holy Communion</tr> given to a dying person. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> give the <tr>viaticum</tr> to s.o.

<p id=3820><form>byatilis</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small rapidly growing <tr>tree</tr> of waste places or cultivated, extensively used for firewood. The leaves are used as animal feed and medicinally. It bears beans also used medicinally: <bio>Leucaena glauca</bio>.

<p id=3821><form>byátu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>pious</tr>, <tr>devout</tr> man. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> become pious, devout.

<p id=3822><form>byinbinída</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>welcome party</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> hold a welcoming <tr>party</tr>. <i>Magbiyinbinída mi pasidungug sa ímung pag-abut,</i> We&apos;ll hold a welcome party when you arrive. <form>&mdash; parti</form> <xr>= <sc>byinbinída</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3823><form>byínis</form> person&apos;s <tr>things</tr>. <i>Gibaligyà íyang mga byínis ibadbad sa útang,</i> He sold his property to pay off his debts.

<p id=3824><form>byintus</form> <xr>= <sc>bintus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3825><form>byirnis</form> <xr>= <sc>birnis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3826><form>byú</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>view</tr>, <tr>scenery</tr>. <number>2</number> <formx>way &mdash;</formx> have <tr>lost</tr> its nice look. <i>Wà nay byú ákung sapátus kay nagkalápuk,</i> My shoes look awful because they&apos;re all muddy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> get to be poor-looking. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make oneself conspicuous s.w.

<p id=3827><form>byúda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>widow</tr>. <form>&mdash; nga búhì</form> a wife who has been <tr>separated</tr> from a husband still living. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; a2]</itype> become a widow. &dagger; <i>Nabyúda siyang búhì sukad mamabáyi ang bána,</i> She became a widow of a live man after her husband started taking up with women.

<p id=3828><form>byúdu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>widower</tr>. <form>-ng búhì</form> husband <tr>separated</tr> from his wife. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; a2b6]</itype> be, become a widower.

<p id=3829><form>byugul, byúgul</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dull</tr>, <tr>slow</tr> in comprehension. <i>Nahagbung siya kay byúgul man,</i> He flunked because he&apos;s dull. <number>2</number> five-centavo <tr>coin</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> become slow in comprehending.

<p id=3830><form>byulin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>violin</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>play</tr>, make a violin.

<p id=3831><form>byulíta</form> <pos>n</pos> low perennial flowering ornamental with violet flowers: <bio>Barleria cristata</bio>.

<p id=3832><form>byumbu</form> <xr>= <sc>bayumbu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3833><form>byúti parlur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>beauty parlor</tr>.

<p id=3834><form>byúuk</form> <xr>= <sc>bayúuk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3835><form>byúus</form> <xr>= <sc>bayúus</sc>.</xr>


</body>
</text>
</TEI.2>
