<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN" [

<!ENTITY larr       CDATA "&#x2190;"            -- leftwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY rarr       CDATA "&#x2192;"            -- rightwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY glots      CDATA "&#x0294;"            -- glottal stop -->

<!ENTITY amacr      CDATA "&#x0101;"            -- a with macron -->
<!ENTITY imacr      CDATA "&#x012B;"            -- i with macron -->
<!ENTITY umacr      CDATA "&#x016B;"            -- u with macron -->

<!ENTITY amacrgra   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0300;"    -- a with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY imacrgra   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0300;"    -- i with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY umacrgra   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0300;"    -- u with macron and grave -->

<!ENTITY amacracu   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0301;"    -- a with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY imacracu   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0301;"    -- i with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY umacracu   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0301;"    -- u with macron and acute -->

<!ENTITY Acaron     CDATA "&#x01CD;"            -- A with caron -->
<!ENTITY acaron     CDATA "&#x01CE;"            -- a with caron -->
<!ENTITY Icaron     CDATA "&#x01CF;"            -- I with caron -->
<!ENTITY icaron     CDATA "&#x01D0;"            -- i with caron -->
<!ENTITY Ucaron     CDATA "&#x01D3;"            -- U with caron -->
<!ENTITY ucaron     CDATA "&#x01D4;"            -- u with caron -->

<!ENTITY schwa      CDATA "&#x0259;"            -- schwa (turned e) -->
<!ENTITY N          CDATA "N"                   -- N symbol (as used in this dictionary) -->

]><TEI.2 lang=en>
<teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
        <titleStmt>
            <title>A Dictionary of Cebuano Visayan</title>
            <author>John U. Wolff</author>
        </titleStmt>
    </fileDesc>
    <profileDesc>
        <langUsage>
            <language id=en>English</language>
            <language id=en-US>English (United States)</language>
            <language id=ceb>Cebuano</language>
        </langUsage>
    </profileDesc>
</teiHeader>
<text>
<body>



<pb n=537a>
<div1 type=Letter id=letter.l n=L>
<head>L</head>


<p id=10347><form>la<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>lámang</sc></xr> (dialectal).

<p id=10348><form>la<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>la</tr>, the sixth note in the musical scale. <number>2</number> a syllable used in place of words forgotten when singing a song.

<p id=10349><form>l&amacracu;</form> <xr>= <sc>lála<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=10350><form>láag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>roam</tr> about for no special purpose, just for diversion. <i>Atúa si Pidru sa syudad miláag,</i> Pedro is downtown roaming about. <i>Unsay ímung laágun didtu? Mangítà na pud kag áway?</i> What are you going to roam around there for? Are you looking for another fight? <form>{(&rarr;)|laag}</form> <pos>a</pos> roving about, going nowhere in particular. <i>Lagmit paangkan ang babáying laag,</i> A woman that roams about is likely to get pregnant. <i>Ang laag níyang panan-aw didtu mahiúrung sa babáyi,</i> His roving gaze stopped at the woman. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be a wanderer. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|laagan}</form> <xr>= <sc>laag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10351><form>láang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>noose</tr> of a trap. <i>Biraha ang láang inigtunub sa manuk,</i> Pull the noose when the chicken steps in. <number>1a</number> any trap that has a noose. <number>2</number> stratagem designed to catch or trick s.o. <i>Babáyi ang gamíta nga láang pagsíkup sa ispíya,</i> Use a woman as a trap to snare the spy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> trap s.t. with a noose. <i>Laángun nátung bábuy,</i> Let&apos;s trap the pig with a noose. <number>2</number> employ a trick to catch s.o. <i>Dì siya madiritsu ug dakup. Laángun giyud,</i> He can&apos;t be caught easily. He should be trapped. <form>{-in-|lináang}</form> <xr>= <sc>láang</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr>

<p id=10352><form>laas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> take a sword or rod and raise it. <i>Naglaas ug sundang ang hurimintádu,</i> The amok was brandishing a bolo. <i>Gilaas sa tigúlang ang íyang ulísi,</i> The old man raised his cane in the air. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> go bare of protection. <i>Naglaas ka lang nga tugnaw kaáyu?</i> Why aren&apos;t you dressed when it&apos;s so cold?

<p id=10353><form>láas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>tear</tr> leaves or thin sheets lengthwise into strips. <i>Miláas siyag papil pára himúung bandirabandíra,</i> She tore some papers into strips to make into pennants. <number>2</number> <tr>tear</tr>, <tr>peel</tr> s.t. off from an attachment. <i>Nakaláas ku sa bulsa sa íyang púlu,</i> I accidentally tore the pocket off his shirt. <i>Ang uban nga táwu laásun lang ang pánit sa kanding,</i> Some people just peel the skin off of goats. <number>2a</number> remove the cloth-like sheathing of the coconut bud as the first step in tapping the toddy. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the lower part of the leaves of the areca palm which sheathes the trunk. <i>Maáyu kaáyung buhátun ug sudlanan sa bugas ang mga layà nga láas sa káhuyng búnga,</i> Several pieces of dry palm frond sheaths of the areca palm can be made into useful containers for rice or corn grits. <number>2</number> the covering cloth-like sheath of the coconut bud which grows from the sides of the bottom of the frond.

<p id=10354><form>laaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stray cat</tr>.

<p id=10355><form>láay</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>monotonous</tr>, wearingly <tr>boring</tr>. <i>Láay kaáyu ning wà tay búhat,</i> It is so dull to be without anything to do. <i>Láay kaáyu ang pagpaábut,</i> It is very boring just to wait around. <number>2</number> disgusting, disappointing in that one doesn&apos;t conform to what is expected of him. <i>Laáya nímu uy, ingun ka palitan ku nímug sapátus,</i> How disgusting! You promised to buy shoes for me (but you didn&apos;t). <i>Kaláay bayang Nína, gipanabì diay níya ang ákung sikrítu,</i> How disgusting of Nina. She told my secret to everybody. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B124; b4]</itype> be boring, feel bored. <i>Nagkalaay na ning trabahúa kay mu ra gihápun,</i> This work is getting boring because it is always the same thing. <i>Mipaúlì na lang siya kay gilaáyan nag pinaábut nímu,</i> He just went home. He got tired of waiting for you. <form>{(&rarr;)|laay}</form> <pos>n</pos> a variety of corn that takes a long time to mature. <form>laaylaay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> while away time or do s.t. for the meantime. <i>Samtang magpaábut ku mulaaylaay lang kug gansilyu,</i> While I&apos;m waiting, I&apos;ll while away the time crocheting. <i>Gilaaylaayan ku lang nig búhat, nahuman na giyud,</i> I just did this little by little during <pb n=538>my spare time, and now it&apos;s finished. <form>{ka-(&rarr;)|kalaay}</form> <xr>= <sc>laaylaay</sc>.</xr> <form>{ka-|kaláay}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>boredom</tr>.

<p id=10356><form>láb<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> half of the number of points or one less half the number of points that make a tennis or pingpong game. (From the notion that when the one who is behind reaches half the number of points&mdash;usually ten points, that number is subtracted from the winner&apos;s points and the one behind is reckoned at zero. E.g. a score 12 to 10 is reckoned at <ix>dus láb</ix> instead of <ix>dúsi diyis</ix>.) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for the one who is behind to get as far as the half-way point. <i>Makaláb lang ku, sigurádu giyud kung makaagpas ug makadaug,</i> If I can make it to love (ten points), I&apos;m sure I can catch up and win. <i>Siya ang kampiyun apan gilában ku siya,</i> He is the champion, but I was able to get ten points (out of twenty-one).

<p id=10357><form>láb<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> lab.

<p id=10358><form>laba</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b1]</itype> <tr>wash clothing</tr>. <i>Gilabhan níya ang ákung púlu,</i> She washed my shirt. <i>Ang batu nga ílang gilabhan,</i> The stone where they do their washing. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> scold, talk against. <i>Gilabhan ka na sad sa ímung bus?</i> Did your boss give you a cussing out again? <number>3</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> be badly defeated. <i>Gilabhan námù ang ílang tím sa baskitbul,</i> We trounced their team in basketball. <form>{-kára|labakára}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>washcloth</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> wash the face with a washcloth. <form>labalába</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc1]</itype> <tr>work furiously</tr>, in a concentrated way. <i>Átung labalabáhan pagpanday ang iskuylahan,</i> Let&apos;s work furiously building the school. <number>2</number> keep scolding, ranting against. <pos>a</pos> done at a furious pace. <form>labhanan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> dirty laundry. <number>2</number> place to do wash. <number>3</number> place to air grievances. <form>labhunun</form> <xr>= <sc>labhanan</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr> <form>nilabhan (linabhan)</form> <pos>n</pos> clean laundry. <form>{-bu(&larr;)|labábu}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lavatory</tr>, <tr>sink</tr>. <form>{-da(&larr;)|labáda}</form> <pos>n</pos> laundry done for pay. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b5]</itype> take in wash, work off a debt by doing laundry. <i>Naglabáda (nanglabáda) na lang siya,</i> She took in wash. <form>labandíra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>washerwoman</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a]</itype> be a washerwoman. <form>labandíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>laundryman</tr>. <form>{-dur|labadur}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>basin</tr>.

<p id=10359><form>labà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stains</tr>, <tr>spots</tr>, uneven color. <i>Ang labà sa íyang mga sinínà walà makúhà,</i> We could not get the stains out of her dress. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> get stained, spotted in color. <i>Mulabà (malabà) ang kulur sa sinínà ug ibuwad kini sa ínit,</i> The color of the dress will become uneven if it gets exposed to the sun. <i>Ayaw nag labaa (ilabà) ug pintal,</i> Don&apos;t paint it unevenly. <form>labàlabà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> have splotches of lighter or darker hue, not evenly smooth. <i>Naglabàlabà ang sinínang dikulur nga giladlad,</i> The colored dress got splotched when it was bleached in the sun.

<p id=10360><form>labà<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>taas</sc></xr> (dialectal). <form>{pa-(&larr;)|palábà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> do s.t. to enhance one&apos;s image in public. <i>Kanang íyang panghátag kwarta nagpalábà lang sa íyang papil,</i> He gave money, but only to enhance his public image. <pos>n</pos> action of doing s.t. for the show and not with earnest intent.

<p id=10361><form>*lába</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>kilába</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10362><form>labábu</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>laba</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10363><form>labad</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for the head to ache. <i>Labad kaáyu ang ákung úlu,</i> I have a terrible headache. <number>2</number> giving a headache, problem. <i>Labad kaáyung tudlúan. Búgù unyà dì pa mamínaw,</i> It&apos;s a real headache to teach him. He&apos;s stupid and on top of that, he won&apos;t listen. <i>Ang pagbáyad ímung labad,</i> It&apos;s your headache how to pay it off. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B46; b4]</itype> get, have a <tr>headache</tr>. <i>Naglabad ning ákung úlu sa inyung kasábà,</i> I have a headache because of your noise. <i>Labdun (labarun) pa giyud ku ninyu ánang mga sulirána,</i> You still have to trouble me with those problems. <i>Tumar ug aspirin ug labdan ka sa úlu,</i> Take aspirin if you have a headache. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; b4]</itype> be mentally disturbed. <i>Malabad siya basta higutman,</i> He becomes deranged if he misses meals. <form>labdunun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>mentally disturbed</tr>. <form>labdanan</form> <pos>a</pos> prone to headaches.

<p id=10364><form>*lábad</form> <form>{pa-|palábad}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>propeller</tr> of a plane or windmill. <number>2</number> toy propeller. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a2]</itype> make into, install a propeller. <form>labadlábad</form> <xr>= <sc>palábad</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10365><form>labáda</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>laba</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10366><form>labadur</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>laba</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10367><form>labadúra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>batter</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make a batter.

<p id=10368><form>labag, lábag<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a bundle of abaca fibers consisting of thirty-two smaller bunches (<ix>bituul</ix>). <number>2</number> any large bundle of threads or yarn. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> group fibers into bunches. <i>Labágun lang ning tingkal arun mahibaw-ag pilay abutun,</i> Let&apos;s take this twine and group it in bundles so we know how much it amounts to.

<p id=10369><form>lábag<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>wring water out</tr>. <i>Gilabágan sa mga sumasákay ang ílang mga saput nga nahumud sa dágat,</i> The passengers of the boat wrung out the sea water from their wet clothes. <form>{-in-|linábag}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. wrung out.

<p id=10370><form>labáha</form> <pos>n</pos> straight <tr>razor</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> shave s.o. with a straight razor. <i>Mubui ang tingkuy piru ayaw labahái,</i> Make the nape short, but don&apos;t shave it. <form>{pa&N;-|panglabáha}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> shave oneself with a straight razor.

<p id=10371><form>labak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>throw</tr> s.t. hard on the ground. <i>Nakalabak na bayà kag daghang plátu. Tingálig mahurut ni,</i> You&apos;ve already thrown down a lot of plates. No doubt you intend to break all of them. <number>2</number> throw s.t. away. <i>Ayaw nag ilabak, ákù na lang,</i> Don&apos;t <pb n=539>throw that away. Let me have it. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> spank with open palm. <i>Nakalabak ku sa íyang samput,</i> I spanked her on the buttocks.

<p id=10372><form>lábak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> for a sore or an infected wound to be opened wide. <i>Milábak (nalábak) ang íyang hubag nga gitambálan niánang tambála,</i> Her boil opened wide when that medicine was put on it.

<p id=10373><form>lab-ak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> get to have spaces or omissions in between; cause s.t. to do so, skip. <i>Mulab-ak lang kug pila ka klási arun ku masayu,</i> I will just skip some classes so I can get home early. <i>Nakalab-ak kug usa ka linya sa ákung pakigpúlung,</i> I accidentally left out a line in my speech. <i>Gilab-akan níya ang tulu ka balay únà siya muhúnung,</i> He passed up three houses before he stopped. <i>Kining pula ilab-ak nímu sa putì,</i> Intersperse these red things between the white ones. <number>1a</number> for colors to get uneven. <i>Mulab-ak ang kulur sa siní<pos>n</pos>à ug ibulad sa ínit,</i> The dress will get uneven in color (with dark interspersed with light) if you dry it in the sun. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b7c1]</itype> go beyond a measure, too far or too deeply. <i>Ang karsáda milab-ak ug usa ka mitru sa ámung yútà,</i> The road encroaches onto one meter of our land. <i>Pasaylúa ku kay nakalab-ak kug sulti ganína,</i> Please forgive me for having spoken beyond the bounds of decency a while ago. <i>Gilab-ak níya paghíwà ang íyang báhin sa kík,</i> He sliced a bigger portion of the cake for himself than for others. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having spaces or omissions in between. <i>Lab-ak nga pagkakural,</i> Fencing with the posts put too far apart. <number>1a</number> being uneven in color. <number>2</number> cut too deeply, gone over the mark or limits. <pos>n</pos> space left, area beyond which one has gone.

<p id=10374><form>labakára</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>laba</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10375><form>laban</form> (from <ix>labi</ix>) greater in number, size, intensity. <form>{ka-an|kalabanan}, {ka-an(&larr;)|kalabánan}</form> <pos>n</pos> most of a number of. <i>Kalabanan (kalabánan) sa mga Pilipínu mugbù,</i> Most Filipinos are short. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B3; b2c1]</itype> exceed, be more. <i>Mulaban (malaban) sa úras ang íyang paglakaw nganhi,</i> It will take more than an hour for him to get here. <i>Hinglabanan na sad nang ímung bisyu,</i> Your vices have gone beyond the limits of tolerance. <number>2</number> <itype>[b2P]</itype> do s.t. excessively. <i>Ayaw ug palabani (labani) ug latà ang tinúlang karni,</i> Do not cook the meat overly soft.

<p id=10376><form>lában</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> take sides with. <i>Mulában ku nímu ug hustu ka,</i> I&apos;ll go to your defense if you are right. <i>Gilabánan sa Yúis ang Israil,</i> The U.S. took sides with Israel. <number>1a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lában} sa nigusyu</formx> cooperate in making a business do well. <i>Dúnay mga tindírang dílì mulában sa nigusyu sa ílang agáwun,</i> Some salesgirls do not do anything to help their master&apos;s business. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> defend s.o. in a lawsuit. <i>Si Aturni Katunggal ang mulában sa ákung kásu,</i> Attorney Catunggal is defending me in a lawsuit. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>defend one&apos;s honor</tr>, uphold the stand he has taken. <i>Naglában lang ku sa ákung dungug sa pagpatay ku níya,</i> I killed him in defense of my honor. <i>Gilabánan níya ang íyang barugánan,</i> He stood by his principles. <form>{pa&N;-|panglában}</form> <pos>v</pos> be a lawyer by occupation. <pos>n</pos> occupation of lawyer. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|labanan}</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to take sides with one&apos;s child or other person in whom one is interested. <i>Ayg pakig-áway ánang bat-ána kay labanan ra ba kaáyu nag inahan,</i> Don&apos;t quarrel with that child because his mother tends to take sides with him. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become one who mixes in quarrels. <form>{ma&N;-r-|manglalában}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>attorney</tr>.

<p id=10377><form>lab-an</form> <xr>= <sc>laban</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10378><form>labana</form> <xr>= <sc>gwayabanu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10379><form>labandíru, -a</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>laba</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10380><form>labang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5c]</itype> <tr>cross</tr> s.t., go across, bring across. <i>Mulabang na ta, rid láyit na,</i> Let&apos;s cross now. It&apos;s red light. <i>Labangun pa nímu ang pitu ka lawud úsà ku nímu maangkun,</i> You cannot have me (lit. you have to cross seven seas before you can possess me). <i>Ilabang siya ngadtu sa píkas,</i> Bring her across the street. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b8]</itype> <tr>pass examinations</tr>. <i>Gamay ra ang milabang sa pasúlit sa pagkaduktur,</i> Only a few people passed the doctor&apos;s examination. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> come through a crisis. <i>Labangun (labangan) pa nímu ang túmang kaguul,</i> You will have to pass through great sorrow. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>surpass</tr>. <i>Labangan pa kunu níya ang ríkurd ni Sulayman,</i> She says she will beat Sulaiman&apos;s record. <i>Ayaw ilabang sa napúlù ang ímung pagkúhà,</i> Don&apos;t take more than ten. <pos>n</pos> place across from s.t. <i>Ang ílang baul náa sa labang sa sapà,</i> Their field is across the river. <form>{&mdash;|labang} pa, {sa|labang sa}</form> <tr>further than</tr>, <tr>more than</tr>. <i>Labang pa niánà ang ákung buhátun ug tagáan kug higayun,</i> I&apos;ll do more than that if I&apos;m given the chance. <form>{&mdash;|labang}, {-un|labangun} ug pitu ka lawud</form> may it not happen, may it be impossible (lit. have to cross seven seas to commit). <i>Simbaku. Labangun (ilabang) ug pitu ka lawud nga mamatay,</i> God forbid. Let it not happen that he die! <form>{-unun(&larr;)|labangunun}</form> <pos>n</pos> things one has to surmount, trials to which one is put. <form>{-anan(&larr;)|labangánan}, labnganan</form> <pos>n</pos> place one crosses.

<p id=10381><form>lab-ang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab]</itype> <tr>pass over</tr>, <tr>miss</tr>. <i>Milab-ang siyag usa ka dahun sa íyang gibása,</i> He skipped a page of what he was reading. <i>Lab-ang ug usa ka parapu,</i> Skip one paragraph. <pos>n</pos> amount missed, interval.

<pb n=540>

<p id=10382><form>labanus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>radishes</tr>. The white (Chinese) radishes are the variety most commonly grown in Cebu.

<p id=10383><form>labas<sub>1</sub></form> (from <ix>lab-as</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a2c]</itype> <tr>vend</tr> or <tr>peddle</tr> fish that one has bought (usually from the fisherman). <i>Naglabas lang ang íyang anak únà kay wà pa makasulud ug trabáhu,</i> Her daughter works buying and selling fish for the while because she doesn&apos;t have a job. <i>Ilabas ring ákung kuhà,</i> Peddle my catch. <form>{-íra|labasíra}</form> female fish vendor. <form>{-íru|labasíru}</form> <xr>= <sc>labasíra</sc></xr> (male).

<p id=10384><form>labas<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>gulà</sc></xr> (used only by speakers strongly influenced by Tagalog). <form>{pa-|palabas}</form> <pos>n</pos> boast, ostentatious display. <i>Ayaw tug tuúhi ang íyang hílak, palabas lang tu,</i> Don&apos;t pay attention to his crying fit. That was just a put-on.

<p id=10385><form>labas<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab7]</itype> spend entrusted money for oneself. <i>Gilabasan kug diyútay ang ímung gibílin nákù,</i> I used some of the money you had me keep for you.

<p id=10386><form>lab-as</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for s.t. quickly perishable to be <tr>fresh</tr>. <i>Lab-as nga hángin,</i> <tr>Fresh</tr> air. <i>Lab-as nga balità,</i> Fresh news. <i>Lab-as nga búlak,</i> Fresh flowers. <i>Lab-as isdà,</i> <tr>Fresh fish</tr>. <number>2</number> fresh in manner. <i>Lab-as ra kaáyu nang ímung panlihuklihuk,</i> Your actions are very fresh. <pos>n</pos> fresh fish. <i>Musúruy siyag lab-as káda buntag,</i> She peddles fresh fish every morning. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> be fresh. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB2; a12]</itype> make s.t. fresh to one&apos;s mind. <i>Mga handumánan nga naglab-as sa átung kagahápun,</i> Memories that keep our past fresh. <form>nilab-as</form> <pos>a</pos> in a fresh way. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a1]</itype> do s.t. in a fresh way. <i>Ginilab-as ku níyag pangutána,</i> He asked me in a disrespectful way. <form>{-íra|lab-asíra}</form> <pos>n</pos> female fish vendor. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a12]</itype> be a fish vendor. <form>{-íru|lab-asíru}</form> <xr>= <sc>lab-asíra</sc></xr> (male).

<p id=10387><form>labat</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fence</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>patches</tr> made in clothing, walls, fence. <i>Ang labat sa íyang karsúnis lainláin ang kulur,</i> The patches on his pants are of various colors. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> put up a fence. <i>Si Angì ang milabat sa ámung gardin,</i> Angi fenced our garden. <i>Labatun (labatan) nákug kawáyan ang bakilid sa ámung kalubihan,</i> I will fence the sloping part of our coconut plantation with bamboo slats. <number>2</number> <tr>repair</tr> a hole by filling or patching it. <form>labatlabat</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> rough and hurried mending. <number>2</number> makeshift fence or barrier. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> put up a temporary fence. <number>2</number> make coarse, temporary repairs. <i>Gilabatlabatan lang námù ug mga pinunit nga káhuy ang nagubang kural,</i> We patched up the broken fence with whatever pieces of wood we found. <i>Átù lang ning labatlabatang karsúnis,</i> We&apos;ll just do quick patchwork on these trousers.

<p id=10388><form>labatíba</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>enema</tr>. <number>2</number> the apparatus used to give an enema. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> give s.o. an enema. <i>Labatibáhan ta kag dì ka malibang,</i> If you don&apos;t have a B.M. I&apos;ll give you an enema.

<p id=10389><form>labaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B3; c]</itype> <tr>jut out higher than s.t.</tr>, <tr>stick out</tr> farther from the margin or limit. <i>Milabaw ang íyang úlu sa mga táwu,</i> His head jutted above the crowd. <i>Naglabaw ang ímung kamisun,</i> Your slip is showing. <i>Ilabaw ang antína sa mga atup,</i> Put the antenna higher than the rooftops. <number>2</number> <itype>[B3; b]</itype> be more, over in degree, number. <i>Way makalabaw sa íyang kahingatag,</i> No one can surpass his generosity. <i>Labwan nákù ang ímung kininhas,</i> I&apos;ll gather more shells than you did. <number>3</number> <tr>be ahead</tr> in a contest. <i>Isáka ang pusta ug mulabaw ta,</i> Raise the bet if we are ahead. <number>4</number> prevail over. <i>Milabaw ang ákung gugma sa kayugut níya,</i> My love for her prevailed over my hate. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> sticking out from the general level or margin. <i>Putla ang mga labaw,</i> Cut off the ones sticking up above the rest. <number>2</number> <tr>more</tr>, <tr>over</tr> in degree or number. <i>Labaw siyang dátù kay kanámù,</i> He is much richer than us. <number>3</number> <tr>ahead</tr> in a contest. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> amount s.o. is ahead. <i>Pilay labaw sa ímung kuntra?</i> How many points is your opponent ahead of you? <number>2</number> <tr>superior</tr>, <tr>boss</tr>. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|labaw} pa, sa</formx> in addition to, beyond. <i>Hatágan kag primyu, ug labaw pa niánà, makabyáhi ka,</i> You will be given a prize, and in addition to that, you can travel. <i>Buútan siya, utúkan, ug labaw sa tanan, gwápa,</i> She is good, brainy, and above all else, she is pretty. <form>{pa-(&larr;)|palábaw}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C; b3]</itype> try to outdo one another, vie with s.o. <i>Nagpalábaw sila sa hambug,</i> They try to outdo each other with their big talk. <i>Unsa may inyung gipalabáwan nga nagpanghugyaw man mu?</i> You must be having some sort of a contest that you&apos;re shouting so much. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12C2; b5c]</itype> play a game of any sort whereby the one who gets the highest number wins. <i>Nagpalábaw sila arun sa pag-ila kung kinsay musúgud sa dúwà,</i> They drew cards to determine who will start the game. <pos>n</pos> s.t. done to outdo s.o., e.g. action of winning by getting the highest number. <form>palabwánay</form> <xr>= <sc>palábaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10390><form>labay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> <tr>go</tr>, <tr>pass by</tr> s.t., bring s.t. by s.w. <i>Milabay lang ku, wà ku muhapit,</i> I just passed by, I didn&apos;t drop in. <i>Nakalabay na ba ang dyip?</i> Has the jeep passed by yet? <i>Labyun ku unyà tung ákung nalimtan sa inyu,</i> I&apos;ll come by to get the thing I forgot at your house. <i>Gilabyan lang ku nímu,</i> You just passed by me. <i>Ilabay kining sud-an unyà sa íla,</i> Bring this food by to them on your way. <number>2</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> <tr>pass over</tr>, <tr>bypass</tr>. <i>Gilabyan <pb n=541>níya ang ákung ngálan sa pagpanghímug prumusyun,</i> He passed my name over when he made the list of promotions. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> for time to pass. <i>Milabay ang daghang katuígan,</i> Years passed. <pos>a</pos> passing, short-lived. <i>Labay lang ning hangína kay unus man,</i> This strong wind is only temporary. It is just a squall. <form>{pa-|palabay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> let s.t. pass by. <i>Magpalabay ku sa ákung kasukù únà ku muulì,</i> I will let my anger pass before I go home. <i>Palabyun (ipalabay) lang tu nákung íyang sulti,</i> I just won&apos;t mind what she says. <form>{-um-r-|lumalabay}, {-um-r-(&larr;)|lumalábay}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> people passing back and forth. <number>2</number> <tr>passing</tr>, <tr>transient</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|labay} pa</form> <number>1</number> beyond. <i>Ang íla labay pa sa pusti,</i> Their place is just beyond the post. <number>2</number> in addition, even more. <i>Maáyu siyang mutrabáhu, labay pa musayu siyag anhi,</i> He works well and furthermore, he comes early. <i>&lsquo;Duha ka túig ka didtu sa Amirika?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Labay pa<corr sic="&rsquo;,">,&rsquo;</corr></i> &lsquo;You were two years in the States?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;More than that.&rsquo; <number>3</number> surely, even more than sure. <i>&lsquo;Makapasar kahà ka?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Labay pa,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Do you think you can pass?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Most assuredly.&rsquo;

<p id=10391><form>lábay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>throw</tr> at. <i>Labáyun tikawg hanggranid animála ka,</i> I&apos;ll throw a hand grenade at you, you beast. <i>Labáyi tag duha ka buuk bi,</i> Throw me down a couple. <i>Ilábay kanákù ang búla,</i> Throw me the ball. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>throw away</tr>. <i>Ilábay ang mga latà,</i> Throw away the spoiled fruits. <number>1b</number> throw, discard in a card game. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> assign to a remote place. <i>Way láin makalábay sa mga impliyádu ngadtu sa layù gawas sa supirintindinti,</i> No one can assign the employees to a remote place except the superintendent. <pos>n</pos> throw. <i>Kinsang lábay run?</i> Whose turn is it to throw? <i>Ang íyang lábay walà makaabut sa paril,</i> His throw didn&apos;t get as far as the wall. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|labayan}</form> <pos>n</pos> line drawn to indicate the place at which to stand in throwing s.t. <form>{-anan|labayanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> dumping place. <i>Ang Pásil labayánan sa tanang húgaw sa syudad,</i> Pasil is the place they dump all garbage in the city.

<p id=10392><form>labayan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> of several species of sea fish growing to <measure reg="15 cm">6&Prime;</measure>, with fine scales, found individually zigzagging in seaweed. <number>2</number> one who seems to be always on the go, like the <ix>labayan</ix>.

<p id=10393><form>labhà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[ABN; b4]</itype> for the skin to get welts, bruises, or red splotches; cause it to do so. <i>Nalabhà (nalabhaan) ang íyang nawung sa sagpà,</i> She got red splotches on her face when she was slapped. <i>Nanglabhà nang ímung nawung sa tipdas,</i> Your face is all splotched with measles. <number>2</number> <itype>[BN; a1P]</itype> blush, redden. <i>Milabhà (nanglabhà) ang íyang nawung sa kasukù,</i> His face became red with anger.

<p id=10394><form>labhag</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>welts</tr>, <tr>marks</tr>, <tr>splotches</tr> on the body. <i>Ang mga labhag sa kuku maila kaáyu,</i> You can easily tell welts made by the fingernails. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B4; b4]</itype> get welts, splotches on the body. <i>Milabhag ang íyang láwas sa tipdas,</i> His body became splotched with measles. <i>Ngánung nalabhagan ka man? Gipawù ka?</i> Why are you all covered with welts? Were you given a whipping? <number>2</number> <itype>[B; b4]</itype> appear like welts. <i>Milabhag dihà sa íyang agtang ang nagbandaybanday nga ugat,</i> His criss-crossing veins appeared like welts on his forehead. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> for emotions to leave their mark. <i>Milabhag sa ákung panumdúman ang íyang mga háit nga púlung,</i> Her sharp words etched themselves deeply in my memory. <number>4</number> <itype>[BN]</itype> blush, turn red all over. <i>Manlabhag ákung nawung ug makainum ku ug bínu,</i> My face gets red if I drink wine.

<p id=10395><form>labhak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rectangular piece</tr>, area. <i>Gibáhin ang syudad ug dagkung labhak,</i> The city was divided into large rectangular areas. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> divide into rectangular pieces or areas. <i>Kinsay naglabhak sa káhuy nga wà maángay?</i> Who cut the wood into rectangular pieces of all different sizes?

<p id=10396><form>labhu, labhù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a3b]</itype> pour boiling water over s.t. <i>Nakalabhù ka na ba sa mga sus-anan sa bátà?</i> Have you scalded the baby&apos;s bottles yet? <i>Ayaw pagdúul sa abu, malabhù (malabhuan) ka unyà,</i> Don&apos;t go near the stove. You might get scalded. <form>{-in-an|linabhúan}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>scalded</tr>. <i>Háin man ang ímung linabhúan?</i> Where are the things you have scalded?

<p id=10397><form>labi</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>more</tr>, <tr>greater</tr>. <i>Ug mau nay paági pag-uma, labi ang abut sa yútà,</i> If that is the method of farming employed, the yield of the land will increase. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b]</itype> <number>1</number> be greater than s.t. else or excessive. <i>Mulabi ang sakit ug mulíhuk ka,</i> The pain will increase if you move. <i>Naglabi ang mga gagmay sa mga dagkù,</i> There are more small ones than big ones. <i>Asgad ni kay nalabihan (nalabian) nákug timplag asin,</i> This is salty because I put too much salt into it. <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;|labi} nga</formx> <tr>more</tr>, <tr>most</tr>. <i>Siyay labing dátù,</i> He is the richest one. <number>2a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|labi} pang <r>[<ix>adj.</ix>], [<ix>verb</ix>]</r></formx> even more [adj.], [do] all the more. <i>Usa ka labi pang kusug nga pátid,</i> Even a stronger kick. <i>Ug búang ku, labi pa siyang búang,</i> If I&apos;m a fool, he&apos;s a greater one. <i>Ug sultíhan, labi pa siyang mangísug,</i> If you tell him, he gets all the angrier. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|labi} na</formx> <number>a</number> <xr>= <sc>ilabi na</sc>.</xr> <number>b</number> <formx>{&mdash;|labi} nang <r>[<ix>verb</ix>]</r></formx> [do, did] all the more. <i>Labi na siyang nangísug,</i> He got all the more angry. <i>Labi na (pa) siyang muhílak ug sugsúgun,</i> He will cry all the more if you tease him. <form>{i-|ilabi} na, {&mdash;|labi} <pb n=542>na</form> <tr>especially</tr>. <i>Lamían, ilabi (labi) na ug timpláhag asin,</i> It&apos;s very tasty, esp. if you season it with salt. <form>{pa-|palabi}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> prefer, favor. <i>Magpalabi kung magpabíling pubri kay sa ingun nímu,</i> I would rather be poor than be like you. <i>Palabihun ba nímu ang ímung irù sa ímung asáwa?</i> Do you favor your dog over your wife? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; bc2]</itype> do s.t. to excess. <i>Nagpalabi siyag ínum,</i> He is drinking too much. <i>Ayaw palabihi (palabii) pagpanggà ang ímung anak,</i> Don&apos;t dote on your child too much. <i>Ayaw ipalabi (palabii) ang ímung hílak,</i> Don&apos;t cry too much. <form>{pina-|pinalabi}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.o. preferred, favored. <i>Sa iskuyláhan way pinalabi,</i> No one gets special treatment in school. <form>{pa-(&larr;)|palábi}</form> <xr>= <sc>{pa-|palabi}</sc>, <ix>2</ix>.</xr> <form>labilábi</form> <formx>way {&mdash;|labilábi}</formx> no one gets more than anyone else. <i>Way labilábi. Púrus ángay,</i> No one gets more than anyone else. We all get a fair share. <form>palabilábi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> mistreat s.o. <i>Ayaw kug palabilabíhi (palabilabíi). Dì bayà ku nímu suluguun,</i> Don&apos;t kick me around. I&apos;m not your servant, you know. <form>palabilabihun</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to mistreat. <form>mapalabilabíhun</form> <pos>a</pos> characterized by mistreatment. <i>Mapalabilabíhung kasábà,</i> Arrogant scolding, far beyond the limits of propriety. <form>{su-(&larr;)|sulábi}</form> <number>1</number> <tr>especially</tr>, <tr>all the more so</tr>. <i>Sulábi nag timpláhag asin, wà giyuy lamì,</i> Esp. if you mix salt with it, it will have no flavor. <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;|sulábi} ug</formx> better than s.t. else which has the same disadvantages to a worse extent. <i>Ibaligyà lang nà run bisag barátu sulábig mubarátu pa ugmà,</i> You&apos;d better sell it now, even at a low price. Better than getting even less tomorrow. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. all the more. <i>Manday gitagáan ug diyis, misulábi (mipasulábi) ug hílak,</i> I gave him a dime, but he cried all the more. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>palabi</sc>, <ix>2</ix>.</xr> <form>mapasulabíhun</form> characterized by excessive indulgence. <i>Mapasulabíhun sa babáyi,</i> Indulging in women excessively. <form>{si-|silabi}</form> <xr>= <sc>{su-|sulabi}</sc>, <ix>2</ix>.</xr> <form>hilabihan</form> <pos>a</pos> carried out to excess. <i>Nahugù siya tungud sa kaguul nga hilabihan,</i> He became thin because of his excessive sorrows. <form>labihan, labian, hilabihan, ilabihan, hilabian, hinglabihan, labihánay, hilabihánay, labhan a &mdash; nga</form> [<ix>adj.</ix>] <form>{-a|labiha}, {ka-|kalabi}</form>[<ix>adj.</ix>] how very! <i>Labihang mahála sa karni, Labihan kamahal sa karni!</i> How expensive the meat is! <number>b</number> <formx>{&mdash;|labiha} nga <r>[<bx>maka-/naka-</bx><ix>verb</ix>]</r></formx> how it [did]. <i>Labihang makaulan dinhig mahulyu,</i> How it rains here during the month of July. <i>Labihan níyang nakaantus,</i> How he suffered! <form>labíhay, labihánay pud (sad)</form> It&apos;s unbelievable. <i>Labihánay pud. Nakaáku (makaáku) siya niánà?</i> It seems incredible that he could do (would do) that!

<p id=10398><form>lábid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC3; a]</itype> <tr>braid</tr>, become <tr>entwined</tr>. <i>Akuy mulábid niíning lánut,</i> I will braid these abaca fibers into rope. <i>Nalábid ang íyang dílà sa kalisud sa mga púlung,</i> His tongue became twisted because of the difficult words. <i>Nagkalábid ang duha ka hiniktan,</i> The two roosters became entwined. <i>Kataas sa ímung buhuk! Nindut labírun,</i> How long your hair is! It would be nice to braid it. <pos>n</pos> s.t. braided. <i>Unsay gidak-un niánang ímung lábid?</i> How big around is the rope you braided?

<p id=10399><form>labigan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. herb of moist places, with stout-branched, aromatic rhizomes and long, flat leaves with medicinal uses: <bio>Acorus calamus</bio>.

<p id=10400><form>lábil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>label</tr>, a <tr>mark</tr> put on s.t. for identification. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>label</tr> s.t. <i>Labílan lang ni nátung malíta,</i> Let us label this suitcase.

<p id=10401><form>lábing</form> <pos>a</pos> like <tr>sweethearts</tr>. <i>Lábing kaáyu silang magtiayúna,</i> They are a very loving couple. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> be loving. <i>Malábing ra man nà silag náay mutan-aw,</i> They get to be very loving if s.o. is watching them.

<p id=10402><form>labit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>stitch</tr> with a loop that holds but can be unravelled. <i>Si Lúsi ang mulabit niánang ímung panyù,</i> Lucy will stitch loops around the edges of your handkerchief. <form>labitlabit</form> <pos>n</pos> small bits of meat adhering to the bones or any part of a slaughtered animal. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; b5]</itype> stitch s.t. hurriedly and unevenly by hand. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for bits of meat to be left adhering to bones. <i>Panguháag mga unud nga naglabitlabit sa bukug,</i> Get the small bits of meat that are adhering to the bones. <pos>a</pos> meat which has lots of sinews. <i>Gáhì kaáyu usápun ning karníha, labitlabit,</i> This meat is very tough to chew. It is sinewy. <form>labitlabitun</form> <xr>= <sc>labitlabit</sc>, <i>a</i>.</xr> <form>{-íra|labitíra}, {-íru|labitíru}</form> <pos>n</pos> one who works stitching materials.

<p id=10403><form>labka</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>partially cooked</tr>, usually said of root crops and bananas, but sometimes of cereals as well. <i>Labka pa man ning kamúting ímung gilútù,</i> These sweet potatoes that you are cooking are still half done. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; b5c1]</itype> cook root crops halfway, and, by extension, cereals. <i>Mulabka (malabka) ang linung-ag ug dílì maángay ang káyu,</i> Rice will become unevenly cooked if the fire underneath it is uneven. <form>labkahan</form> <xr>= <sc>labka</sc>, <i>a</i>.</xr>

<p id=10404><form>lablab</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB12; ab2]</itype> <tr>slash</tr>, <tr>tear</tr> in a long slash. <i>Malablab ang bandíra ug kusgun ug hángin,</i> The flag will get ripped if it is blown in too strong a wind. <number>2</number> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> be <tr>loose fitting</tr>. <i>Mulablab (malablab) ang ímung sáya ug ímung padakuan,</i> Your skirt will be very loose if you have it enlarged. <form>{&mdash;|lablab} ang bàbà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> shoot off the mouth with unsensical, boasting talk. <i>Naglablab ang bàbà sa táwung nahubug,</i> The man who <pb n=543>got drunk became very talkative. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> big rip, slashed part. <i>Ang lablab sa sáku gipíkut,</i> The big rip on the sack was mended. <number>2</number> nonsensical talk, boasting. <pos>a</pos> loose fitting.

<p id=10405><form>labnaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>heavily diluted</tr>, having too much water. <i>Labnaw ra ning pagkalúgaw,</i> This porridge has too much water in it. <i>Labnaw ug dugù,</i> Weak-blooded, lacking drive or guts. <number>2</number> <tr>cool</tr>, lacking in warmth. <i>Labnaw siyag tinagdan sa mga bisíta kay dílì íyang grúpu,</i> She received her visitors <corr sic=cooly>coolly</corr> because they weren&apos;t her crowd. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; ab7]</itype> <number>1</number> be diluted, put too much water in a mixture. <i>Nagkalabnaw man ning ímung kapi nga daghan na hinúun kag súkì,</i> Your coffee is becoming weaker now that you have lots of customers. <number>2</number> get too cold, lacking in ardor.

<p id=10406><form>labni</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>snatch</tr>, grab with a jerk, esp. s.t. that s.o. has. <i>Wà mailhi sa dalága ang milabni sa íyang pitáka,</i> The maiden did not recognize the man who snatched her bag. <i>Gilabni lang níya ang suwat sa ákung kamut,</i> He just snatched the letter out of my hand.

<p id=10407><form>labnit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>snatch</tr> s.t. attached or just placed s.w. with a jerk. <i>Gilabnit ang íyang bangkaw ug mikaratil pagkanáug,</i> He grabbed his spear from the place he had put it and rushed out.

<p id=10408><form>labnub, labnug</form> <xr>= <sc>lagnub</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10409><form>labnut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>pull</tr> s.t. with a jerk, usually s.t. that is in s.t. else. <i>Sa íyang kapungut gilabnut níya ang tahì sa sanínà,</i> In her anger she ripped out the stitches of her dress. <i>Ang kurd sa plantsa dílì labnútun, hináyun pag-ibut,</i> You should pull out the cord slowly, not with a jerk. <i>Gilabnútan aku níya sa buhuk,</i> He pulled my hair.

<p id=10410><form>labsik</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lovesick</tr>. <i>Labsik kaáyu nà siya, maung ganíwang,</i> He is so lovesick that he has grown thin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get lovesick.

<p id=10411><form>labsit</form> <pos>n</pos> game of tennis or pingpong played so that a player is declared winner if he gets half the score of the set without letting his opponent get a single point. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> win by this method. <i>Musúkul ka nákù labsítun tika,</i> Are you going to play against me? I&apos;m going to beat you eleven to nothing. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12b8]</itype> get nothing for one&apos;s efforts. <i>Wà ku makalabsit sa ákung pagpanágat,</i> I did not go fishing for nothing. I got s.t.

<p id=10412><form>labtik</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>strike with a flicking or snapping motion</tr>. <i>Labtíkan tikaw sa lastiku,</i> I&apos;ll flick the rubber band at you. <i>Hilabtikan ka sa nawung ug buy-an ku ring sanga,</i> You&apos;ll get lashed in the face if I let go off this branch suddenly. <number>2</number> <itype>[B46]</itype> for a mechanism to click or snap. <i>Nagpúsing pa ku, nilabtik na diay ang kamira,</i> I was still posing, but the camera had already clicked. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for the heart to <tr>beat</tr>. <i>Milabtik ang ákung dughan sa kahinangup,</i> My heart beat with joy at seeing her. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>whip</tr> or s.t. to flick at s.t. <number>1a</number> reins of a carabao: a rope usually about 3&ndash;4 meters long attached to the end of the nose cord (<ix>pangilung</ix>). It is snapped on the carabao&apos;s back to urge it on. <number>2</number> action of flicking. <form>{pa-|palabtik}</form> <tr>hint</tr>, s.t. said indirectly. <i>Ang íyang mulù nga wà pay swildu ági lag palabtik nga muhulam siyag kwarta,</i> His complaints that he hadn&apos;t been paid were just his way of hinting that he&apos;d like to borrow money. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> give hints.

<p id=10413><form>labting</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>whip</tr> s.o. by flicking s.t. long and somewhat pliant at him. <i>Gilabtíngan nákù siyag tualya,</i> I flicked her with my towel.

<p id=10414><form>labtingaw, labtíngaw</form> <pos>a</pos> moderately <tr>salted</tr> fish, not completely dried. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB6; c1]</itype> dry fish, but not completely, with a moderate amount of salt. <i>Milabtíngaw silag bulad ug daghang isdà pára sa húngus,</i> They half dried a quantity of moderately salted fish for the work bee. <i>Walà malabtíngaw (mulabtíngaw) ang buwad kay naulanan,</i> The salted fish did not dry even part way because it got rained on.

<p id=10415><form>labu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for ripe fruit, cooked root crops, and squash to have a dry and consistent texture of meat without being soggy. <number>2</number> for skin to be dry. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> get to have a dry and consistent texture. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> get dry skin. <i>Mulabu ang pánit sa síging kalígù,</i> A person who always goes swimming will get dry skin.

<p id=10416><form>*labu<sub>2</sub></form> <form>kwartang {ma-|malabu}</form> sure, <tr>easy money</tr>. <i>Kwartang malabu ug maáyu kang ahinti, láway ray puhúnan,</i> It&apos;s sure money if you&apos;re a good sales agent. All you need for capital is yourself (lit. your saliva).

<p id=10417><form>lábu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <tr>sink deeply</tr>. <i>Milábu ang ayis pik sa dughan ni Kindi,</i> The ice pick sank deep into Candy&apos;s breast. <i>Mu ra ka man ug bairan nga nalábu sa lápuk,</i> You take forever to come back when I send you s.w. (Lit. You are like a whetstone thrown into the mud and fail to come up.) <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; c6]</itype> throw overboard. <i>Ang mga ismaglir naglábu sa ílang mga karga samtang gibugtaw sa taga kustum,</i> The smugglers jettisoned their cargo when the customs men pursued them. <number>3</number> <itype>[AP; b5]</itype> go into a woman. <i>Kinsa na sad kahay mulábu (mupalábu) niánang bayhana karung gabíi?</i> I wonder who will use that woman tonight. <number>4</number> <itype>[B26; a1]</itype> for <pb n=544>garments to become loose-fitting and flapping. <i>Milábu (nalábu) ang íyang mga siní<pos>n</pos>à karung daut na siya,</i> Her clothing has gotten loose now that she lost weight. <pos>n</pos> depth of s.t. sunk in. <i>Usa giyud ka pulgáda ang lábu sa lansang sa íyang lapalapa,</i> The nail sank <measure reg="2.6 cm">1&Prime;</measure> into the sole of his foot. <form>{pa-|palábu}</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. net fishing whereby the net is spread before the sun sets and hauled in some hours later, but before the sun rises. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> go net fishing in this way.

<p id=10418><form>lábu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; ab2]</itype> <tr>fool s.o. by flattery or lies</tr>. <i>Nalábu sa kandidátu ang mga pumipilì, nakadaug giyud,</i> The voters were fooled by the candidate, so he won. <form>{&mdash;|lábu} líbà, {&mdash;|lábu} kasuy</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. said to fool s.o. <i>Lábu líbà (kasuy) lang ang mga pasálig sa tinuryu,</i> The Don Juan&apos;s promises are designed to deceive. <form>linabúhan, pinanglabúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. gained by flattery or deceit. <form>{-um-r-|lumalábu}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>flatterer</tr>, <tr>deceiver</tr>.

<p id=10419><form>lábu<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> for fish to run in schools. <i>Mulábu ang mga isdà sa ímung tungud kun patungdan mug sugà,</i> Fish gather in throngs beneath you if you beam a light down into the water. <i>Ang paun nga íyang gisabúlak mauy nakalábu (nakapalábu) sa mga isdà,</i> The bait that he sprinkled around in the water made the fish gather in schools. <pos>n</pos> school of fish, throng of people.

<p id=10420><form>labù</form> <xr>= <sc>labu<sub>1</sub></sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr>

<p id=10421><form>lábù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB]</itype> for vision to get <tr>blurred</tr>; cause it to do so. <i>Milábù ang íyang mga mata sa lúhà,</i> Her vision was blurred with tears.

<p id=10422><form>lábù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> <tr>grow thick and lush</tr>. <i>Mulábù ang mga tanum kun hambúkan,</i> Plants will grow thick and lush if you loosen the soil around the base. <pos>a</pos> lush, thick in growth. <i>Lábù ug kílay,</i> Thick eyebrows.

<p id=10423><form>lab-u</form> <xr>= <sc>labhù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10424><form>labud</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>welt</tr>. <i>Dílà ra ang walay labud nímu,</i> I&apos;ll beat every inch of you. (Lit. only your tongue will escape welts.) <number>2</number> k.o. <corr sic=milliped>millipede</corr>, about <measure reg="13 cm">5&Prime;</measure> long and an inch around, found in moist earth. The body is covered with a hard, black shell divided into thin segments which go around the body and overlap. It does not bite but secretes a clear yellow substance which burns the skin and may blind the eyes. <number>3</number> lies designed to convince s.o. (slang). <i>Dì ku mutúu nímu kay labud nà,</i> I don&apos;t believe you, because that is nothing more than big talk. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[BN; b4N]</itype> get welts on. <i>Nanglabud (gipalabdan) ang ákung bukubuku,</i> My back has welts all over it. <number>2</number> <itype>[a4]</itype> infested with <corr sic=millipeds>millipedes</corr>. <i>Gilabud ang sílung sa ámung balay,</i> The area under our house is full of millipeds. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> convince s.o. with lies (slang). <i>Nakalabud siya sa íyang asáwa nga pasurúyun,</i> He told his wife some tall stories so she would let him go out.

<p id=10425><form>labug</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> dish consisting of shredded boiled fish stewed in vinegar, coconut juice, and spices. <number>2</number> dish consisting of shredded broiled fish mixed with pickled fish. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac1]</itype> fix <ix>labug</ix>. <i>Labugun lang ni nátung pági,</i> Let&apos;s cook this rayfish in vinegar and coconut juice. <form>{-in-|linabug}</form> <xr>= <sc>labug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10426><form>lábug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> throw out. <i>Dílì ku mulábug ug butang hangtud dílì madúnut,</i> I don&apos;t throw things away until they are rotten. <i>Sábà dinhà, ikaw unyà ang ákung ilábug,</i> Keep quiet, or I will throw you out. <i>Nahilábug (nalábug) ku paglíkù ug kalit sa trák,</i> I was thrown a distance when the bus made an abrupt curve. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; c]</itype> assign s.o. to a far away place. <i>Ang kuntra níyang supirbisur mauy milábug níya ngadtu sa búkid,</i> The supervisor that had a grudge against him assigned him to teach in the mountains. <pos>n</pos> distance to which s.t. is thrown.

<p id=10427><form>labuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> for a chicken to attack.<i> Milabuk ang himungáan dihang gihilabtan ang pisù,</i> The hen charged when s.o. messed with her chicks. <number>1a</number> charge into a fray like a chicken. <i>Gilabukan níya ang íyang kuntra sa dihang gimiramiráhan siya,</i> She lunged at her enemy when he waved his finger at her. <number>1b</number> <itype>[CP; acP]</itype> have cocks fight each other for practice. <i>Nakiglábuk (nakigpalábuk) si Talyu sa íyang tiksas sa halsi sa íyang silíngan,</i> Talyo had his Texas cock have a practice fight with his neighbor&apos;s Hulsey. <number>1c</number> <itype>[A]</itype> come in a gust. <i>Milabuk ang hángin ug unyà mikalma dáyun,</i> The wind gusted and then calmed down. <i>Katáhap nga milabuk sa íyang pangísip,</i> A suspicion that suddenly arose in his mind. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> go after what one wants. <i>Ingun ka báyut siya. Mulabuk sad nà ug makalugar,</i> You said he was a sissy, but I assure you he won&apos;t sit on his hands if he gets half a chance. <number>2a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|labuk} sa hílum</formx> go after what one wants without letting on to others. <i>Milabuk siya sa hílum ug nakaunag hangyù,</i> He moved in without letting others notice it, and he was the first one to ask. <pos>n</pos> way of attacking. <form>hílum, sikrítu ug {&mdash;|labuk}</form> doing things on the sly (secretly). <i>Pahilumhílum nang tawhána, apan sikrítug labuk,</i> That man pretends to be quiet, but actually he is doing things on the sly. <form>{(&larr;)|lábuk}</form> <pos>n</pos> action of clashing with one another. <form>labuklábuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> do s.t. intermittently. <i>Ígù lang siyang mulabuklábuk sa trabáhu <pb n=545>kay may láin siyang lingaw,</i> He just appears at work from time to time because he has other diversions.

<p id=10428><form>lab-uk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b3]</itype> <number>1</number> swallow one&apos;s saliva. <i>Nagpanlab-uk siya sa láway sa kaíbug,</i> He swallowed his spittle in his great desire. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>lad-uk</sc>.</xr> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> action of swallowing the saliva. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>lad-uk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10429><form>labulábu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; ab25]</itype> do s.t. with intensity and unrestrainedly. <i>Ug mulabulábu ug trabáhu wà man gihápuy ingkris,</i> If I work very hard, I still won&apos;t get a raise. <i>Naglabulábu ang káun sa inyu,</i> They were eating in great quantities and without restraint at your house. <i>Hinglabulabúhan lagig hawuk, padilìdílì bítaw,</i> She was subjected to intense and rough kissing. That&apos;s what she gets for pretending not to want to.

<p id=10430><form>labun, lábun</form> <number>1</number> when in fact, actually.<i> Gwápa kaáyu, labun hugawan diay,</i> She is beautiful, but actually she has dirty habits. <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;|labun} kay</formx> anyway, [so-and-so] is OK. In any case ... <i>Musugut sad kug dílì ta mangadtu, labun kay daghan ku ug trabáhu,</i> It would be all right with me if we don&apos;t go there. Anyway, I have lots of work to do. <number>3</number> while, to take advantage of a situation. <i>Manan-aw tag sini labun daghan pa kug kwarta,</i> Let&apos;s go see a movie while I still have lots of money. <form>{(&rarr;)|labun}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> be more prevalent. <i>Maglabun ang sulti kay sa búhat,</i> There is more talk than action. <form>{-ay(&larr;)|labúnay}, {si|silabun}-, {si-(&larr;)|silábun}</form> <xr>= <sc>labun</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr> <form>{pa-|palabun}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> be partial, have preference for. <i>Nagpalabun si Albin sa pagkatúlug kay sa pagsuruysúruy,</i> Alvin would rather sleep than go around. <i>Palabunun kung mag-inusára kay sa magminyù nga maglisudlisud,</i> I&apos;d rather be alone than marry and be financially hard up. <i>Ákù ning ipalabun ang dakung páhat sa tigúlang,</i> I&apos;ll give the old woman the bigger share.

<p id=10431><form>labung<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>dabung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10432><form>labung<sub>2</sub>, lábung</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> abundant and long of growth. <i>Labung (lábung) ang buhuk sa ákung anak,</i> My child has thick, lush hair. <i>Lábung ang kúgun,</i> The saw grass is growing tall and thick. <number>2</number> exaggerating for the sake of bragging. <i>Labung ug sinultihan, Boastful in his speech.</i> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B]</itype> growing abundantly. <i>Milabung ang mga sagbut pag-ulan,</i> The weeds and grasses became thick and lush when it rained. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> become boastful. <i>Gilábung níya ang íyang sinultihan arun pagpatúu nga dakù siyang asyindíru,</i> He spoke in a bragging way to make people believe he was a big plantation owner.

<p id=10433><form>labur</form> <pos>n</pos> embroidery. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> embroider. <i>Mga madring Bilgas ang naglabur sa mga bílung pinya,</i> The Belgian sisters embroidered the pineapple fiber veils. <i>Ákung gilaburan ang tanang panyù nga ákung gipangrigálu,</i> I embroidered all the handkerchiefs I gave out as gifts.

<p id=10434><form>laburaturyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>laboratory</tr>.

<p id=10435><form>labut</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>lubut</sc></xr> (dialectal).

<p id=10436><form>lábut</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>concern</tr>, <tr>connection</tr>, part of. <i>Wà kay lábut sa ámung gipanagsultíhan,</i> What we are talking about is no concern of yours. <i>Wà kuy lábut sa nahitabù,</i> I have nothing to do with what happened. <number>2</number> <tr>including</tr>. <i>Lábut ba ning baskit sa prisyu sa prútas?</i> Is the basket included in the price of the fruits? <i>Lábut ka sa íyang kasukù,</i> You&apos;re included in his anger. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lábut} pa</formx> <tr>besides</tr> that. <i>Tagáan siyag primyu. Lábut pa maasáwa níya ang prinsísa,</i> He will be given a reward, and besides he can marry the princess. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN23; c1]</itype> concern oneself with s.t., be included in the responsibility for s.t. <i>Dì lang ku mulábut (manlábut) ánà kay mu ra mag siyay sad-an,</i> I won&apos;t mix into that affair because he&apos;s apparently guilty. <i>Ayawg ilábut ang inahan nákù sa áway,</i> Don&apos;t drag my mother into the quarrel. <form>{(&rarr;)|labut}</form> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>hilabut</sc>.</xr> <form>{hi-(&rarr;)|hilabut}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>touch</tr>, <tr>meddle</tr> with s.t. or s.o., cause trouble or bother. <i>Ang muhilabut niíning ákung butang mapawù gayud,</i> Whoever touches my things will get a whipping. <i>Hilabtan gánì nang ákung manghud,</i> If you dare meddle with my little sister,... <number>2</number> steal. <i>Hipúsa ang ímung aláhas, hilabtan unyà,</i> Put your jewels in a safe place. They might be stolen. <number>3</number> have <tr>sexual intercourse</tr> (euphemism). <i>Wà siya muhilabut (manghilabut) sa íyang asáwa kay nagdaut pa man kini,</i> He did not have sexual intercourse with his wife because she was still sick. <number>4</number> harm. <i>Dílì na makahilabut nátù ang úngù kay dúna man tay panagang,</i> That vampire can&apos;t harm us because we have a charm. <form>hilabtánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>meddlesome</tr>, given to stealing. <number>2</number> tending to molest women. <i>Sus, pagbantay giyud mu ánang lakíha, hilabtánun ra ba nag babáyi,</i> My! Better be careful. That man is known to be dangerous to women. <form>labutlabut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become meddlesome. <i>Ayawg labutlabut sa ámung áway,</i> Don&apos;t meddle in our quarrel. <number>2</number> <itype>[c]</itype> include s.t. which shouldn&apos;t be included. <i>Ayawg ilabutlabut sa átung lális ang way lábut,</i> Don&apos;t include irrelevant matters in our argument. <form>{pangi-|pangilábut}, {panggi-|panggilábut}, {pangin-|panginlábut}, {panghi-|panghilábut}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> meddle in with s.t., make s.t. one&apos;s business. <i>Ngánung manggilábut ku sa inyung prublíma?</i> Why should I mix in with your problems? <i>Ngánung panggilabútan <pb n=546>pa níya ang ákung kaminyúun?</i> Why is he meddling into my wedding plans? <form>{ig-|iglábut}, dílì {ig-|iglábut}</form> not related. <i>Makapangasáwa ka níya, kay dílì mu siya iglábut,</i> You can marry her because she is unrelated to you. <form>{ka-an|kalabútan}</form> <pos>n</pos> involvement, responsibility. <i>Ang taksi draybir may kalabútan sa káwat,</i> The taxi driver had s.t. to do with the robbery.

<p id=10437><form>*labuy</form> <form>{pa-|palabuy}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>ignore s.t. said against one&apos;s own person</tr>. <i>Maldíta kaáyu nang bayhána, dì giyud nà mupalabay ug sulti, suklían giyud,</i> That woman is ill-natured. She never lets a word pass without answering back. <i>Ipalabuy (palabuya) lang ang mga huhungíhung nga way katinúan,</i> Just ignore groundless rumors. <form>palabuylábuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> give hints. <i>Palabuylabúyi ug sulti si Máma arun makasabut nga nagkinahanglan tag kwarta,</i> Give Mama some hints so she will understand that we need money.

<p id=10438><form>labúyù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>adolescent rooster</tr>. <number>2</number> wild chicken, male or female, characterized by its smallness as compared with the domestic ones. <form>{-un|labuyúun}</form> <pos>a</pos> having the characteristics of a wild chicken.

<p id=10439><form>labyug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB46; c]</itype> <tr>swing</tr> vigorously with a sweeping arc. <i>Grabíha sad nímung nakalabyug sa dúyan,</i> My, how vigorously you swing the hammock. <i>Milabyug ang bágun nga gikumbitáyan ni Tarsan,</i> The vine that Tarzan rode swung with sweeping arc. <i>Ilabyug ang písì úsà ilábay,</i> Swing the rope vigorously before you throw it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear a loose style of trousers. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> swinging motion with a sweeping arc. <number>2</number> style of loose-fitting trousers. <form>{pa&N;-|panglabyug}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a]</itype> go fishing with a line. <i>Ang katambak panlabyúgun,</i> Porgies are caught by casting a line. <form>{pina-|pinalabyug}</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>labyug</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr>

<p id=10440><form>lad-an</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>lála</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10441><form>lad-ang</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> water having a slightly salty taste. <i>Lad-ang ang túbig sa atábay nga duul sa dágat,</i> Water from a well near the sea tends to taste a bit salty. <number>1a</number> for drinking water or soup to have a flat taste. <number>2</number> responding with no enthusiasm, coldly. <i>Lad-ang ang íyang tinagdan kanákù,</i> She gave me a cool reception. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; a6]</itype> get, be flat or salty tasting. <i>Mulad-ang (malad-ang) ang túbig human pabukála,</i> Water tastes flat after it is boiled. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> be cool in one&apos;s dealings with s.o.

<p id=10442><form>ladíla</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>trowel</tr> for plastering or smoothing out cement. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> use a trowel on s.t.

<p id=10443><form>ladlad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> spread soaped white clothes under the sun to bleach them. <i>Nagladlad siya sa íyang mga sinabunan sa kasagbutan,</i> She spread the soaped clothes on the grass. <i>Ang mga dikulur ayaw iladlad,</i> Don&apos;t spread the colored things out to bleach. <number>2</number> <tr>spread</tr> for display. <i>Iladlad ang mga baligyà sa asíras,</i> Spread the goods to display them on the sidewalk. <i>Dílì ángay iladlad ang láwas sa publiku,</i> It is not proper to display your body to the public. <number>2a</number> <tr>show</tr>, <tr>present</tr>, <tr>tell</tr>. <i>Miladlad siya sa ákung angsu nga kagahápun,</i> She spread the smelly details of my past out for the public to enjoy. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> set a fishline or net. <i>Dì ta muladlad sa pukut sa duha ka dupa kay mabaw ra,</i> We will not set the net at two fathoms because it&apos;s a bit too shallow. <pos>n</pos> goods laid out on the sidewalk for display. <i>Kining guntínga didtu níya mapalit sa ladlad,</i> She bought this pair of scissors from a sidewalk vendor. <form>{-in-|linadlad}</form> <pos>n</pos> soaped clothes spread for bleaching.

<p id=10444><form>láds</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>lodge</tr>, <tr>rent</tr> a room or sleeping space. <pos>n</pos> <tr>loge</tr> in a movie house. <form>ladyir</form> <pos>n</pos> lodger.

<p id=10445><form>lad-uk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>gulp down</tr> a liquid. <i>Mulad-uk lang siyag kapi dáyung adtus trabáhu,</i> He gulps down a cup of coffee before leaving for work. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>lab-uk</sc>.</xr> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> action of swallowing liquids. <number>2</number> quantity of liquid in a swallow. <i>Tulu ka lad-uk sa túbig ígung ipugung sa uhaw,</i> Three swallows of water, enough to stave off thirst.

<p id=10446><form>ladyir</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>láds</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10447><form>laga</form> <xr>= <sc>hulmígas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10448><form>làgà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> broil water or water with s.t. in it: coffee, medicinal herbs, and the like. <i>Naglàgà kug luy-a pára sa nagsakit kung tiyan,</i> I am brewing ginger tea for my stomachache. <form>{-anan|làgáanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> any cooking utensil used for boiling purposes.

<p id=10449><form>lagáak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S3(1)46]</itype> produce a loud cracking or splitting sound. <i>Kusug nga nakalagáak ang kawáyan pagpíkas niíni,</i> The bamboo produced a loud cracking sound when it was split.

<p id=10450><form>lag-ab<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>drink in large gulps</tr>, drink greedily. <i>Adtu na pud sa tubaan. Paglag-ab na pud didtu,</i> Go on to the drinking stand. Swig your toddy. <i>Ug lag-ábun nímu ang sabaw, dì na hisalinan ang uban,</i> If you gulp all of the soup down, there won&apos;t be any left for the others. <pos>n</pos> gulp. <i>Sa usa ka lag-ab nahurut níya ang usa ka básu,</i> He drank up the glassful in one gulp.

<p id=10451><form>lag-ab<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> having spaces in between. <i>Lag-ab ang pagkasalug sa balay,</i> The flooring was put in with spaces between the floor boards. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2; c1]</itype> get spaces between. <i>Naglag-ab ang kamaisan kay daghan ang wà muturuk,</i> The corn plants came up far apart because so many failed to germinate. <i>Nalag-aban ang ámung baul sa karsáda,</i> The road divided <pb n=547>our field. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b7]</itype> <tr>destroy a large portion of s.t.</tr>, remove a large chunk out of. <i>Ang bagyung Naring milag-ab sa ámung kalubihan,</i> Typhoon Naring destroyed a large number of our coconut plants. <i>Gilag-ában ug dakù ang kík,</i> A big part was taken off the cake. <pos>n</pos> amount taken off.

<p id=10452><form>lag-ab<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> belch, burp. <i>Milag-ab siya sa kabusug,</i> He burped because he was full. <i>Dílì makatulug ang bátà ug dílì makalag-ab,</i> The child can&apos;t go to sleep unless he burps.

<p id=10453><form>lagablab</form> (from <ix>lablab</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for clothing to be loose so as to be flapping. <number>2</number> <tr>talking continuously</tr> and inconsequentially. <i>Katuúhan ba gud nà nga lagablab man,</i> Can you believe him when he babbles on all the time? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> be loose and flapping. <i>Nalagablab ang pagkatahì sa íyang sinínà,</i> After it was sewed, her dress was so loose it flapped. <i>Naglagablab ang íyang ági sa íyang paglabay,</i> She passed by with her skirts flapping. <i>Naglagablab ang bandíra,</i> The flag flapped. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> blab, talk too much. <i>Sugut lang nà siyag way káun basta makalagablab lang,</i> She doesn&apos;t mind not eating so long as she can shoot off her mouth. <i>Pagbantay unyag kining ímung hidunggan ímung ilagablab,</i> Better watch out if you blabber about what you heard here.

<p id=10454><form>lagak, lágak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>lower</tr> s.t. on a line. <i>Dinhi lang nátù lagákun (ilágak) ang báling,</i> Let us just cast the fishing net here. <pos>n</pos> length of line lowered.

<p id=10455><form>lagàlà</form> <pos>a</pos> given to loud <tr>boasting</tr>. <pos>n</pos> action of boasting. <i>Maáyu sa abugádu nang lagàlà, kay dílì palúpig,</i> Having a big mouth is good for lawyers, because no one can outdo them. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be vocally boastful. <i>Nagkalagàlà si Ídi nga nagkadakù ang íyang katungdánan,</i> Eddie is getting more and more loud-mouthed with his boasting now that he has been promoted. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|lagàláun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>boastful</tr> sort.

<p id=10456><form>lagàlagà</form> <pos>n</pos> a darting light from a flickering fire or phosphorescent light. <i>Ang lagàlagà sa mga aniníput nakahátag ug talagsaung dan-ag,</i> The flashes of phosphorescence given off by the fireflies gave an unusual brightness. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> give off flashes of darting light. <i>Naglagàlagà ang lamparilya nga nahutdan sa gás,</i> The kerosene lamp is flickering because it ran out of gas.

<p id=10457><form>lagalaw</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <xr>= <sc>lagaraw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10458><form>lagamak</form> <xr>= <sc>lugamak</sc>.</xr>

<!-- lagang_2 in addenda -->

<p id=10459><form>lagang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> chambered nautilus.

<p id=10460><form>lagapak, lagápak</form> <xr>= <sc>lugapak</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10461><form>lagaplap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for s.t. flat to come partly off so as to flap. <i>Mulagaplap ang lapalapa sa sapátus ug maukang,</i> The sole of your shoe will flap if it comes partly off.

<p id=10462><form>lagarat, lagárat</form> <pos>a</pos> harsh and grating sound of voice. <i>Misinggit siyag pakitábang sa lagarat nga tíngug,</i> She called for help in a raspy, hoarse voice. <i>Lagarat sa masinggan,</i> The rat-a-tat-tat of the machine gun. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S; a]</itype> for the voice to get harsh, grating. <i>Magkalagarat ang tíngug sa táwu nga palaínum,</i> A heavy drinker&apos;s voice becomes harsh with time.

<p id=10463><form>lagaraw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. long <tr>machete</tr> with a blunt end which curves downward, used for rough clearing, picking up coconuts, and the like. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> wear or use a <ix>lagaraw</ix>.

<p id=10464><form>lagárì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>saw</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> saw.

<p id=10465><form>lagas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for a person to be <tr>old</tr>. <i>Dalágang lagas,</i> Old maid. <number>2</number> for corn to ripen. <i>Lagas na ang mais. Sanggiun na,</i> The corn is mature, ready for harvesting. <number>3</number> withered, shriveled up to the point that it falls off the stem. <i>Nagkayamúkat ang nataran sa lagas,</i> The yard is untidy with all the fallen leaves. <number>4</number> having spent long s.w. <i>Lagas na ku dinhi sa Pilipínas,</i> I&apos;ve spent a long time here in the Philippines. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> for a person to become old. <i>Mulagas (malagas) kag dalì ug maghínay kag panuyù,</i> You&apos;ll age fast if you are always angry. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> for corn to mature, be ready for harvest. <number>2a</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> be overtaken by the ripening of corn. <i>Malagasan ka na lang ánang ímung gitanum, dílì ka pa makaamural,</i> Those corn seedlings will be ready for harvest before you get around to proposing. <number>3</number> <itype>[APB; a]</itype> for leaves, fruits to wither and fall off; cause them to do so. <i>Yugyúga ang mansanítas arun mulagas (malagas) ang mga búnga ug dáhun,</i> Shake the tree so that its dried leaves and fruits will fall off. <number>4</number> <itype>[B5]</itype> for a period of time to come to an end. <i>Maghinayhínay na kug panghípus kay nagkalagas na ang adlaw,</i> I had better begin packing up as the day is coming to an end.

<p id=10466><form>lagas<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>pursue</tr>, run after. <i>Nakalagas ku sa trák kay gilabyan lang ku,</i> I was forced to run after the truck because it just passed me by. <number>2</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> get caught up with. <i>Diin ka hilagasi?</i> Where did they catch up with you?

<p id=10467><form>lagasak</form> <pos>n</pos> splattering, pattering noise made by water falling on s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for water to make a splattering noise. <i>Naglagasak ang íhì níya sa batu,</i> Her urine made a splashing sound as it hit the rocks.

<p id=10468><form>lagat<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for root crops or bananas to have a soft, stringy consistency with no flavor. <i>Lagat ning sagínga kay ahat pagkahinug,</i> These <pb n=548>bananas are soft and stringy because they were picked before they were ripe. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a1]</itype> get soggy and fibrous. <i>Mulagat ang kamúti ug madugay ug húmul sa túbig,</i> Sweet potatoes become soggy if they are left soaking in water too long.

<p id=10469><form>lagat<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for the eyes to be <tr>bulging</tr>. <form>{(&larr;)|lágat}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B23]</itype> for the eyes to bulge. <i>Nilágat ang íyang mga mata sa kahibúlung,</i> His eyes popped out of his head in surprise.

<p id=10470><form>lagatak</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a <tr>clattering</tr>, slapping, thudding noise of numerous things hitting s.t. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>lagasak</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> strike with a clatter. <i>Milagatak ang mga batu sa bungbung,</i> The stones hit the wall with a rattling sound. <i>Milagatak ang mga sinsilyu sa simintu,</i> The coins dropped with a clatter on the cement floor. <number>2</number> shell out a large amount of money for s.t. not necessary. <i>Upat ka gatus ang nalagatak níya sa nayitklab,</i> He spent four hundred pesos at the night club. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>lagasak</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10471><form>lagatlat</form> <pos>a</pos> for corn grits to be wet and unevenly cooked. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> for corn grits to come out <ix>lagatlat</ix>. <i>Mulagatlat ang linung-ag ug daghan ang túbig ug kúwang sa káyu,</i> Corn grits come out wet and unevenly cooked if you use too much water and not enough fire.

<p id=10472><form>lagatukan</form> <pos>a</pos> almost cooked, but not quite. <i>Lagatukan pa ang kamunggay, ayaw ú<pos>n</pos>à haúna,</i> The vegetables are not quite soft. Let them cook a bit longer.

<p id=10473><form>lagaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. deep sea fish with pink skin about <measure reg="15 cm">6&Prime;</measure> in length and <measure reg="5.1 cm">2&Prime;</measure> in width, caught in large schools.

<p id=10474><form>lagay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>penis</tr> (coarse). <number>2</number> <tr>scrotal sack</tr> encasing the testicles. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> be hit or struck on the penis or in the scrotum. <i>Lagaya siya pagpátid,</i> Kick him in the balls.

<p id=10475><form>lagay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>bribe</tr>, grease the palm (slang). <i>Wà man ka mulagay mau nga gidakup ka,</i> You didn&apos;t give him anything, so you were arrested. <number>2</number> bribes given to s.o. in power.

<p id=10476><form>lagbà</form> <xr>= <sc>labà<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=10477><form>lagbas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b5]</itype> <tr>pierce</tr> or traverse through. <i>Milagbas sa íyang panumdúman ang tíngug sa íyang asáwa,</i> The voice of his wife passed through his mind. <i>Milagbas ang lansang ngari sa píkas,</i> The nail pierced through the other side. <i>Lagbasun (lagbasan) ning sinilása ug lansang,</i> A nail can pierce through these slippers. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a123]</itype> arrive at a destination after having gone through s.t. <i>Dúgay kung kalagbas dinhi kay daghan kug gihapithapitan,</i> It took me a long time to get here because I had to stop at several places. <number>3</number> <itype>[AC; bc]</itype> go, bring s.t. beyond s.t. <i>Tingálig magkalagbas ta,</i> I&apos;m afraid we might pass by each other without knowing it. <i>Makalagbas ka kahà sa íyang abilidad?</i> Do you think you can surpass his ability? <i>Gilagbasan námù ang inyung balay,</i> We went beyond your house. <form>{&mdash;|lagbas} sa</form> <number>1</number> through an area or over a stretch of time. <i>Babáying naglakaw lagbas sa háwan sa tulunghaan,</i> A woman walking across the courtyard of the school. <number>2</number> beyond s.t. <i>Lagbas pa sa pusti,</i> Beyond the post. <form>{-anan|lagbasanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> place one passes through. <form>{-in-an(&rarr;)|linagbasan}</form> <pos>n</pos> a mark left by s.t. that passed.

<p id=10478><form>lagdà</form> <pos>n</pos> pattern or outline to which s.t. is to conform. <number>1</number> rules of behavior or action. <i>Lagdà sa gramatika,</i> Rules of grammar. <i>Lagdà sa pamatásan,</i> Code of behavior. <number>2</number> temporary stitches to be sewn over. <number>2a</number> tracing. <number>3</number> signature. <i>Way lagdà ang tsíki,</i> The check lacks a signature. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give a set of rules to be followed. <i>Unsay gilagdà sa Kudigu Pinal báhin niíni?</i> What does the Penal Code state about this? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> baste, make temporary stitches prior to sewing. <i>Gilagdaan pa ni, dílì untà maghíbat,</i> If you had basted it first, it wouldn&apos;t have come out crooked. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> trace a pattern. <i>Ang tiil sa bátà gilagdà ku sa papil,</i> I traced the outline of the child&apos;s foot on a piece of paper. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> affix one&apos;s signature.

<p id=10479><form>lagdas</form> <pos>a</pos> careless, not giving s.t. its proper attention. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; bP]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. without proper care. <i>Mulagdas (mupalagdas) lang nag higdà bísan ása,</i> He lies down any old place. <i>Hikaiktan kay naglagdas man lag sulti,</i> He got scolded because he spoke without thinking. <i>Gipalagdásan (gilagdásan) lang níla ang nigusyu maung nabangkarúta,</i> They just let their business go, so it went bankrupt. <number>2</number> be any old place, everywhere. <i>Gibutangan nákug hilu ánang gabíi<corr>.</corr> Pagkabuntag nanglagdas na ang ilagà,</i> I put out poison for the rats that night, and in the morning the rats were scattered all over the place. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> <xr>= <sc>pa-</sc>, <ix>1.</ix></xr> <form>{pa-|palagdas}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> stay in a place without moving away, though there may be good reason to settle elsewhere. <i>Mupalagdas (magpalagdas) lang ku sa ámù kay mahadluk kung mulangyaw,</i> I&apos;ll stay in our place forever because I&apos;m afraid to migrate. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> fish with the <ix>palagdas</ix> set s.w. <pos>n</pos> fishing with a pole which is left alone s.w. and tended only when s.t. bites. <form>{pama-|pamalagdas}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> put in an application s.w. on a slim chance. <i>Mamalagdas lang kug aplay dihà básin pag dawátun,</i> I&apos;ll try my luck in applying in case I am accepted.

<pb n=549>

<p id=10480><form>lagdù</form> <pos>n</pos> droplets. <i>Gagmayng lagdù nga namilit sa kadahúnan,</i> Small droplets that stuck to the leaves. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6]</itype> form droplets, fall in droplets. <i>Milagdù ang ákung mga lúhà sa ákung kaapíngan,</i> My tears formed droplets on my cheeks.

<p id=10481><form>lagduk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a small <tr>stake</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>penis</tr> (humorous slang). <number>3</number> <form>{&mdash;|lagduk} ang anínu</form> <tr>noon</tr> (lit. for the shadow to have been driven in the ground like a stake). <number>3a</number> <tr>noon</tr> (short for <ix>lagduk ang anínu</ix>). <i>Lagduk na (ang anínu) pag-abut námù,</i> It was noon when we arrived. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> drive a small stake into the ground. <i>Maglagduk kug tugwáyan sa kábaw,</i> I&apos;ll drive a peg to tether my carabao to. <number>1a</number> stick s.t. into s.t. <i>Ilagduk ang kandílà sa kik,</i> Stick the candles into the cake. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> hold oneself upright and firm. <i>Makalagduk na si Bíbi pagtindug,</i> Baby can stand by herself now. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> put a fighting cock out in the yard by staking the tether string to the ground. <i>Kinsay naglagduk sa manuk diris gardin?</i> Who tied the cock here in the garden? <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> in bowling, throw the ball keeping the feet together in place without moving them or taking a step. <i>Nakalagduk na ku, apan wà ku kadaug,</i> I tried throwing the ball without taking a step, but I couldn&apos;t win. <number>4</number> <itype>[B3; b4]</itype> for the sun to be directly above one. <i>Mulagduk ang adlaw ug maalas dúsi,</i> The sun gets directly above you at twelve o&apos;clock. <number>4a</number> be, become noon. <i>Gilagdúkan na lang siya sa adlaw wà pa giyud mahumag dáru,</i> It was already noon, and he still had not finished plowing. <number>4b</number> for s.t. to be above one like the sun. <i>Milagduk ákung tabánug,</i> My kite soared above me. <number>4c</number> <itype>[B246; c1]</itype> for the eyes to roll upwards. <i>Milagduk íyang mata sa kalamì,</i> Her eyes rolled upward in ecstacy. <form>{(&rarr;)|lagduk}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> become absent-minded. <i>Uy, gilagduk na tingáli ka kay walà ka makapanira sa ímung karsúnis,</i> My, you have become absent-minded because you haven&apos;t buttoned up your pants. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|lagdukan}</form> <xr>= <sc>lagduk</sc>. <ix>n</ix> <ix>1.</ix></xr>

<p id=10482><form>lagdung</form> <pos>n</pos> sinker for a fishing line, net, or any other rope dropped into the sea. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b]</itype> use or put a sinker.

<p id=10483><form>laghang</form> <xr>= <sc>lahang</sc> (plural), <ix>a</ix> and <ix>v</ix>.</xr>

<p id=10484><form>laghaw</form> <pos>a</pos> low and throaty in voice. <i>Laghaw ang tíngug ni Lurin Bakal,</i> Lauren Bacall had a low and throaty voice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be, become husky, rasping. <i>Makalaghaw (makapalaghaw) ug tíngug ning sip-un,</i> Colds make the voice weak and throaty.

<p id=10485><form>laghay</form> <pos>a</pos> for s.t. in grains or powder to be hard and dry. <i>Gaan ang laghay nga munggus,</i> Dry mung beans are light. <form>{&mdash;|laghay} nga ubu</form> dry cough, difficult with no discharge. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; c1]</itype> be, become hard and dry. <i>Ilaghay (lagháya) paglung-ag ang kan-un,</i> Cook the rice hard and dry so that each grain is separate.

<p id=10486><form>laghus</form> (from <ix>lahus</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> proceed, take s.t. directly s.w. <i>Dì ku magdúgay dinhi. Mulaghus ku sa ákung gidulngan,</i> I won&apos;t stay here long. I&apos;ll go directly to the place I&apos;m headed for. <pos>a</pos> straight without bends.

<p id=10487><form>lagi</form> particle used to assert emphatically that s.t. is what it is. <number>1</number> <ix>particle giving assurance about s.t. the interlocutor may be inclined to disbelieve:</ix> believe it or not, I assure you [so-and-so] is the case. <i>Ayaw ug kabaláka kay muabut lagi si Máma mu,</i> Don&apos;t worry. Your mother will come back. <i>Wà lagi nákù tuyúa. Ayaw kasukù,</i> I told you I didn&apos;t mean to do it. You shouldn&apos;t get angry. <number>1a</number> <ix>in narration, a particle acknowledging that there might be reason to disbelieve:</ix> believe it or not. <i>Ang manuk lagi ni Pidru nga bayat nakabunù,</i> Believe it or not, that weakling cock of Pedro&apos;s managed to win! <number>1b</number> <formx><corr sic="kay &mdash;">{&mdash;|lagi} kay</corr></formx> because, after all, that is what one would expect. <i>Tungud lagi kay abtik man tu siya, siyay nakadaug,</i> And since he was, after all, pretty smart, he won. <number>2</number> expressing surprise at s.t. contrary to one&apos;s expectations. <i>Ingun kang wâ. Nía ra man lagi,</i> You said it was gone, but here it is! <i>Ingun kang dílì mulubad, milubad man lagi,</i> You said it wasn&apos;t going to fade, but it did. <number>2a</number> <formx>náa na pud {&mdash;|lagi}</formx> expression of deep exasperation at s.t. that <corr sic=occured>occurred</corr> a second time, which already was exasperating to start out with. <i>Náa na pud lagi. Ímu na pung gihilabtan,</i> There you go again. You touched it again. <number>2b</number> <formx>apan {&mdash;|lagi}</formx> but despite what might have been expected. <i>Apan lagi, dinhi puy pipila nga nanambung,</i> However, there were a few who attended. <number>2c</number> [so-and-so] is the case, after all, much as one might wish it otherwise. <i>Nalípay nga naadtu sa Amirika ang ílang anak, piru kay anak man lagi, mingawun giyud sila,</i> They are happy that their son went to the States, but because he is, after all, their son, they will miss him. <number>2d</number> <ix>with a repeated command or request:</ix> didn&apos;t I tell you to do [so-and-so]? Now do it! <i>Ibutang lagi nang kutsilyu,</i> Didn&apos;t I tell you to put that knife down? <i>Ayaw lagig sábà,</i> I said stop that noise. <i>Tris lagi. Dì lagi ni ikatúgut ug dus,</i> I said three. I told you I can&apos;t let you have it for two. <number>3</number> <ix>indicating that the speaker was right all along about a certain point in contention:</ix> see, I told you. <i>Lagi, giingnan ta lagi kang hustu tu,</i> See, I <pb n=550>told you that was right! <i>&lsquo;Uu. Mubálik giyud ku. Duul ra man.&rsquo; &mdash; &lsquo;Lagi,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Yes, I will come back again. Anyway, it&apos;s right close.&rsquo; &mdash; &lsquo;Yes (that&apos;s what I&apos;ve been saying).&rsquo; <form>dáan pa {&mdash;|lagi} <r>[<ix>gen.</ix>]</r></form> that&apos;s what [gen.] thought. <i>Dáan pa lagi ku, wà siya dinhi,</i> That&apos;s just what I thought! He&apos;s not here. <number>3a</number> <tr>conceding</tr> a point with some reservation. <i>&lsquo;Gwápu siyag kutsi.&rsquo; &mdash; &lsquo;U lagi, piru inútang,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;He&apos;s got a nice car.&rsquo; &mdash; &lsquo;He sure does, but it&apos;s not his.&rsquo; <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> emphatically assure s.o. by saying <ix>lagi</ix> to him. <i>Dì ku musálig sa íyang pasálig bísan ug gilagihan ku níya,</i> I won&apos;t count on his promises even though he assured me emphatically.

<p id=10488><form>lag-i</form> <pos>n</pos> thin piece of bamboo or rattan used for flooring, fencing, or tying. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a; a]</itype> split bamboo or rattan.

<p id=10489><form>lag-id<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>hard</tr>, <tr>tough</tr>. <i>Lag-id ang tugas labi na ang íyang lúbas,</i> Molave is a hard wood, esp. the heartwood.

<p id=10490><form>lag-id<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> <tr>brush</tr>, <tr>whizz</tr>, <tr>speed by</tr> s.t. touching or grazing it slightly. <i>Duha ka íhu ang milag-id (naglag-id) níya,</i> Two sharks whizzed by him. <i>Ígù lang nakalag-id sa íyang nawung ang bala,</i> The bullet just grazed his face.

<p id=10491><form>lagilági</form> <tr>kinds</tr>, <tr>quality</tr>. <i>Lagilági ang buluk sa bángaw,</i> The rainbow has various colors. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> be, get, make various kinds. <i>Dílì ta makalagilági sa putáhi kun wà tay kwarta,</i> We can&apos;t have all different kinds of food if we have no money. <i>Ayaw lagilagíha (ilagilági) ang ímung ági,</i> Don&apos;t vary your penmanship. <form>{ka-|kalagilági}</form> of all different kinds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be of all different kinds. <i>Ang útan nga magkalagilági lamían,</i> A vegetable stew of various kinds of vegetables tastes good.

<p id=10492><form>lagilhi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> smooth sticks by scraping or whittling off unnecessary edges. <i>Siyay milagilhi sa kawáyang igsalálug,</i> He smoothed the slats to put in as flooring.

<p id=10493><form>láging</form> <xr>= <sc>lúging</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10494><form>lagingling</form> <pos>n</pos> soft tinkling sound. <i>Ang lagingling sa kampanilya,</i> The tinkling of the small bell. <i>Ang lagingling sa íyang kinataw-an,</i> The tinkling of her laughter. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a tinkling sound.

<p id=10495><form>lagínit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S45]</itype> emit a ripping, tearing sound. <i>Nagkalaginit ang pánit nga giláras,</i> The leather that was sliced gave a ripping sound. <pos>n</pos> a ripping, tearing sound. <i>Nadungug námù ang lagínit sa pagkasìsì sa íyang karsúnis,</i> We heard the sound of his trousers ripping. <form>{-in-|linagínit}</form> <xr>= <sc>lagínit</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=10496><form>lag-it</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> rough and sharp. <i>Mga lag-it nang mga batu,</i> Those rocks are sharp and rough. <number>1a</number> sharp, keen, piercing. <number>2</number> hard and durable. <i>Lag-it nga káhuy, pánit,</i> Hard wood, durable leather. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; a]</itype> <tr>be, become sharp, piercing</tr>. <i>Sigíhig báid hangtud malag-it,</i> Keep working at it until it becomes sharp. <i>Dinhà na ang babáyi batíag kahadluk sa nagkalag-it na ang tinan-awan sa táwu kaníya,</i> The girl didn&apos;t feel frightened until the man started shooting penetrating glances at her. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> <tr>be, become hard and durable</tr>. <i>Mulag-it ang kámay ug latikun,</i> Sugar becomes crystallized if you make it into syrup.

<p id=10497><form>lagitì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>a sharp, snapping or cracking sound</tr>. <i>Ang lagitì sa pistúlang gikák,</i> The snapping of the pistol that was cocked. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> <tr>make a cracking, snapping sound</tr>. <i>Milagitì ang gamayng sanga nga ákung natumban,</i> The twig cracked when I stepped on it. <i>Ang asin mauy nakalagitì (nakapalagitì) sa káyu,</i> The salt thrown into the fire made it crackle. <form>{-in-|linagitì}</form> <xr>= <sc>lagitì</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=10498><form>lagiting</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>intense heat of the sun</tr>. <i>Mulakaw kang lagiting ang ínit?</i> Do you have to go when the heat is scorching? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>for the sun&apos;s heat to get intense</tr>.

<p id=10499><form>lagiw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56; b3c]</itype> <tr>run away, escape from a place</tr>. <i>Milagiw (nalagiw) ang mutsatsa kay gidagmálan,</i> The maid ran away because she was badly treated. <i>Unsay ímung gilagiwan sa inyu?</i> What did you escape from at home? <i>Ilagiw ang ímung uyab gíkan sa íyang pamanhunun,</i> Take your girl away from her husband-to-be. <pos>n</pos> <tr>escapee, stowaway</tr>. <i>Nasakpan ang lagiw sa pínal kuluni,</i> They caught the escapee from the penal colony. <form>{ka-|kalagiw}</form> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>lagiw</sc>.</xr> <form>kágiw</form> <xr>= <sc>kalagiw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10500><form>lagiwliw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>spiny outgrowths from bamboo plants</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>gather <ix>lagiwliw</ix></tr>.

<p id=10501><form>lagkaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>makeshift shelter</tr> for staying in temporarily. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>make a temporary shelter</tr>. <i>Naglagkaw ang mga bakwit sa lasang,</i> The evacuees erected lean-to&apos;s in the forest. <form>{-in-|linagkaw}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>built like a temporary shelter</tr>.

<p id=10502><form>laglag</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fallen off</tr>. <i>Mga laglag nga dáhun,</i> Fallen leaves. <number>2</number> <tr>destroyed, ruined</tr>. <i>Laglag nga mga damgu,</i> Ruined dreams. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; a]</itype> <tr>fall off, cause to do so</tr>. <i>Ang hángin naglaglag sa mga lusuk sa humay,</i> The wind caused the grains of rice to fall off. <i>Nagkalaglag ang íyang buhuk human masakit sa típus,</i> Her hair has been constantly falling off after her bout with typhoid. <i>Gilaglag níyag túyù ang panyù arun nákù punitun,</i> She dropped the handkerchief on purpose so that I would pick it up. <number>2</number> <itype>[B6]</itype> <tr>abort, have a miscarriage or an abortion</tr>. <i>Prisúhun ang duktur nga mulaglag ug bátà,</i> A doctor who performs abortions will be put in prison. <pb n=551><i>Bag-u pa siya nga nalaglágan,</i> She just had a miscarriage. <number>3</number> <itype>[AB12; a]</itype> bring to a downfall, <tr>destroy</tr>. <i>Ang Diyus naglaglag sa Súdum,</i> God destroyed Sodom. <form>{ma-un|malaglágun}</form> <pos>a</pos> destructive. <i>Malaglágung hunàhúnà,</i> Destructive thoughts.

<p id=10503><form>laglum</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>lalum</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10504><form>lagmaw</form> <xr>= <sc>lugmaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10505><form>lagmun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>impulse</tr>, what one wants to do at a certain instant. <i>Unsa may lagmun ku? Sa pagkakità kung nanágan sila, midágan sab ku,</i> When I saw them run away, my impulse was to run away, too.

<p id=10506><form>lagmit</form> likely, the chances are very good that s.t. will happen. <i>Ayúhag báat kay lagmit mabadbad ang hukut,</i> Tie it well because the knot will likely come undone. <i>Lagmit sa (ang) mapasahan sa gútum mabúang,</i> A person who has become over-hungered is likely to go crazy<corr>.</corr> <form>{ma-|malagmit}</form> <xr>= <sc>lagmit</sc>.</xr> <form>{ka-an|kalagmítan}</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>lagmit</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> probability. <i>Ang kalagmítan nga may gíra dílì ikalimud,</i> It cannot be denied that there is a good likelihood of war.

<p id=10507><form>lagnak</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>loose</tr>, <tr>sagging</tr>. <i>Lagnak ra nang pagkahigut sa muskitíru,</i> The mosquito net has been tied so that it is sagging. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be, become slack, loose. <i>Nagkalagnak ang íyang mga sinínà gíkan sa íyang pagkasakit,</i> Her dresses have become too loose for her after her sickness.

<p id=10508><form>lagnas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> for water to spread out or flow over. <i>Mulagnas ang túbig sa subà ngadtu sa <corr sic="pilapìlan">pilapílan</corr> ug tingbáhà,</i> Water from the river spreads over the rice paddies during the flood season. <i>Basta dakung dágat maglagnas ang ámung sílung,</i> When the tide is high, water spreads under our house.

<p id=10509><form>lagnaw</form> <xr>= <sc>labnaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10510><form>lagnay</form> <pos>a</pos> sagging for lack of firmness. <i>Lagnay kaáyu ang unlan nga kúwang sa dasuk,</i> A pillow that lacks stuffing is very soft. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> sag for lack of firmness. <i>Mulagnay ang tútuy sa inahan basta dì na sus-an,</i> The breast of a mother sags after she stops nursing.

<p id=10511><form>lagnub</form> <pos>n</pos> erect shrub or small tree with smooth, glaberous, and shiny oval leaves, used to stop bleeding: <bio>Ficus hauili</bio>.

<p id=10512><form>lagnut</form> <xr>= <sc>labnut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10513><form>lagpad</form> <xr>= <sc>lapad</sc></xr> (plural).

<p id=10514><form>lagpak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>slap</tr>, strike a part of one&apos;s body with the hand or with s.t. flat. <i>Kinsa tung naglagpak sa ákung bukubuku?</i> Who slapped my back? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>patch a hole</tr>. <i>Lagpáki na lang nà bisag unsa arun dì ka lìlíun,</i> Patch that with anything so they won&apos;t peep at you. <i>Pula ang ilagpak sa ákung sinínà,</i> Use a red piece of cloth to patch the tear in my dress. <pos>n</pos> slapping sound. <form>{-in-|linagpak}</form> <pos>n</pos> having a checkered or striped design. <i>Linagpak nga hinabul,</i> Cloth woven in a checkered design. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> weave cloth in a checkered design.

<p id=10515><form>lagpang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> broil peeled mature bananas. <i>Lagpangun (ilagpang) níya ang salin nga ságing linung-ag,</i> He will broil the leftover cooked bananas. <form>{-in-|linagpang}</form> <pos>n</pos> broiled bananas.

<p id=10516><form>lagpì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> harvest corn. <i>Hinug na ang púsù sa mais hustu nang lagpíun,</i> The corn ears are ripe, just right for harvest. <form>{-unun|lagpiunun}</form> <pos>n</pos> corn that is ready for harvest.

<p id=10517><form>lagput</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26; b6]</itype> be knocked a distance. <i>Milagput ang búla ug layù pagpátid ni Rúmi,</i> Romy kicked the ball, and it flew off in the distance. <i>Hilagputan ku sa íyang láway,</i> I was hit by his spit. <i>Nalagput ku nga giigwáran níya,</i> I was thrown to the side when she hit me with her buttocks. <number>2</number> <itype>[B246]</itype> remove from a job, expel. <i>Nalagput na siya sa iskuylahan. Hasta ikaw mulagput ug dì ka mag-amping,</i> He was kicked out of school, and you will be, too, if you don&apos;t watch it. <number>3</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> be caused to move with alacrity. <i>Milagput mi pagkadungug sa mandasiyun,</i> We moved off smartly when we heard the command. <form>{pa-|palagput}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> cause to fly off. <number>2</number> expel from school or job. <i>Wà na lang nákù siya ipalagput (palagpúta) sa íyang gisap-an,</i> I didn&apos;t expel him from the land he was working.

<p id=10518><form>lagsaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for the voice to be cracking, dry. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> get to be cracked and dry. <i>Milagsaw ang tíngug sa bátà ug hinílak,</i> The child&apos;s voice became hoarse from crying.

<p id=10519><form>lagsaw<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> tall and lanky. <number>2</number> having bones sticking out prominently. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> become tall and lanky. <i>Milagsaw lag kalit ang batan-ung laláki sa pagkabayung na,</i> The young boy suddenly shot up when he reached his teens. <number>2</number> for the bones to stick out. <i>Naunsa man kang nanglagsaw na nang ímung gúsuk?</i> What&apos;s the matter with you that your ribs are sticking out?

<p id=10520><form>lagsaw<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> deer.

<p id=10521><form>lagsik<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> speedy and energetic. <number>1a</number> doing s.t. quickly. <i>Lagsik kaáyu siyang mulálag banig,</i> He is quick in weaving mats. <number>2</number> healthy. <i>Lagsik na man si Máma. Wà nay hilánat,</i> Mother is fine again. She doesn&apos;t have any fever any more. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; ab]</itype> get to be energetic, healthy. <i>Milagsik ang ílang mga lákang pagtaligsik,</i> They started walking faster when it started to rain. <i>Inum sa ímung tambal arun ka malagsik,</i> Take your medicine so you get your energy. <form>{ka-|kalagsik}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>briskness</tr>. <form>{ma-un|malagsikun}</form> <pos>a</pos> of a quick, brisk, healthy sort.

<pb n=552>

<p id=10522><form>lagsik<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B456; b2]</itype> for small things to fly off, <tr>splatter</tr>. <i>Milagsik ang lápuk pagluksu nákù,</i> Mud splattered in all directions when I jumped. <i>Nanglagsik ang bildu pagkahúlug sa básu,</i> Bits of glass flew off when the tumbler fell. <i>Hilagsikan ku sa íyang láway pagsulti níya,</i> His saliva splattered on me when he spoke. <pos>n</pos> matured coconut fruits which were thrown in all directions as they were gathered from the trees. <form>{-in-|linagsik}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. that flew off.

<p id=10523><form>lagsut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B246; b2]</itype> <tr>splatter</tr> up or out, for things in pieces to scatter in various directions. <i>Mulagsut ang íyang láway inigsulti,</i> His saliva showers you when he talks. <i>Nangalagsut ang mga lubi sa pagkahúlug sa búlig,</i> The coconuts that came off the tree fell all over the place.

<p id=10524><form>lagtang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>roast</tr> kernels of corn. <i>Dúnay nanimáhù, may naglagtang tingálì ug mais,</i> S.t. smells good. S.o. must be roasting corn kernels. <form>{-in-|linagtang}</form> <pos>n</pos> roasted corn kernels.

<p id=10525><form>lagtang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. woody vine, the seeds of which are roasted and used for poisoning fish: <bio>Anamirta cocculus</bio>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b5]</itype> fish using this plant as poison. <form>{-in-an|linagtangan}</form> <pos>n</pos> fish caught in this way.

<p id=10526><form>lagtiw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> <number>1</number> for s.t. small to be knocked off to a distance. <i>Mu rag milagtiw (nalagtiw) ang ákung ispiritu pagbutu sa bumba,</i> It seemed that my spirit left my body when the bomb exploded. <i>Nanglagtiw ang mga binughà nga íyang gibundak,</i> Pieces of wood flew off in all directions when he dropped the logs. <number>2</number> be caused to move with alacrity under some pressure. <i>Nalagtiw ming gisingkáhan ug súgù,</i> We moved smartly when we were given orders in no uncertain terms.

<p id=10527><form>lagtub</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> giving off a single thud. <number>2</number> giving a crunchy sound. <number>2a</number> cooked half-way so that it is still crunchy. <number>2b</number> <tr>cooked</tr> so that it is crisp. <number>3</number> inflamed, blistered (like s.t. cooked crisp). <i>Unsa man nang lagtub sa ímung buktun?</i> What is that blister on your arm? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> giving a thudding sound. <i>Naglagtub ang batu sa íyang bukubuku,</i> The stone bounced off his back with a thud. <number>2a</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> get to be cooked in a half-done manner. <i>Lagtúba (ilagtub) pagsugba ang atay,</i> Broil the liver rare. <number>2b</number> get to be overcooked, till it is crisp. <i>Mulagtub ang adúbug lat-an úsà,</i> The spiced meat will get crisp if you boil it first. <number>3</number> <itype>[B]</itype> <tr>blister</tr> (like s.t. fried crisp). <form>{pina-|pinalagtub}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> food that is broiled or fried half-way. <i>Mais nga pinalagtub pagkaánag,</i> Corn broiled half-way. <number>2</number> food fried crisp.

<p id=10528><form>lagù</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>filthy</tr>, very <tr>dirty</tr>. <i>Ilísi nang kurtináha, lagù na kaáyu,</i> Change the curtains. They are so filthy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> be, become filthy. <form>{ka-(&larr;)|kalágù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> all covered with dirt. <i>Nagkalágù siya gíkan sa trabáhu,</i> He was filthy when he came from work. <form>{-un|lagúun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dirty-looking</tr>.

<p id=10529><form>lágub<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; c1]</itype> <tr>join</tr> s.t. of value together, as money, land, business. <i>Mulágub ku sa inyung nigusyu,</i> I will join your business. <i>Nagkalágub ang ámung duha ka lúti sa usa ka titulu,</i> Both of our lots are included in the same title. <i>Lagúba (ilágub) ang inyung puhúnan arun mu makalíhuk sa nigusyu,</i> Pool your capital so that you can start a business.

<p id=10530><form>lágub<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc1]</itype> for s.t. long to penetrate all the way into s.t. (not said of things put in a case). <i>Milágub ang lansang sa íyang lapalapa,</i> The nail went all the way into the sole of his foot.

<p id=10531><form>lagubu, lagúbu</form> <pos>n</pos> dull, hollow thudding sound. <i>Ang lagúbu sa bawud sa baybáyun,</i> The thudding of the waves on the seashore. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46P]</itype> be thudding in a hollow way. <i>Milagubu ang ákung likud sa íyang sumbag,</i> My back resounded with his thudding blows. <form>{-in-|linagubu}</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>lagúbu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10532><form>lagudlágud</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ovary of a sow</tr>. <form>layà ug {&mdash;|lagudlágud}</form> incapable of bearing children, said of a woman who marries late in life (derogatory). <i>Ang babáying dúgayng maminyù layà na ug lagudlágud,</i> A woman who marries late in life is incapable of bearing children.

<p id=10533><form>laguk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sticky, resinous substance taken from trees, esp. the <ix>tipúlu</ix> tree. <number>2</number> trap for birds and small insects using this resin. The trap is baited and the birds get stuck. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12N; ab2]</itype> trap birds with <ix>laguk</ix>. <i>Nakalaguk si Silis ug limúkun,</i> Celes caught a dove with <ix>laguk</ix>. <form>{pa&N;-|panglaguk}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> go trap game with <ix>laguk</ix>.

<p id=10534><form>laguk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for a liquid to come out scantily from its source. <i>Ígù na lang nilaguk ang túbig sa tubud,</i> The water in the spring was just coming out in a few drops. <i>Wà giyud mulaguk ang íyang mata sa pagkamatay sa íyang inahan,</i> Not a tear formed in her eyes when her mother died. <i>Wà na giyud maglaguk ang sanggutan tungud sa huwaw,</i> The coconut palm didn&apos;t produce a drop of toddy because of the drought.

<p id=10535><form>laguk<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>lad-uk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10536><form>lag-uk=</form> <xr><sc>lad-uk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10537><form>lagukluk</form> (from <ix>lukluk</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>hide</tr>, <tr>conceal</tr> by staying out of sight or away from the open. <i>Dì ka giyud makalagukluk ug pangitáun ka níla,</i> You can&apos;t hide from them if they look for you. <i>Lawum ang lungag nga gilaguklúkan sa kasag,</i> The hole where the crab hid itself was deep.

<pb n=553>

<p id=10538><form>lagúlu</form> <pos>n</pos> coarse fern with huge leathery pinnate leaves found in open mud flats, in mangrove swamps, and along tidal streams: <bio>Acrostichum aureum</bio>.

<p id=10539><form>lagum</form> <pos>a</pos> dirtyish white, greyish. <i>Lagum ang linabhan ug dì iladlad,</i> Washed clothes are greyish if they are not bleached. <i>Lagum na ang íyang ngábil kay nagdúgayg húmul sa dágat,</i> His lips are blue from staying in the water too long. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become darkish, greyish in color. <i>Milagum (nalagum) siya kay sígig kalígù sa dágat,</i> He has become dark because he always goes swimming. <form>{pa&N;-(&larr;)|panglágum}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> get dark all over in color. <i>Nanglágum ang bátà nga dúgayng natáwu,</i> The baby that took long to be delivered is blue all over. <i>Nanglágum ang bukubuku sa binunalan,</i> His back is black and blue from being beaten too much.

<p id=10540><form>lagumlum</form> (from <ix>lumlum</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> for s.t. to lie dormant and hidden beneath or inside s.t. <i>Naglagumlum sa átung kabukíran ang daghang mína,</i> Ores to be mined are lying dormant in our mountains. <i>Naglagumlum nga kahadluk sa íyang dughan,</i> Fear lurking in her heart. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> keep s.t. one doesn&apos;t own or should share for oneself. <i>Ang tagakustum kusug mulagumlum sa dílì íla,</i> The Customs people are quick to keep things that don&apos;t belong to them. <i>Ayaw lagumlúma ang sikrítu. Ibutyag,</i> Don&apos;t keep the secret to yourself. Tell us. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> stay s.w. for some good reason. <i>Milagumlum siyag usa ka simána sa íyang panágat,</i> He stayed out fishing for a week. <i>Unsay ímung lagumlúman sa tubaan, dì ínum?</i> What are you hanging around at the toddy stand for if not to drink?

<p id=10541><form>lagumù, lagúmù</form> <pos>a</pos> producing a crunchy sound. <i>Lagumù ang sinángag mais kan-un,</i> Roasted grains of corn are crunchy to eat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; c1]</itype> make a crunching, grinding sound. <i>Milagúmù ang bildu nga gigaling,</i> The glass made a crunching noise as it was ground.

<p id=10542><form>lagumuk, lagúmuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the sound of s.t. brittle which is being crushed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> produce this sound. <i>Milagumuk ang itlug nga ákung hitumban,</i> I stepped on the egg and it made a crunching sound.

<p id=10543><form>lagúmuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23P; c1]</itype> fall down helpless on the floor, ground, ring, etc. <i>Milagúmuk sa ring ang kuntra ni Ilurdi,</i> Elorde&apos;s opponent fell prostrate on the ring.

<p id=10544><form>lagúna</form> <pos>n</pos> a meadow. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> turn into a weed-covered field.

<p id=10545><form>*lagundà</form> <form>{Culu-|lululagundà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> fall asleep some place other than one&apos;s usual sleeping place before transferring to one&apos;s own bed. <i>Ayaw paglulagundà dihà sa sála kay mahinayak ka,</i> Don&apos;t take a nap in the living room because you won&apos;t be able to wake up till morning.

<p id=10546><form>lagundì</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. shrub of thickets and waste places, bearing palmately-arranged groups of fine leaflets, with a velvety undersurface, used as a poultice for <ix>panúhut</ix>: <bio>Vitex negundo</bio>.

<p id=10547><form>lagung</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to <tr>flies</tr> larger than houseflies, including the bluebottle fly. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infested with <ix>lagung</ix>. <i>Gilagung ang patayng irù,</i> The dead dog was covered with bluebottle flies. <form>ambut sa {&mdash;|lagung}</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ambut</sc>.</xr> <form>simbaku {&mdash;|lagung}</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>simba</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10548><form>lagunit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>screeching</tr>, ripping sound. <i>Ang lagunit sa tayaung lansang nga giibut,</i> The screeching of the rusty nail that was pulled out. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make a ripping, screeching sound. <i>Naglagunit ang papil nga gilaksì sa bungbung,</i> The paper that was ripped off the wall made a ripping sound.

<p id=10549><form>lagunut, lagúnut</form> <pos>n</pos> dull ripping sound, as when weeds are pulled out. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make a dull ripping sound. <i>Milagunut ang gamut sa sagbut nga giibut,</i> The roots of the weeds made a dull ripping sound as they were uprooted.

<p id=10550><form>lagupù, lagúpù</form> <pos>n</pos> dull cracking sound of bones. <form>{(&larr;)|lagúpù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S]</itype> for bones to make a dull cracking sound.

<p id=10551><form>lagúrul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>shave the head clean</tr>. <i>Gilagurúlan ang prísu nga patyunun,</i> They shaved the prisoner&apos;s head clean.

<p id=10552><form>lagúrut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>grating sound</tr> or sound of uprooting s.t. <i>Ang lagúrut sa balhíbu sa manuk nga gilabnut,</i> The sound of the chicken feathers being pulled out. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S]</itype> make this sound. <i>Naglagurut ang kamúti nga gilidgid,</i> The sweet potatoes make a scratching sound as they were being grated.

<p id=10553><form>lagus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gums</tr>. <i>Ang íyang lagus makítà inig katáwa níya,</i> Her gums show when she laughs. &dagger;

<p id=10554><form>lagusà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hissing</tr>, splashing sound of water. <i>Ang lagusà sa busay,</i> The swirling sound at the bottom of a waterfall. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> hiss, as when waves dash on the rocks or bubbles burst. <i>Ang balud nga naglagusà sa lapyahan,</i> The waves hissing against the beach.

<p id=10555><form>lagusu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>involve</tr>, <tr>include</tr> s.o. in some sort of mischief or punishment. <i>Ikaw mauy nakalagusu (nakapalagusu) nákù sa tinuntu,</i> You dragged me into doing mischief. <i>Ayaw kug ilagusu sa ímung kasábà kay wà kuy lábut,</i> Don&apos;t scold me, too, because I didn&apos;t have any part in it.

<pb n=554>

<p id=10556><form>lagúsù</form> <pos>n</pos> a soft, crunching sound, as for example that produced by chewing s.t. fleshy and easy to chew, but not soft. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S]</itype> produce such a sound. <i>Mulagúsù ang kapáyas nga tagudtud ug kan-un,</i> A hard but ripe papaya produces a faint crunching sound when you eat it.

<p id=10557><form>lagut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>chew tobacco</tr>. <i>Bahù ug bàbà ang táwung mulagut,</i> A person who chews tobacco will develop foul-smelling breath. <i>Lagutun ku ning tabakúa,</i> I&apos;ll chew this tobacco. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a1]</itype> do chewing motions. <i>Ang kábaw maglagut kanúnay,</i> The carabao is always chewing. <i>Íya lang gilagut ang karni,</i> He just chewed the meat. <pos>n</pos> chewing tobacco. <pos>a</pos> for a child to be so cute one would love to pinch or bite it. <i>Lagút kaáyung bataána. Kaáyu dyung kusiun,</i> This child is so cute. How I&apos;d love to pinch it. <form>{(&larr;)|lágut}<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>gnash</tr> the teeth. <i>Gilágut níya ang íyang ngípun sa kasukù,</i> She gnashed her teeth in anger. <number>2</number> <itype>[B146; b3(1)c3]</itype> get irritated, angry. <i>Naglágut si Ibuy sa ímung sugsúg,</i> Iboy was irked at your teasing. <i>Ángay ba nà nímung ikalágut (kalagútan)?</i> Is that worth getting mad about? <pos>a</pos> irritating, irksome. <i>Lágut kaáyu nang bataána, samukan,</i> That brat is very irritating. He&apos;s a pest. <form>{pa-(&larr;)|palágut}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> get s.o.&apos;s goat. <i>Unsa na puy ílang ipalágut nákù?</i> What are they going to think of next to annoy me? <pos>n</pos> s.t. to irk, anger s.o. or rouse s.o. to resentment. <form>{pa&N;-|panglagut}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> for a child to be <tr>teething</tr>. <i>Paliti ug lagutan ang bátà kay nanglagut na,</i> Buy the baby a teething ring because he&apos;s beginning to <corr sic=teeth>teethe</corr>. <form>{-an|lagutan}</form> <pos>n</pos> teething ring. <form>{-unun|lagutunun}</form> <pos>n</pos> tobacco for chewing. <form>{maka-r-|makalalagut}, {maka-r-(&larr;)|makalalágut}</form> <pos>a</pos> very <tr>maddening</tr>. <i>Makalalágut kanang ímung binúang,</i> Your foolishness is maddening. <form>{ma-un(&larr;)|malagútun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>irritated</tr>. <form>{ka-(&larr;)|kalágut}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>anger</tr>, <tr>irritation</tr>. &dagger;

<p id=10558><form>lágut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be knocked to a distance by a force. <i>Nalágut ang bisiklítang hidumbulan sa dyip,</i> The bicycle was thrown off to a distance because the jeep bumped into it.

<p id=10559><form>lagutmun</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>lagutum</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10560><form>lagutù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> dull, cracking sound. <number>2</number> for rice or corn grits to be half-cooked, such that they still crunch. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN]</itype> make a dull, thick, cracking sound. <i>Milagutù ang ákung lutáhan pagtindug nákù,</i> My joints made a dull cracking sound when I stood up. <i>Ang nagpanlagutù nga pundu sa gángu,</i> The creaking of the ropes tying the large raft. <number>2</number> <itype>[B15; b6]</itype> for rice or corn grits to be half-cooked.

<p id=10561><form>lagútub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S]</itype> make a low, prolonged, resonant thud. <i>Milagútub ang kílid sa tangki nga nasaghiran sa trák,</i> The tank made a prolonged thudding sound when the truck scraped it. <i>Naglagutub ang bumbu nga nagkalinding sa handag,</i> The drum resounded as it rolled down the slope. <pos>n</pos> this sound.

<p id=10562><form>lagútuk</form> <pos>n</pos> knocking sound produced when the bony part of the body is hit, cracking sound of bone joints. <i>Ang lagútuk sa túhud sa íyang pagtindug,</i> The cracking of his knees when he stood up. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2346]</itype> produce this sound. <form>{(&rarr;)|lagutuk}</form> <xr>= <sc>lagutù</sc>, <ix>n 2, v 2.</ix></xr>

<p id=10563><form>lagutum</form> (from <ix>gútum</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> <tr>eat</tr>, <tr>feed</tr> with root crops and bananas in times of scarcity. <i>Naglagutum mig balanghuy paggíra,</i> We ate nothing but cassava during the war. <i>Gilagutuman nákug kamúti ang mga bátà paggútum,</i> I fed my children sweet potatoes during the famine. <i>Ang gábi ikalagutum ug magníhit ang pagkáun,</i> Taro can substitute for the staple food when food is scarce. <form>lagutmun</form> <pos>n</pos> crops which can be used to replace the staple (corn or rice): root crops and cooking bananas. <i>Ang binignit nilútù sa nagkalainláing lagutmun,</i> <ix>Binignit</ix> is a sweet soup made of all different kinds of root crops and cooking bananas. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <xr>= <sc>lagutum</sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr>

<p id=10564><form>lagutuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B456; b4]</itype> for the stomach to have nothing in it. <i>Naglagutuy ang tiyan sa nagpuása,</i> The man who was fasting was starving to death. <i>Nalagutuyan ang bábuy nga nakalimtan ug pásaw,</i> They forgot to feed the pig for a long time and it practically starved to death.

<p id=10565><form>laguy</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>lagiw</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> going about to avoid work, not staying put. <i>Gipapaháwà siya kay laguy man,</i> He was fired, because he never stayed put in his place. <form>laguyláguy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> roam around on the job. <i>Gamay siyag ági kay naghínay lag laguyláguy,</i> He hardly accomplished anything because all he ever did was gad about on the job.

<p id=10566><form>laguyláguy<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>chew s.t. tough</tr>. <i>Ígù lang siyang makalaguyláguy sa kúbal,</i> She couldn&apos;t do anything but chew away at the tough pork rinds.

<p id=10567><form>laguyluy</form> <xr>= <sc>byatilis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10568><form>lagwirta</form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>vegetable garden</tr> or, by extension, a yard planted to grass or flowers.

<p id=10569><form>lagwis</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>tall</tr> and <tr>slender</tr>. <i>Lagwis kaáyu ug mga bitíis nang bayhána, mu rag tukun,</i> The legs of that woman are long and straight like a bean pole. <i>Lagwis nga pinútì,</i> Long sword. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); b6]</itype> grow tall and slender. <i>Mulagwis ang kawáyan,</i> Bamboo grows tall and slender.

<p id=10570><form>lagwum</form> <xr>= <sc>laglum</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>lalum</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10571><form>lagyu</form> <xr>= <sc>lagiw</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=555>

<p id=10572><form>lagyum</form> <xr>= <sc>laglum</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>lalum</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10573><form>láhà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> trim or clean the top of coconut trees to prepare them for becoming toddy-producing palms.

<p id=10574><form>lahang</form> <pos>n</pos> crack in between s.t. <i>Naglìlì siya sa lahang sa bungbung,</i> He was peeping through the cracks in the walls. <pos>a</pos> have spaces in between, be at wide intervals. <i>Gwápa untà apan lahang lag ngípun,</i> She would be beautiful if it were not for her teeth which are too wide apart. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> be so arranged as to have spaces in between. <i>Kinsay naglahang ug pugas sa mais?</i> Who planted the corn so far apart? <i>Naglahang man ning sawug. Simpúta,</i> The floor slats are so wide apart. Put them close together.

<p id=10575><form>láhap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> slice a thick slab off, cut off s.t. wide and thick. <i>Muláhap untà kug gamay pára isugba,</i> I&apos;d like to slice off a chunk to broil. <i>Ang bahà nakaláhap ug dakung parti sa íyang yútà,</i> The flood took off a big chunk from his land. <i>Naláhap ang tumuy sa íyang tudlù sa blíd,</i> The blade sliced off the tip of his finger. <pos>a</pos> having been cut widely and deeply. <i>Kaúsik sa mansánas, láhap nga pagkapánit,</i> What a waste! The apples were peeled with so much flesh adhering to the peels. <form>{-in-|lináhap}</form> <pos>n</pos> chunk sliced off. <form>{-in-an|lináhapan}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. from which a chunk has been cut off.

<p id=10576><form>lahawlahaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> wander without purpose over a wide area. <i>Nalahawlahaw (nalahawlahawan) na nákù ang tanang suuk sa kalibútan,</i> I have wandered aimlessly over the face of the earth.

<p id=10577><form>*lahay</form> <form>walay {&mdash;|lahay}</form> <number>1</number> not having a liking, inclination for s.t. <i>Wà kuy lahay sa baskit,</i> I have no inclination for basketball. <number>2</number> lacking flavor. <i>Walay lahay ang kan-un kun hilantan ta,</i> Food doesn&apos;t taste good when one is sick. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B23(1)46; b4]</itype> feel like doing s.t. <i>Ang táwung hilantan dílì mulahay sa káun (layhang mukáun),</i> A person with a fever won&apos;t feel like eating. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> do liberally to one&apos;s heart&apos;s content. <i>Mulahay silag katúlug kun wà ang agálun,</i> They sleep to their hearts&apos; content when the mistress is not home. <form>lahaylahay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> do s.t. to pass the time. <i>Maglahaylahay lang kug bása samtang maghulat níla,</i> I will pass the time reading while I wait for them.

<p id=10578><form>lahì</form> <pos>a</pos> different. <i>Káda táwu lahì sa usa,</i> Each person is different from every other. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[BC; ac]</itype> be different or dissimilar. <i>Malahì giyud kag muadtu kag magdyins,</i> You&apos;ll surely be different from everybody else if you go there in jeans. <i>Nagláhì ang ílang hitsúra bisag kalúha sila,</i> They look different even though they are twins. <i>Ilahì (lahia) ang pagkáun sa mga binatunan sa átù,</i> Give the servants different food from ours. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC12]</itype> do s.t. apart from others or the main group. <i>Mulahì sila sa grúpu inigpangáun na,</i> They eat in a small group off to themselves. <form>{pa-|palahì}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> do s.t. different from the ordinary. <i>Dílì ku manundug, mupalahì giyud ku,</i> I won&apos;t imitate, I&apos;ll do s.t. different. <form>lahìláhì</form> <pos>a</pos> of different kinds. <i>Lahìláhing mga panaptun ang íyang gipalit,</i> She bought different kinds of cloth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a]</itype> be of different kinds. <form>{ka-|kalahì}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> be of various kinds. <i>Nagkalahìláhì ang ámung upiniyun,</i> Our opinions were varied.

<p id=10579><form>láhib, làhib</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> slice off the end part of the coconut bud to induce a flow of palm toddy. <i>Gilàhíban na nákù ang ákung sanggutan,</i> I have sliced off the end part of the coconut buds for the toddy.

<p id=10580><form>láhid</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> spread, smear s.t. over. <i>Lahírig túbig ang pánit sa inasal,</i> Rub water over the roast pig&apos;s skin. <i>Gilahíran ug dyam ang pán,</i> They spread jam on the bread. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1c1]</itype> involve s.o. else in s.t. unpleasant. <i>Muláhid man ka sa uban nga way sâ,</i> Why do you involve others who are blameless?<i> Ayaw kug iláhid sa kastígu,</i> Don&apos;t include me with the punishment. <form>{(&rarr;)|lahid}</form> <pos>n</pos> magical medicine of coconut oil and herbs used for skin ailments of supernatural origin, or the application of this medicine. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> subject to this treatment. <form>{ka-|kaláhid}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> get all smeared. <i>Nagkaláhid ang bungbung ug húgaw,</i> The walls are all smeared with dirt.

<p id=10581><form>lahing, láhing</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>mature coconuts</tr>. <number>2</number> matured person, of age (metaphorical). <i>Lahing na siyag hunàhúnà kay idad-idaran na,</i> He is mature in his ways of thinking, because he&apos;s middle-aged. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> for coconuts to become mature. <i>Dalì mulahing (malahing) ang lubi nga inarigl&acaron;r,</i> Coconut fruits mature early if they are well tended.

<p id=10582><form>láhit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b26(1)]</itype> cut, slice off with a sharp blade. <i>Muláhit (mangláhit) pa ku sa ákung sanggutan,</i> I still have to make a cut in the coconut buds. <i>Kinsay nagláhit sa sáhà sa ságing?</i> Who cut off the banana shoot? <i>Mityábaw ang kanding nga gilàhítan sa dalunggan,</i> The goat cried because a part of his ear was cut off. <pos>n</pos> sickle, scythe.

<p id=10583><form>lahù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> pass loosely through s.t. <i>Milahù ang búla sa dakung lungag,</i> The ball easily went into the large hole. <i>Gilahù níyag tulun ang dakung lísu,</i> She swallowed the large seed with ease. <i>Kanang gilhánga sa kural lahuan lang nà sa irù,</i> With those gaps in the fence, the dog will pass through it with <pb n=556>ease. <pos>a</pos> fitting loosely inside s.t.<i> Lahù ang íyang tiil sa íyang sapátus,</i> His shoes are too big for his feet.

<p id=10584><form>lahug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> mend a tear in a rough way using long stitches. <i>Ákù lang lahugan (<corr sic=lahugan>lahúgan</corr>, ilahug) ang gisì, kay kápuy sursíhan,</i> I&apos;ll just stitch the tear hastily because it&apos;s a nuisance to darn it.

<p id=10585><form>láhug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> mix s.t. together and stir around. <i>Nagláhug ang mga trabahanti ug simintu,</i> The laborers are mixing the cement. <i>Nagláhug ang dátù ug pubri niadtung mitínga,</i> The rich and the poor mixed together in that gathering. <number>2</number> get all mixed up in no special order. <i>Nagkaláhug ang ílang sulti,</i> They were talking on all different topics mixed up without any order. <form>{-ay|láhugay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> <xr>= <sc>láhug</sc>.</xr> <form>lahuglahug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC12; a]</itype> <number>1</number> roam around with others. <i>Dì ku gustung makiglahuglahug ka sa mga buguy,</i> I don&apos;t want you to roam around with bums. <number>2</number> roam around in general for no good purpose. <i>Sa kaping magtrabáhu magpúnay lag lahuglahug,</i> Instead of working, he just used to roam about. <number>3</number> go straight s.w. <i>Manglahuglahug ta dihà ánang mga lagúna paingun sa ámù,</i> Let&apos;s cross those meadows to get to our house.

<p id=10586><form>lahundung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. grunter (<ix>lipti</ix> or <ix>alatan</ix>), also called the <ix>alatan nga Maniláun</ix>.

<p id=10587><form>láhung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; b]</itype> help carry a load. <i>Nagkaláhung mi sa kaban,</i> We carried the trunk together. <i>Lahúngi ninyu ang pyánu,</i> Carry the piano together. <form>{ka-|kaláhung}</form> <pos>n</pos> one with whom one carries s.t.

<p id=10588><form>lahus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> proceed, go on or forward, esp. after an interruption or stop. <i>Mulahus lang kug pangumpra human sa simba,</i> I will just proceed to the market after going to church. <i>Nagláhus ang nagsaaray,</i> The engaged couple went through with their marriage. <i>Lahusa nyà ákung karsúnis sa tiluring,</i> Please go ahead to get my pants at the tailor&apos;s. <i>Ilahus ni ngadtu sa íla,</i> Bring this on ahead to their house. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> penetrate, pass through. <i>Lahusa (ilahus) lang ang ímung mga plánu,</i> Just go ahead with your plans. <number>3</number> <itype>[B3; c1]</itype> get through, finish s.t. successfully. <i>Milahus na siya sa íyang abugasíya,</i> He has gotten through his law course. <number>3a</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> be finished in the first fight. <i>Gilahus ang íyang sunuy,</i> His cock was killed <corr sic=on>in</corr> the first fight. <form>{&mdash;|lahus} sa</form> going through s.t. <i>Lahus ning lansánga sa píkas bungbung kay taas,</i> This nail goes through to the other side. <i>Mu rag kining ákung tambag lahus lang sa píkas mung dunggan,</i> Apparently my advice to you goes in one ear and out the other. <pos>n</pos> k.o. small shark, so called because its liver causes instant defecation. <form>{(&larr;)|láhus}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C23; a12]</itype> for two things to lead into each other. <i>Nagláhus ang duha ka lángub,</i> The two caves lead to each other. <i>Lahúsa ang duha ka kanal,</i> Have the two ditches connect to each other. <number>1a</number> <itype>[C23]</itype> for two openings to be arranged in a straight line configuration. <i>Nagláhus ang duha ka pultahan, sayun ra paglahus,</i> The two doors are right in line with each other. It&apos;s easy to go through. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> do s.t. straight without interruption. <i>Naláhus ang ílang isturya hangtud sa tungang gabíi,</i> Their talk lasted until midnight. <i>Lahúsun (iláhus) ni nákù ug laba kay gamítun ugmà,</i> I will have to wash this in one day because I&apos;m going to use it tomorrow. sa &mdash; entirely. <i>Ang ákung kaguul nawálà sa láhus,</i> My sorrows are gone forever. <i>Malimtan ku nímu láhus,</i> You will forget me entirely. <form>lahusláhus</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for s.t. to have lots of openings so that it is easy to pass through it. <number>2</number> taking things easy without much sense of responsibility. <i>Mamána ka niánang lahusláhus nga pagkatáwu?</i> What, you want to wed that irresponsible person? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> go s.w. readily without bother. <i>Mulahusláhus lang mu sa ákung kwartu mu rag ristawran,</i> You keep coming into my room without any ado as if it were a restaurant. <i>Malahusláhus na ang Úpun ug mahuman na ang taytáyan,</i> You&apos;ll be able to get to Opon in no time when the bridge is done. <form>{pa-(&larr;)|paláhus}</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <ix>tarik</ix> that consists of one long piece of timber going from one outrigger float to the other, usually put on large-sized boats.

<p id=10589><form>láhus</form> <pos>n</pos> slaughtered animal and other food given by the bridegroom&apos;s parents to the bride&apos;s parents on the eve of the wedding. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> give the <ix>láhus</ix>.

<p id=10590><form>lahútay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> continue doing s.t. one has started, endure to continue s.t. <i>Mulahútay kug isturya hangtud sa kaadláwun,</i> I can go on talking till dawn. <i>Mulahútay ba ang ílang panagdáit hangtud mahuman ang pruyiktu?</i> Will their good feelings for each other endure to the end of the project? <i>Dílì makalahútay sa trabáhu ning ákung láwas,</i> My body cannot endure to keep on with the work. <pos>n</pos> action of persevering. <i>Bilib ku sa íyang lahútay nga musimánag bilar nga way pupahúway,</i> I take off my hat to his ability to continue keeping vigil for a week without rest.

<p id=10591><form>lahuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> pass or go through with ease, slip in or through without a hitch. <i>Milahuy man lang wà giyud mangáyug katahúran,</i> He just went through without greeting anyone. <pb n=557><i>Milahuy ang kawatan sa kasayun kay wà may táwu,</i> The thief slipped in and out with ease because there was no one about. <i>Ang ákung mga tambag mulahuy lang sa píkas dunggan,</i> My advice went in one ear and out the other. <form>lahuyláhuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> pass back and forth easily, smoothly. <i>Maglahuyláhuy ang hángin niíning baláya,</i> The breeze blows in and out of this house unobstructed. <i>Singsing nga naglahuyláhuy sa íyang tudlù,</i> A ring that passes readily over his fingers. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> escape from s.t. <i>Ilahuyláhuy man lang gud nímu ang súgù sa ímung inahan,</i> You try to get out of what your mother tells you to do. <form>lahuylahuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b5c]</itype> go from one place to another with no purpose. <i>Gilahuylahuy (gilahuylahuyan) sa ulitáwung gúlang ang kalibútan úsà pahikut sa pilitína,</i> The bachelor roamed around the world first before he let himself get hooked.

<p id=10592><form>láin</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> different, another. <i>Láin ning klasíha sa panaptun,</i> This is a different k.o. cloth. <number>1a</number> <formx>may {&mdash;|láin} pa</formx> of course, could it be different? <i>&lsquo;Wà na pud tingáli nay kwarta.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;May láin pa?&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;He&apos;s probably out of money again.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Of course, could it be otherwise?&rsquo; <number>1b</number> <formx>{&mdash;|láin} nga kalibútan</formx> <tr>afterworld</tr>. <i>Adtu ta magkítà sa láing kalibútan,</i> We&apos;ll meet in the afterworld. <number>1c</number> <formx>sa {&mdash;|láin} nga báhin</formx> on the other hand. <i>Hustu pud ang íyang sulti, apan sa láing báhin, sayup pud siya,</i> What he said is true, but on the other hand, he&apos;s also wrong in some ways. <number>2</number> bad, sick. <i>Láin kaáyu ning ákung gibátì,</i> I feel very sick. <number>3</number> odd in behavior, different from what one would expect. <i>Kaláin nímu nga dílì gánì mupahíyum inighinagbù nátù!</i> How odd of you not even to smile when we meet! <i>Láin ug báhù ning agwáha,</i> This perfume has a strange smell. <number>3a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|láin} ug buut, úlu</formx> <tr>unpredictable</tr> in behavior, somewhat crazy. <i>Ayaw nà siya kumpiyansáhi kay láin ra ba nag úlu,</i> Don&apos;t trust him, because he&apos;s somewhat crazy. <number>3b</number> <formx>{&mdash;|láin} ug sabaw</formx> acting strangely, unexpectedly. <i>Láin siyag sabaw kay manáug manday nanghúkad,</i> He&apos;s a strange fellow. He leaves just when they are serving dinner. <number>4</number> not of a good sort, bad. <i>Láin ang panahun run,</i> The weather is no good now. <i>Láin kaáyu ug batásan nang íyang asáwa,</i> That wife of his has very offensive manners. <number>4a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|láin} ug buut, úlu</formx> <tr>short-tempered</tr>.<i> Ayaw siya bikla kay láin ra ba nag buut (úlu),</i> Don&apos;t irritate him because he&apos;s short-tempered. <number>4b</number> <formx>{&mdash;|láin} ug kamut</formx> tending to steal. <i>Láin ug kamut tung ákung binatunan, Daghan ang naw&amacracu;,</i> Our servant was a thief. So many things disappeared. <number>4c</number> <formx>{&mdash;|láin} ug sabaw</formx> sensitive, easily taking offense. <i>Láig sabawng bayhána. Wà bayà kuy gipasabut nga dautan!</i> What a sensitive woman. I didn&apos;t mean anything by that remark. <number>5</number> for a person to be dangerous, capable of supernatural harm. <i>Láin kaáyu ang mga táwu sa Nága. Daghang mga unglù,</i> The people in Naga are dangerous. There are lots of vampires. <number>6</number> <formx>{&mdash;|láin} nga táwu</formx> unrelated person, outsider. <i>Nagbalunbálun pa man ka. Mau ra ka mag láing táwu,</i> You&apos;re bringing food, as if you weren&apos;t related to us. <i>Way láing táwung pasudlun dinhi,</i> No outsider is allowed in. <number>7</number> <formx>{&mdash;|láin} pay ákù, átù</formx> <number>7a</number> by the way. <i>Láin pay átù, tagadiin man tu ka?</i> By the way, where do you say you come from? <number>7b</number> <xr>= <sc>mau pay ákù</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> be, become different, unusual. <i>Ug muláin ang andar sa makina, pahunúnga,</i> If the engine develops a strange sound, turn it off. <i>Ayaw laína pagsabut,</i> Don&apos;t take it the wrong way. <number>1a</number> <itype>[B126; b4(1)]</itype> become mentally deranged. <i>Nalaínan (naláin) siya tungud sa labihang kaguul,</i> He went off his rocker because of his extreme grief. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> be or feel bad, sick. <i>Nagláin ákung ginháwa,</i> I feel sick. <number>3</number> <itype>[B]</itype> get bad, worsen. <number>3a</number> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> be disconcerted, feel distaste. <i>Naláin siya pagkabatì níya sa balità,</i> He reacted with distaste upon hearing the news. <i>Gilaínan ku sa ákung pagkabutang,</i> I feel uneasy in my situation. <form>dílì {ig-|igláin}</form> <number>1</number> related by blood. <i>Dílì ka nákù igláin,</i> You&apos;re not unrelated to me. <number>2</number> of the same family as. <i>Ang barílis dílì igláin sa tulíngan,</i> The tuna is not unrelated to the mackerel. <i>Ang arti sa panugilánun dílì igláin sa arti sa pamintal,</i> The art of story writing is not unrelated to the art of painting. <form>{(&rarr;)|lain}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> separate oneself from the group, do s.t. s.w. else or at another time. <i>Milain ang dalágag káun sa laláki,</i> The girls ate apart from the boys. <i>Mulain ta kay lisud ug ípun ta sa mga bayaw,</i> We will live separately because it is difficult to live with in-laws. <i>Lainun nákù ni ug anhi kay dì nákù madala run,</i> I will come back for this some other time because I can not take it now. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> separate s.t., set aside. <i>Laina ang hilaw ug ang hinug,</i> Keep the unripe and the ripe ones separate. <i>Ilain kini pára níya,</i> Set this aside for him. <form>lainlain</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. crazy. <number>2</number> thieves. <i>Kaning mga iskwátir mga lainlain,</i> The squatters around here are a bunch of thieves. <number>3</number> people of supernatural powers. <i>Dílì maáyung paliwatan nang mga tawhána nga lainlain,</i> We mustn&apos;t marry our children off to those people because they are thought to be vampires. <form>lainláin</form> <pos>a</pos> various. <i>Lainláin ang mga klási sa pagkáun,</i> There are all different <pb n=558>kinds of food. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> be <tr>varied</tr>. <i>Lainlaínun nákù ang kulur sa bungbung,</i> I&apos;ll paint the walls all different colors. <number>2</number> do s.t. <tr>separately</tr> or alone by oneself. <i>Ngánung naglainlàin ka mag káun dihà?</i> Why are you eating alone by yourself there? <form>kalainláin</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be all different. <form>{ka-an|kalainan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>difference</tr>. <i>Wà kay kalaínan sa kawatan,</i> You&apos;re no different from a thief. <number>2</number> <tr>change</tr>. <i>Dakù ang kalaínan nga mahímù sa ímung pánit ug mugámit kag Kamay,</i> It will make a great difference for your skin if you use Camay. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|lainun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <form>{&mdash;|lainun} ug buut, úlu, kamut, etc.</form> of the sort that gets easily angered, tends to be crazy, tends to steal. <form>{pa-(&rarr;)|palain}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> change the subject in a conversation. <i>Wà ku maagpas kay mipalain siya sa íyang isturya,</i> I did not understand because he changed the tack of his story. <i>Palainan nátù ang sulti,</i> Let&apos;s change the tack of our conversation. <form>{panag-|panagláin}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> <xr>= <sc>{panig-|panagláin}</sc>, <ix>1.</ix></xr> <form>{panig-|panigláin}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23; c2]</itype> feel like a stranger, be treated like a stranger. <i>Dílì siya manigláin nákù kay dúgay na mi nga nagkaíla,</i> He feels at home with me because we&apos;ve been friends for a long time. <i>Mahiubus ku ug ímu kung paniglaínan (ipanigláin, ipanagláin),</i> I will be hurt if you treat me like a stranger. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23; c3]</itype> treat s.o. as if he were not related. <i>Dì ku manigláin sa paryinti sa ákung asáwa,</i> I will not treat my wife&apos;s relatives like outsiders.

<p id=10593><form>láis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fibers</tr> made from the strippings of the outer part of coconut, buri palm fronds, or from bamboo. <i>Pagkúhag láis ibugkus sa sugnud,</i> Get strips of coconut palm fronds to tie the firewood. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> get fibers from the outer part of coconut, buri palm fronds, or bamboo.

<p id=10594><form>Laíti</form> <xr>= <sc>Layti</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10595><form>lák</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lock</tr>, <tr>latch</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>lock</tr>. <i>Wà ku kasulud kay gilákan (gilák) man ang gít,</i> I was unable to come in because the gate was locked.

<p id=10596><form>lak-ab<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>lab-ak</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10597><form>lak-ab<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>stanza</tr> in a poem or song.

<p id=10598><form>lákad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> step over s.t. <i>Dílì ku makalákad sa kanal kay pinsil ang ákung palda,</i> I cannot step over the ditch because my skirt is too narrow. <i>Lakárun lang níya nang kurála,</i> He&apos;ll just step over that fence. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> go beyond, exceed. <i>Kun mulákad sa trayinta díyas dubli na ang bayranan,</i> If it exceeds thirty days you will have to pay double. <i>Kadtung ímung mga sulti nakalákad sa maáyung pamatásan,</i> What you said went beyond the bounds of proper behavior. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> marry or wed ahead of big brothers or sisters. <i>Dì sà ta magminyù kay dì ku gustung lakdan (lakáran) ang ákung magúwang,</i> We won&apos;t get married because I don&apos;t want to get ahead of my big sister. <number>4</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lákad} sa adlaw</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> for s.o. to be caught by the noon sun still asleep. <i>Gilakdan (hilakdan) siya sa adlawng natúlug, maung nagluya ang láwas,</i> He slept until afternoon so his body is weak. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lákad} sa</formx> beyond a limit. <i>Lákad sa baláud ang ímung buhátun,</i> What you are going to do is a transgression of the law. <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lákad} ang búlan</formx> for the moon to be moving toward the noon position in the early hours of the evening&mdash;i.e., the second quarter. <form>{(&rarr;)|lakad}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> <formx>{&mdash;|lakad} ug búlan</formx> <number>1</number> affliction of individual coconuts whereby the meat of the coconut is hard, grooved, and scanty or there is none at all, and the juice, if there is any, is sour, unfit to drink. A coconut with this disease is called <ix>búang nga lubi</ix> (lit. &lsquo;crazy coconut&rsquo;) and is believed to be caused to be so by the moon&apos;s rays. <number>2</number> be mentally deranged. A person is so called because he is compared to the coconut afflicted by the moon (called <ix>búang</ix> &lsquo;crazy&rsquo;). <i>Mu rag gilakaran (gilakdan) ug búwan ang linihukan ánang tawhána,</i> That man acts as if he had been exposed to the moon (i.e. crazy). <form>{-in-an|linakádan}, linakáran</form> <pos>n</pos> fine given to the older siblings by a younger sibling who marries ahead of them.

<p id=10599><form>lakag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; ac3]</itype> <tr>chase</tr>. <i>Naglákag ang duha ka trák,</i> The two buses are chasing each other. <i>Lakaga (lakga) ang manuk nga nakabuhì,</i> Chase the chicken that escaped. <form>{-ay|lakagay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c3]</itype> chase each other. <i>Naglakagay ang mga bátà,</i> The children are chasing one another.

<p id=10600><form>lákang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>step across</tr>. <i>Lakángun ku nang kanal,</i> I&apos;m going to step across that ditch. <i>Ilákang pag-úna ang walang tiil,</i> Take the first step with your left foot. <pos>n</pos> step, stride. <i>Hínay ang íyang lákang padúng sa simbahan,</i> She walked to church slowly. <form>tag-as ug {&mdash;|lákang}</form> arriving at a house in time for a meal (lit. having long leg strides). Such a person is considered lucky. <i>Tag-as kag lákang, Dù, kay mu pay pagsúgud námù,</i> You are lucky you came in time, young man, because we just started to eat. <form>sayup nga {&mdash;|lákang}</form> <tr>false move</tr>.

<p id=10601><form>lak-ang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> stand or squat with legs wide apart. <i>Ayaw lak-ángi ang unidúru kun mugámit mu,</i> Do not squat with your feet on the toilet bowl when you use it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> set s.t. on a fire to cook. <i>Ang kalapíhan ang ilak-ang pag-úna,</i> Set the pot of coffee on the stove first. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> miss, skip s.t in a series. <i>Milak-ang ang íyang dugù ug usa ka búlan,</i> She missed her period for one <pb n=559>month. <i>Nalak-angan ang íyang ngálan pagrulkul,</i> They skipped his name when they called the roll. <number>3a</number> <itype>[B]</itype> for there to be a gap. <i>Naglak-ang ug dakù ang idad sa íyang mga bátà,</i> Her children were widely spaced. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. skipped or missed. <number>2</number> distance, gap. <i>Dakug lak-ang ang kinaíya nílang duha,</i> There is a big difference in their character.

<p id=10602><form>lakat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>walk</tr>. <i>Mulakat na ang bátà,</i> The baby is able to walk now. <i>Duul ra man nang ámù. Laktun ta lang,</i> My house is near here. Let&apos;s go on foot. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for s.t. to be going on. <i>Milakat ang daghang katuígan,</i> Many years went by. <i>Samtang naglakat ang pangadyì,</i> While the prayers went on. <number>1b</number> approaching an age, length of time. <i>Mulakat na ug usa ka túig sukad sa íyang pag-anhi,</i> It&apos;s been close to a year since he came here. <i>Naglakat na ku sa kwarinta,</i> I&apos;m approaching forty. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; ab3c]</itype> go away, depart. <i>Wà ra ba dinhi. Milakat na,</i> He&apos;s not here. He went out. <i>Unsa may laktun mu sa lungsud?</i> What are you going to the city for? <i>Kagamay ra ánang butang nga ímung laktan,</i> My, you are running away from such an insignificant thing. <i>Ilakat ang bátà sa parki arun malingaw,</i> Take the child to the park to amuse him. <number>3</number> <itype>[B46; c]</itype> spread. <i>Milakat ang balità nga bakak,</i> The false news spread. <i>Maáyung puúhun ning bagúna arun dílì makalakat nganhi,</i> It would be best to kill this vine off completely so that it can not spread here. <number>4</number> <itype>[AP; a1]</itype> follow up. <i>Akuy milakat (mipalakat) sa titulu sa ámung yútà,</i> I followed up the title to our land. <i>Laktun sa supirintindinti ang átung apuwintmint,</i> The superintendent will follow up our appointments. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> trend, course or direction s.t. is taking. <i>Lakat sa panahun,</i> Trend of the time. <i>Lakat sa nigusyu,</i> The way business is going. <number>2</number> errand, chore s.o. is sent to do. <i>Wà kuy lakat run,</i> I don&apos;t have anything to do now. <number>3</number> trip, journey. <number>4</number> procedure for doing s.t. <i>Ang lakat sa sinadiyap lahì sa yánung paghablun,</i> The procedure for weaving twill is different from that of a simple design. <form>{(&larr;)|lákat}</form> <pos>n</pos> action of going some place on foot. <i>Lákat na pud ta kay wà nay sakyanan,</i> Here we go, having to walk again because there is no transportation. <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>lakat</sc>, <ix>4.</ix></xr> <form>{pa-|palakat}, {pa-(&larr;)|palákat}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> make s.t. walk, go away, spread news, follow it up. <number>1a</number> move pieces around the board in a game. <i>Sígi, ipalákat pa ang mga batu kay dì ra ka mapasu,</i> Go on, keep moving your stones because you haven&apos;t stopped in an empty hole. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> operate an enterprise; business. <i>Antígu siya mupalákat ug nigusyu,</i> He knows how to run a business. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> continue working on a design that was started. <i>Akuy mupalákat niíning ginansilyu,</i> I&apos;ll continue working on your crochet work. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> way, means of doing s.t. <i>Ang íyang palákat sa íyang tindáhan inantigu,</i> She runs her store in a knowledgeable way. <number>2</number> manner or process of doing. <form>{-an|lakatan}</form> <pos>a</pos> prone to roaming about. <form>{hi&N;-(&larr;)|hinglákat}</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to go out a lot for business or for just plain roaming. <form>linaktan, nilaktan</form> <pos>n</pos> way of walking. <form>laktunun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> way or distance to be walked. <number>2</number> errand to be run. <form>{tali-(&larr;)|talilákat}, {-um-r-(&larr;)|lumalákat}</form> <pos>n</pos> about to go out, <tr>depart</tr>.

<p id=10603><form>lakatan</form> <xr>= <sc>bángan<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=10604><form>lakaw</form> <xr>= <sc>lakat</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10605><form>lakayan</form> <pos>n</pos> container consisting of a bamboo tube about <measure reg="20 cm">8&Prime;</measure> long with the node serving as its bottom. It is worn strapped to the side as container for miscellaneous little things: seeds for farmers, bait for fishermen, et al. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> make into a <ix>lakayan</ix>.

<p id=10606><form>lakbang</form> <pos>n</pos> step, procedure. <i>Ang íyang mga lakbang nagkahinay,</i> Her steps began to falter. <i>Unsay inyung mga lakbang arun madakpan ang kriminal?</i> What steps have you taken to catch the criminal? <i>Hukmanan sa únang lakbang,</i> Court of First Instance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> go s.w. walking. <i>Milakbang na kug súgud apan íya kung gialíhan,</i> I began to walk away, but he blocked my path. <i>Kaduul ánà, lakbángun rag katulu,</i> It is very close-by. You can get there in three steps.

<p id=10607><form>lakbay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> travel, take a trip. <i>Pila ka adlaw makalakbay na ang táwu sa búwan,</i> Soon we&apos;ll be able to take trips to the moon. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> walk, travel on foot. <i>Mulakbay (maglakbay) siyag paúlì mahápun,</i> He walks home from work in the afternoon. <i>Lakbáyun lang nátù ang lungsud,</i> We will just walk to town.

<p id=10608><form>lakbit</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>brief</tr>, short in time. <i>Sa lakbit nga pagkasulti,</i> In short or briefly. <i>Lakbit nga pagkakítà,</i> A brief meeting. <number>2</number> <formx>sa {&mdash;|lakbit}</formx> all of a sudden. <i>Sa lakbit misantup sa íyang panumdúman,</i> Suddenly it occured to him that ... <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make s.t. brief. <i>Átù lang ning lakbítug sulti,</i> We&apos;ll just say this briefly. <number>2</number> <itype>[b2c]</itype> touch on s.t. briefly and suddenly in the main course of the conversation. <i>Lakhiti ku dihag ampù,</i> Mention me in your prayers. <i>Gilakbit níya pagtug-an ang tinúud,</i> He revealed the truth in the course of his conversation. <pos>n</pos> a brief portion, part. <i>Usa ka gamayng lakbit sa ákung kagahápun,</i> One small bit of my past. <form>{pa-|palakbit}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> drop hints. <i>Gipalakbítan (gipalakbitan) ku níya sa íyang gustung pinaskúhan,</i> She dropped some <pb n=560>hints as to what she wanted for Christmas. <form>{pa-|palakbit}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hints</tr>.

<p id=10609><form>lakdap</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3C3; a12b2]</itype> for chickens to dash into fight for only a few clashes. <i>Milakdap ang mungà sa banug,</i> The hen dashed at the hawk. <i>Naglakdap ang duha ka sunuy,</i> The two roosters clashed for a short time. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A3P; c16P]</itype> have chickens clash with each other. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> swoop down over, whizz close by. <i>Milakdap ang ayruplánu sa digíra,</i> The plane swooped down over the battleship. <i>Lakdapi siya pagpusil,</i> Let a bullet whizz by him.

<p id=10610><form>lakdup</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> swoop down. <i>Banug da tung milakdup sa mga pisù,</i> It was a hawk that swooped down on the chicks. <i>Ilakdup ang ímung tabánug sa iyáha,</i> Make your kite swoop down on his. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23; b6]</itype> appear in one&apos;s mind in a flash. <i>Milakdup sa ákung panumdúman ang íyang mga túgun,</i> His last words came back in my mind. <pos>n</pos> swoop.

<p id=10611><form>lakgak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> join strands of abaca fiber (<ix>lánut</ix>) end to end to make thread. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|lakgakan}</form> <pos>n</pos> container into which the strands of fiber are laid after they have been joined.

<p id=10612><form>lakgut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC3; a]</itype> tie a series of things together by means of a series of locked knots. <i>Lakgutig maáyu ang mga nípà. Adtu ilakgut sa katsaw,</i> Tie the palm shingles up firmly. Tie them to the rafters. <pos>n</pos> tie that cannot come undone.

<p id=10613><form>laki</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> male animal or plant. <number>2</number> descriptive term given to plants, where the same name is given to different species or varieties. The thorny and/or smaller variety or species is called <ix>laki</ix>, as opposed to a larger and smoother species or variety called <ix>bayi</ix> &lsquo;female&rsquo;. <number>3</number> paramour. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> have male offspring. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>laláki</sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr> <form>{(&larr;)|láki}<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>laláki</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; c1]</itype> turn out to be a boy. <i>Maáyu untag maláki ning ákung gisabak,</i> It would be nice if my baby turned out to be a boy! <form>laláki</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> human male. <i>Laláki kaáyu siyang manlihuklihuk,</i> He acts all man. <number>2</number> paramour. <i>Pusilun ku ang laláki sa ákung asáwa,</i> I&apos;ll kill my wife&apos;s paramour. <number>3</number> <formx>{-ng|laláking} búhat</formx> acting in a way proper to a man. <i>Mu nay láking búhat nga makig-áwayg babáyi?</i> Is that what a gentleman does&mdash;quarrel with a woman? <number>4</number> <formx>mau nay {&mdash;|laláki}</formx> Atta boy, that&apos;s the way you ought to do it (said only to males). <form>{la-(&larr;)|laláki}, {panla-|panlalaki}, {panla-(&larr;)|panlaláki}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> have a paramour. <i>Nanglaláki (naglalaki) ang íyang asáwa,</i> His wife has a paramour. <i>Gipanglalaki (gilalaki) níya ang íyang humagbus,</i> She took her stepson for a lover. <form>{-in-(&larr;)|lináki}</form> <pos>a</pos> done like a male; man-like. <i>Lináki ang íyang tupi,</i> She has a man&apos;s haircut. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> do things like a male. <i>Mulináki ku ug ímu kung suhúlan,</i> I&apos;ll act like a man if you pay me. <i>Ilináki (linakíha) ang ímung pagbayhun arun dì ka hiilhan nga báyut,</i> Carry yourself like a man so people won&apos;t recognize that you&apos;re a fairy. <form>{-in-|linaki}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> man&apos;s bicycle. <number>2</number> riding astraddle like a man. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> ride astride an animal or vehicle. <i>Maglinaki ku pagbakráyid sa mútur,</i> I&apos;m going to ride astride the back of the motorcycle. <form>{pakala-(&larr;)|pakalaláki}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> act like a man, consider, treat like a man. <i>Kinahanglan kang magpakalaláki arun dì ka ingnung báyut,</i> You have to act like a man so they won&apos;t call you scared of women. <form>kalalakin-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the menfolk as a group. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>tag-(&larr;)</sc>. </xr><form>lakin-un</form> <pos>a</pos> a female that acts like a male, tomboy. <form>{tag-(&larr;)|tagláki}, taglakin-an, taglalakin-an</form> <pos>n</pos> the groom&apos;s relatives at the wedding.

<p id=10614><form>láki<sub>1</sub></form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>laki</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10615><form>*láki<sub>2</sub></form> <form>maáyung {&mdash;|láki}</form> have exceptional ability. <i>Maáyung láki si Maríya sa ininglis,</i> Maria has exceptional ability in English. <form>{ka-|kaláki}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> ability, skill. <i>Pwirtig kaláki níya sa karáti,</i> He is very skilled in karate. <number>1a</number> extraordinary ability of supernatural origin. <i>May kaláki siyang makatihul samtang mag-inum,</i> He has the ability of whistling while drinking. <number>1b</number> <formx>walay {&mdash;|kaláki}</formx> no good. <i>Way kaláki ang pagkáun dinhi,</i> The food here is no good. <number>2</number> course of action, maneuver. <i>Ug dì ta mangampanya, masíru giyud ta íning kalakíha,</i> If we don&apos;t campaign we will get no votes in this race. <i>Maprísu ta ánang kalakíha nímu,</i> We might land in jail with those plans of yours. <number>3</number> doings, usually evil. <i>Unsa tung inyung kaláki sa Manílà?</i> What was going on in Manila? <number>3a</number> way one does things. <i>Kanúnay kang malít ug mau nang kalakíha,</i> You&apos;ll never be on time if that&apos;s the way you do things. <number>3b</number> <formx>unsay {ka-|kaláki}</formx> how are things? <i>Unsay kaláki run bay?</i> How are things, pal? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[ANP; a1]</itype> find ways and means to remedy a problem. <i>Akuy mukaláki (mupakaláki, mangaláki) niíni arun dílì magkúlang,</i> I&apos;ll do s.t. so that this will be enough for all of us. <i>Kalakíha ri ug mahímù pa ba ning pawuntin ping daut,</i> See if you can do s.t. with this broken fountain pen to make it work. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1P]</itype> do s.t. one shouldn&apos;t be doing. <i>Nagkaláki (nagpakaláki) ka dihag languylánguy ug malumus ka,</i> You dare to swim where you shouldn&apos;t be. You might drown. <i>Kaláki (pakaláki) kag mulumakinilya ug sakpan ka sa tag-íya,</i> Better stop playing with that typewriter. The owner might catch you. <form>{paka-|pakaláki}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> <number>1, 2</number> <xr>= <sc>kaláki</sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr> <number>3</number> do one&apos;s best. <i>Magpakaláki giyud aku sa pagtuun,</i> I&apos;ll do my best in my <pb n=561>studies. <form>kalakíhan</form> <pos>a</pos> having an extraordinary ability of supernatural origin.

<p id=10616><form>lakiláki, lakìlákì</form> <pos>n</pos> splint to brace s.t. broken: broken plants, broken bones, broken furniture legs, and the like. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> make into a splint, put a splint on. <i>Gilakìlakían sa duktur ang ákung piang,</i> The doctor put a splint on my broken arm.

<p id=10617><form>lakináyin</form> <pos>n</pos> a card game in which the winning number of points is 9, wherein the face cards count zero. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> play lucky nine.

<p id=10618><form>lakip</form> including, included. <i>Lakip na niíning báyad ang túbù,</i> This payment includes also the interest. <i>Nangamátay ang mga manuk sa tukdaw lakip ang mga pisù,</i> All the chickens died of the pest including the chicks. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> include in a group or activity; be, become included in a group or activity. <i>Dì ku mulakip ug kasábà sa way lábut,</i> I won&apos;t scold (lit. include in the scolding) anyone who had no part in the ruckus. <i>Wà ka malakip sa lista,</i> You were not included in the list. <i>Ayawg lakipa (ilakip) kining ámung yútà pagsukud,</i> Do not include our land in your survey. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> enclose s.t. within s.t. <i>Nalakip tingáli ang risíbu sa sulat pagpadala,</i> I must have accidentally enclosed the receipt in the letter when I sent it.

<p id=10619><form>lákir<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> lacquer. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> apply, put lacquer on s.t.

<p id=10620><form>lákir<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> locker.

<p id=10621><form>lákit</form> <pos>n</pos> locket. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> have, wear or attach a locket.

<p id=10622><form>laklak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> for trousers, pants, underpants to be too loose. <i>Mulaklak ang karsúnis basta luag ang hawakan,</i> Trousers hang loosely if the hip part is loose. <i>Naglaklak ang pundíyu,</i> The undershorts are big around at the seat.

<p id=10623><form>laknit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> tear or peel s.t. off with a certain amount of force. <i>Makalaknit ba kahà ning hangína sa atup,</i> I wonder if this wind can rip the roof off. <i>Gilaknit ang íyang bág sa kawatan,</i> A thief snatched her bag. <i>Nalaknitan ug gamay ang ákung sinínà sa alambri,</i> The wire ripped a small piece off my dress.

<p id=10624><form>lakpawlakpaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> walk very lightly, hardly touching the ground. <i>Naglakpawlakpaw siya sa katunukan,</i> He walked carefully over the thorny ground.

<p id=10625><form>lakra</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> make an impression on a surface. <i>Mulakra sa iláwum nga papil ang ági kun iduut pagsulat,</i> If you write with pressure it will leave a mark on the paper beneath it. <i>Mga tudlù nga naglakra sa líug sa gibunù,</i> Finger marks left on the murder victim&apos;s neck. <number>1a</number> for s.t. to show through a transparent or thin surface. <i>Naglakra ang ímung panti kay hugut ang ímung sinínà,</i> Your panties are showing through because your dress is too tight. <number>2</number> for feelings or emotions to show in one&apos;s face. <i>Milakra sa íyang nawung ang íyang kaguul,</i> Her sorrow was apparent on her face. <pos>n</pos> impression on a surface. <i>Lakra sa banig sa íyang likud,</i> Impression of the mat on his back. <pos>a</pos> showing through clearly. <i>Lakra kaáyu ang ímung tútuy sa ímung blawus,</i> Your breasts show clearly through your blouse.

<p id=10626><form>laksà</form> <pos>n</pos> <ix>measure of quantity:</ix> <tr>ten thousand</tr>. <i>Usa ka laksang lubi,</i> Ten thousand coconuts. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B256]</itype> reach ten thousand.

<p id=10627><form>laksanti</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>laxative</tr>.

<p id=10628><form>laksi</form> <xr>= <sc>laski</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10629><form>laksì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> tear off, detach with a jerk. <i>Mulaksì kug usa ka pálid sa ímung nutbuk,</i> I&apos;ll tear a sheet out of your notebook. <i>Laksíun ku nang pahibalu nga gipapilit sa bungbung,</i> I&apos;ll tear off the notice pasted on the wall. <number>2</number> wipe out of one&apos;s mind. <i>Dì na malaksì gíkan sa ákung panumdúman ang átung kagahápun,</i> Our past can never be obliterated from my memory.

<p id=10630><form>laksut</form> <pos>a</pos> bad, <tr>ugly</tr>, <tr>unpleasant</tr> to the senses. <i>Laksut ug hitsúra,</i> Ugly in face. <i>Laksut ug batásan,</i> Having bad manners. <i>Laksut ug lamì,</i> Tasting bad. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> be, become ugly. <i>Milaksut (nalaksut) man hinúun ang ákung nawung nga gimik-ápan,</i> This make-up makes my face uglier instead of prettier. <i>Ang makalaksut (makapalaksut) sa managhigála ang panaglinibákay,</i> What is bad among friends is when they backbite each other.

<p id=10631><form>laktaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>miss</tr>, <tr>skip over</tr>. <i>Sukad sa iskína mulaktaw kag tulu ka balay. Ang ikaupat ámù,</i> From the corner, skip three houses. The fourth is my place. <i>Ug makalaktawg pila ka púlung, maigsaktu ang ihap sa tiligráma,</i> If you can skip a few words, the telegram will have exactly the right number of words. <i>Ayaw laktawi (laktáwi) ang ákung ngálan sa pagtawag,</i> Don&apos;t miss my name in the roll call. <pos>n</pos> s.t. skipped over. <form>laktawlaktaw</form> <pos>a</pos> not continuous, unevenly spaced. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> have gaps or omissions. <i>Ayawg laktawlaktáwa pagpintal,</i> Paint every inch. Don&apos;t keep skipping spaces. <form>{ka-|kalaktaw}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> have gaps or omissions. <i>Nagkalaktawlaktaw ang íyang isturya sa íyang kahadluk,</i> His story had several details missing because he was so frightened.

<p id=10632><form>laktud</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> direct, not going round about. <i>Laktud ning dalána kay diritsu,</i> This is the direct route because it is straight. <number>2</number> done directly, straight to the point without spending <pb n=562>time on s.t. else. <i>Sa laktud nga pagkasulti,</i> In short, to say it directly. <number>3</number> suddenly, straight away without warning. <i>Laktud man lang siyang nawálà, way pupananghid,</i> She just disappeared without saying good-bye. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> go or take s.t. right away, directly. <i>Milaktud siyag súd, way tulutuktuk,</i> He came in directly without bothering to knock. <i>Laktúra pagsulti ang ímung túyù,</i> Say what you want directly. <i>Ilaktud ni Káti pagsulat ngadtu sa manidy&icaron;r,</i> Cathy will send the letter direct to the manager. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> go, take a shortcut. <i>Nanglaktud ku padúng sa simbahan,</i> I took a shortcut to church. <form>{-anan|laktudánan}, lakturánan</form> <pos>n</pos> shortcut. <form>{-in-|linaktud}</form> <pos>a</pos> done in the shortest possible time, with unnecessary steps omitted.

<p id=10633><form>lakun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> coil s.t. <i>Lakunun (laknun) únà nang písì úsà hipúsa,</i> The rope should be coiled before you store it. <pos>n</pos> a coil. <i>Usa ka lakun alambri,</i> A coil of wire.

<p id=10634><form>lakung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB6; c1]</itype> loop around, wind into a loop. <i>Dihay hálas nga naglakung sa sanga,</i> There was a snake curled around the branch. <i>Siyay naglakung sa pasul,</i> He coiled the fish line up. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; b5]</itype> warp or curl up at the edges. <i>Nagkalakung ang playwud,</i> The plywood is curling up at the edges.

<p id=10635><form>lakuy</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. wrasse.

<p id=10636><form>lakuy-ung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> fall in a heap when the legs or props give way. <i>Mulakuy-ung nang silyáhag lingkúran kay balig tiil,</i> That chair will collapse if you sit on it because it has a broken leg. <i>Nakalakuy-ung siya sa dihang gipatíran ku ang íyang batíis,</i> I kicked him in the shins, and he fell in a heap.

<p id=10637><form>lakwatsa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC12; ac]</itype> go about with no fixed destination and have fun doing so. <i>Adtu ta sa Talísay maglakwatsa,</i> Let&apos;s go to Talisay to stroll about. <i>Ayawg ilakwatsa ug uban ang nagtinarung pagtrabáhu,</i> Don&apos;t take the serious workers along when you go roving about. <form>lakwatsíra</form> <xr>= <sc>lakwatsíru</sc>.</xr> (female). <form>lakwatsíru</form> <pos>a</pos> one who gallivants about. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become a gallivanter.

<p id=10638><form>lakwig</form> <pos>a</pos> tall and lanky. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be, become tall and lanky. <i>Naglakwig lang ang bayungbáyung,</i> The adolescent is tall and lanky.

<p id=10639><form>lála<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> weave leaves, straw, plastic. <i>Mul&amacracu; silag mga kálù,</i> They will weave hats. <i>Lad-i (láhi) akug banig,</i> Weave me a mat.

<p id=10640><form>lála<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for bites to be poisonous. <i>L&amacracu; kaáyu ang tuyum,</i> Black sea urchins <corr sic=inflect>inflict</corr> a painful sting. <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lála} ug bàbà, dílà</formx> one who has the trait that whatever bad he utters will come true. Such people usually have a birthmark on the tongue. <i>Dì siya makabuyag, mahitabù dáyun, kay l&amacracu;g dílà,</i> He cannot make comments, because they will come true right away. He has a poisonous tongue. <i>Simbaku malála kag bàbà,</i> God forbid if what you said comes true. (Lit. God forbid that you be a person with a poisonous tongue.) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> <number>1</number> be affected by venom. <i>Dì siya lad-an sa suyud sa buyug,</i> He is not affected by bee stings. <number>2</number> be hurt or embarrassed by a comment regarding s.t. which is secret but true. <i>Nalad-an siya sa ílang panaghap nga may kurang,</i> She was embarrassed when they figured that she was having homosexual relations with s.o. because it was true. <number>3</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> feel the effects of an activity so that one cannot continue doing it. <i>Gilad-an sa bayli maung dì na gánì gustung mamínaw ug sunáta,</i> She has danced so much that she doesn&apos;t even want to hear music. <form>lad-ánun</form> <pos>a</pos> having strong reactions to venom. &dagger;

<p id=10641><form>lálà</form> <xr>= <sc>balalà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10642><form>làlà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>slurp</tr>, lap up s.t. noisily. <i>Gilàlà sa iring ang gátas,</i> The cat lapped up the milk. <number>2</number> drink liquor (slang). <i>Naplastar kay milàlà man gabíi,</i> He is flat on his back because he tied a good one on last night. <pos>n</pos> drinking spree (slang).

<p id=10643><form>lalag</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>dalag<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <tr>yellow of complexion</tr>, having jaundice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> get a yellow, sickly complexion. <i>Malalag sab ang mata sa maawásan sa apdu,</i> Your eyes get a yellow cast if you suffer from jaundice.

<p id=10644><form>lalagan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. scaly, yellowish fish about three fingers wide and <measure reg="13 cm">5&Prime;</measure> long found in shallow waters.

<p id=10645><form>lalan</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> eat food one usually eats with staples alone. <i>Ayaw lalana ang sud-an kay wà na unyay isulà sa paniudtu,</i> Don&apos;t eat the food without rice because we&apos;ll run out. <number>2</number> eat s.t. without the thing it usually accompanies. <i>Ayaw lalana ang mantikilya,</i> Don&apos;t eat the butter without bread.

<p id=10646><form>lalang</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>create</tr>. <i>Ang mga táwu gilalang nga dì managsáma,</i> Men are created different from one another. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> creature. <number>2</number> power. <i>Unsa kahay lalang ánang tawhána nga mu ra mag tukúyun ang mga babáyi,</i> What sort of power does this man possess that women come to him like chickens coming for their feed. <form>{-in-|linalang}</form> <xr>= <sc>lalang</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr>

<p id=10647><form>lalau</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>muddy water</tr>. <i>Ayaw pagdúlà sa lalau arun dì ka nukaun,</i> Don&apos;t play in the muddy water because you&apos;ll get sores. <form>kalalauhan</form> <pos>n</pos> a swampy area, portion of a river or bay where the water is muddy.

<p id=10648><form>lalawígan</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>lawig</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10649><form>lalha</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> strip leaves or fronds off of a <pb n=563>stem by ripping them with a sudden downward motion or cutting downward with a knife such that a clean break is made. <i>Lalháun ku ang dáhun sa tubu,</i> I&apos;ll strip the leaves off the sugar cane.

<p id=10650><form>lálì</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. amberjack.

<p id=10651><form>lálik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>form</tr> into a certain shape. <i>Ang iskultur nga naglálik ánang istatwa,</i> The sculptor who carved that statue. <i>Maáyung pagkalálik ang íyang batíis,</i> She has well-formed legs. <i>Gilálik ku na sa ákung hunàhúnà ang ákung buut isulti,</i> I have already formed in my mind the things I want to say. <form>{-in-|linálik}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>carved</tr>, <tr>formed</tr>. <i>Dílì ka magyukbù sa linálik,</i> Thou shalt not worship graven images.

<p id=10652><form>lalim</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pleasurable</tr>. <i>Lalim pamináwun ang Rúsas Pandan,</i> The song Rosas Pandan is very pleasant to listen to. <number>2</number> <tr>delicious</tr>, delightful to eat. <i>Lalim kaáyung kan-un ang práyid tsíkin nímu,</i> Your fried chicken tastes delicious. <form>{&mdash;|lalim} mu, ka, ninyu, -y <r><ix>or</ix></r> nga</form> imagine that, can you believe it! <i>Lalim mu ba nga (y) wà diay kuy ikapilíti,</i> Imagine! It turned out that I didn&apos;t have money for fare. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become pleasurable. <i>Magkalalim ang tubà imnun ug madúgay nang ininum,</i> Coconut palm toddy becomes more delicious after a quantity has already been taken in. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> don&apos;t you think that is s.t.? <i>Gilaliman kag bulagan ug uyab?</i> Don&apos;t you think being jilted is bad enough? <i>Gilaliman ka ba ánang kantidára?</i> Don&apos;t you think that amount is s.t.?

<p id=10653><form>lálin</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>emigrate</tr>, transfer one&apos;s residence to a far place. <i>Ang pamilya ni Mútuk mulálin ngadtu sa Amirika,</i> Mutuc&apos;s family will immigrate to America. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> transfer s.t. to a new location. <i>Lalínun (ilálin) ang ámung upisína diin adúnay kahílum,</i> Our office will be transferred to a quiet place. <form>{(&rarr;)|lalin}</form> <pos>n</pos> emigrant.

<p id=10654><form>lális</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; ac3]</itype> <tr>argue</tr> about the rightness of s.t., <tr>dispute</tr>. <i>Dì ku malális nga may rasun ku,</i> You can&apos;t deny that I&apos;m right. <i>Ngánung lalísun pa man, sumbagayun na lang,</i> Why argue over it? Just fight it out. <i>Gilalísan níla ang paági sa pagbáhin,</i> They were arguing about how it was to be divided up. <i>Dì mamínaw ug rasun ang ákung gikalális,</i> The man I had a debate with won&apos;t listen to reason. <pos>n</pos> argument, dispute. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|lalisan}, {-un|lalisun}</form> <pos>a</pos> quarrelsome. <form>{ka-|kalális}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.o. with whom one has or had an argument.

<p id=10655><form>lálug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>feed</tr> slop to animals. <i>Ang mga subra iláwug sa bábuy,</i> Give the leftovers to the pigs. <number>2</number> feed a person (deprecatory). <i>Gilalúgan na ba sad nímu nang ímung way prubitsung bána?</i> Did you feed your no-good husband again? <form>{(&rarr;)|lalug}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> slop to feed animals. <number>1a</number> fodder, feed for animals that graze. <i>Tambúgig lalug nga kumpay ang kábaw,</i> Give the carabao some hay for fodder. <number>2</number> food served (deprecatory). <number>3a</number> fine sediment. <i>Ihuwad nang lawug sa tubà ngadtu sa sukaan,</i> Pour the sediment from the toddy into the vinegar container. <number>3b</number> slime clinging to the bottom of containers. <number>4</number> youngest child in the family (humorous slang).

<p id=10656><form>lalum</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>deep</tr>, extending far down from the surface. <i>Lalum nga bangag,</i> A deep hole. <i>Ang subà dinhi lawum,</i> The river here is very deep. <number>2</number> late in the night. <i>Lalum nga kagabhíun,</i> Deep in the night. <number>3</number> deep, low in tone. <i>Lalum nga pangaghu,</i> A deep sigh. <number>4</number> profound, hard to understand. <i>Lalum nga tirminu,</i> Difficult terms. <i>Lalum nga pinsar,</i> Deep thought. <number>5</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lalum} ug bughat</formx> for a relapse after childbirth to be severe. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; ab]</itype> deepen, cause to become deep. <i>Ang kaminíru mauy mulalum sa mga kanal,</i> The street cleaners will deepen the ditches. <i>Mulalum (malalum) ang samad ug dílì limpiyúhan,</i> A wound will become deep if it is not cleaned. <i>Laluma pagbúhù ang lubung,</i> Dig the grave deep enough. <i>Lalumi pag diyútay ang bulsa,</i> Make the pocket a little bit deeper. <number>2</number> <itype>[B25]</itype> become late at night. <number>3</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> become deep and low, reaching from the depths. <i>Milalum ang íyang pangaghu nga nagtan-aw sa masakitun,</i> Her sighs grew deeper as she looked at the sick man. <number>4</number> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> get to be profound. <i>Makalalum (makapalalum) diay ug pinsamintu ning kalisud,</i> I have found out that hardship makes one think deeply. <number>5</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lalum} ang bughat</formx> <itype>[A]</itype> for a relapse after childbirth to be severe. <i>Ang kasagunsun sa pagpanganak mauy makalalum (makapalalum) sa bughat,</i> Having babies one after another makes one get severe relapses. <number>6</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lalum} ug dulut</formx> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>dulut</sc>.</xr> <form>{-g-|laglum}</form> <xr>= <sc>lalum</sc>, <ix>a, v</ix> (plural).</xr> <form>{gi-un|gilalumun}, giladmun</form> <pos>n</pos> depth. <i>Ang giladmun sa íyang pangútuk,</i> The depth of his intelligence. <form>{ha-|halalum}</form> <pos>a</pos> deep. <i>Halawum nga ginháwa,</i> A deep breath. <form>{ka-|kalalum}</form> <pos>n</pos> depth, deepness. <i>Dílì masukud ang kalalum sa íyang gibátì,</i> The depths of her feeling cannot be fathomed. <form>{kahi-an|kahilaluman}, kahiladman</form> <pos>n</pos> depths, the innermost recesses. <form>{i-(&larr;)|ilálum}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>underneath</tr>, <tr>under</tr>. <i>Ilálum sa káma,</i> Underneath the mattress. <i>Ilálum sa gahum sa Katsílà,</i> Under the Spanish regime. <i>Iláwum sa dágat,</i> Under the sea. <form>{pai-(&larr;)|pailálum}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; bc]</itype> go under, underneath s.t. <i>Mipailálum ang isdà sa sapyaw,</i> The fish went underneath <pb n=564>the fish net. <i>Pailadmi sa libru ang mga papil,</i> Put the papers under the book. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> assume responsibilities or duties. <i>Akuy mupailálum sa tanang trabáhu dinhi,</i> I&apos;ll do all the chores around here. <number>3</number> <itype>[A]</itype> be subject, subservient to. <i>Násud nga nagpailálum sa bandílang langyaw,</i> A nation that allowed themselves to be subject to a foreign power. <form>{hai-|hailalum}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> get to be underneath s.t. <i>Lisud kuháun ang libru kay nahailalum sa uban,</i> It&apos;s difficult to get the book because it&apos;s way underneath the others.

<p id=10657><form>lálung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> grow seedlings. <i>Maglálung kug talung rung tuíga,</i> I will grow eggplant seedlings this year. <number>2</number> transplant, transfer from one place to another as a whole. <i>Maglálung ku íning similya,</i> I&apos;m going to transplant these seedlings. <i>Ang tanang balay sa iskwátirs lalúngun ngadtu sa Lahug,</i> All the squatters&apos; houses will be transferred to Lahug. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|lalungun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> seeds for seedlings. <number>2</number> seedlings to be transplanted. <number>3</number> houses or things of great bulk to be transferred.

<p id=10658><form>lamà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>imprint</tr>, <tr>stain</tr> left behind. <i>Lamà sa ngábil,</i> Mark left by the lips. <i>Lamà sa kuldun sa íyang háwak,</i> The imprint of the cord on his waist. <number>2</number> stain on one&apos;s character. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2; b]</itype> <number>1</number> leave a mark, have a mark left on it. <i>Naglamà sa mantil ang kitsap,</i> The catsup left a stain on the tablecloth. <number>2</number> bring a moral stain or blemish upon. <i>Ang ímung pagkadisgrasyáda mauy naglamà sa átung kadunggánan sa bánay,</i> You got pregnant, and it has blemished the honor of our family. <number>3</number> become clearly apparent. <i>Ang kaguul mulamà giyud sa hitsúra,</i> Sorrows show themselves in one&apos;s countenance. <form>{(&larr;)|lámà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> dye thread or cloth. <i>Ang usa ka putus tinà makalámà ug tulu ka sinínà,</i> A packet of dye can dye three dresses. <form>{-in-(&larr;)|linámà}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> dyed large cotton threads, usually used for weaving into blankets or towels. <number>2</number> red weft thread. <form>lamàlamà</form> <pos>a</pos> smeared, uneven in color. <i>Lamàlamà nga pagpintal,</i> Not evenly painted. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; a]</itype> be, become smeared or uneven in color. <i>Maglamàlamà ang kulur sa sinínà ug iladlad,</i> Your dress will get all uneven in color if you bleach it.

<p id=10659><form>lamak, lámak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>muddy</tr>, <tr>watery</tr> place. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> become, make into a muddy, watery area. <i>Lamákun (ilámak) sa kábaw ang pilápil úsà tanumi,</i> The carabaos are made to tramp over the paddy to turn it into a mire before it is planted. <form>{-an|lamakan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>lamak</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10660><form>laman, láman</form> <xr>= <sc>lámang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10661><form>lámang</form> <ix>short form</ix>: <bx>lang.</bx> <tr>only</tr>, <tr>just</tr>. <number>1</number> merely, [do] nothing more than. <i>Naglingkud lang siya didtu ug walà magtingug,</i> He just sat there without saying anything. <i>Mutsátsu lang siya unyà magbuut,</i> He&apos;s just a houseboy, but he wants to have the say. <i>Walà ku muanhi arun lang kasab-an,</i> I didn&apos;t come here merely to get a scolding. <i>Ígù lang siya sa paghílak,</i> All she could do was cry. (Lit. She was merely up to crying.) <i>Káwang lang ang ákung pag-antus,</i> My sufferings were all in vain (nothing more than vain). <i>Barátu ni kay písus lang,</i> This is cheap because it is only a peso. <i>Tú lang ákung gidá,</i> I only brought three. <number>1a</number> <ix>with commands or exhortation:</ix> just do [so-and-so]&mdash;it&apos;s a small thing to do. <i>Hulata lang ku sa gawas,</i> Just wait for me outside. <i>Maglakaw lang ta, duul ra man,</i> Let&apos;s just walk. It&apos;s not far. <number>1b</number> <formx>sígi {&mdash;|lámang}</formx> please [do], it&apos;s just a little favor to ask. <i>Sígi lang. Tugti lang ku,</i> Come on. Please, let me do it. <number>1c</number> <ix>with negatives:</ix> not bother to do. <i>Dì lang ta mangatúlug rung gabíi,</i> Let&apos;s not bother going to sleep this evening. <number>1c1</number> <formx>walà (dílì) {&mdash;|lamang} ... kun dílì ...</formx> not only ... but also ... <i>Dì lang ang inahan kun dì hasta anak maapiktahan,</i> Not only the mother but also the child will be affected. <number>1d</number> <formx>basta {&mdash;|lamang}</formx> just so it happens, though it isn&apos;t desirable. <i>Iwarì lang nà. Basta lang mawálà sa ákung panan-aw,</i> Get rid of it. Just so it gets out of my sight. <number>1e</number> <formx>karun, bag-u, gahápun {&mdash;|lamang}</formx> just now, just recently, just yesterday. <i>Karun lang siya miabut,</i> He just arrived now. <i>Bag-u lang silang namalhin,</i> They just recently moved. <i>Gahápun lang siya maulì,</i> He just went home yesterday. <number>1f</number> <formx><r>[<ix>expression of time</ix>]</r> {&mdash;|lamang}</formx> just do at [such-and-such time] (and no other time). <i>Mahuybis lang sila mamasúra,</i> They just collect garbage on Thursdays. <number>1g</number> <formx>balu, ambut {&mdash;|lamang}</formx> gee, I don&apos;t know (I&apos;m only up to saying I don&apos;t know). <number>1h</number> <formx>dipindi, sigun {&mdash;|lamang}, sa <r>[<ix>verb</ix>]</r> {&mdash;|lamang}</formx> depending on. <i>Ákung ibaligyà sa makauna lang,</i> I&apos;ll sell it to whoever is first. <i>Sigun lang sa prisyu,</i> It depends on the price. <number>1i</number> <formx>gáni, gáling {&mdash;|lamang}</formx> the only thing wrong. <i>Maáyu untà, gáling lang nasayup ang miskla,</i> It should have been good, only the mixture was in the wrong proportions. <number>2</number> just, take [so-and-so] rather than some other choice. <number>2a</number> <ix>with nominal predicate and verb subject:</ix> let [so-and-so] do it. <i>Aku lay dá áni bi,</i> There, let me carry this. <i>Ikaw lay pangutána,</i> You ask. (Lit. let you be the one to ask.) <number>2a1</number> <formx><r>[<ix>pronoun, noun</ix>]</r> {&mdash;|lamang}</formx> [so-and-so] will take the consequences. <i>Ug ímung buhátun, ikaw lang,</i> If you do it, you take the responsibility. <number>2b</number> <ix>with quantities:</ix> just make it [so-and-so] much. <i>Trayinta lang ni ha?</i> Can I have it for thirty? <number>2b1</number> <formx>anhi, dinhi, <pb n=565>nganhi {&mdash;|lamang}</formx> only up to here. <i>Anhi lang ku dinhi manáug,</i> I&apos;ll just get off here. <number>2c</number> <ix>with verb:</ix> take the choice of [do]ing. <i>Ang isdang dílì mahálin gamsun lang, dílì bularun,</i> If they can&apos;t sell the fish, they just salt it. They don&apos;t dry it. <i>Ayaw lag anhi ugmà, kay mahímu man sa Huybis,</i> Don&apos;t bother coming tomorrow because you can do it on Thursday. <form>sígi {&mdash;|lamang}</form> <number>2c1</number> never mind. <number>2c2</number> well, all right, I&apos;ll agree to it. <i>Sígi lang. Dì lang ku mudayug palit kay mahal,</i> Never mind. I won&apos;t buy it because it&apos;s expensive. <i>Sígi lang, itúgut ku na lang nig bayinti,</i> Oh, all right. I&apos;ll let you have it for twenty centavos. <form>ákù (íya, ímu) {&mdash;|lamang}</form> just let me (him) have it rather than s.o. else. <i>Ákù lang ni. Kadtu lay ihátag ni Pidru,</i> Let me have this one. Just let Pedro have the other one. <number>2c3</number> can&apos;t help [do]ing. <i>Mahadluk lang ta bisan sa pagpanimátì lang,</i> We can&apos;t help getting cold shivers, even just hearing about it. <number>2c4</number> <formx>mau {&mdash;|lamang}</formx> <number>2c4a</number> it cannot be otherwise. <i>&lsquo;Mu ba siya ang nakaingun?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Mu lang!&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Is he the one that caused it?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Of course! Who else could it have been.<corr>&rsquo;</corr> <number>2c4b</number> yes, most certainly so. <i>&lsquo;Mukáun kag surbíti?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Káun mu lang,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Would you like to eat ice cream?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;I sure would.&rsquo; <number>3</number> <formx>na {&mdash;|lamang}</formx> <number>3a</number> now it is only [so-and-so much] where it was more before. <i>Sukad sila namalhin aku na lang ang nahibilin,</i> After they moved away I was the only one left. <i>Human na ang tanan, paglimpiyu na lang,</i> Everything is done. Only the cleaning remains. <i>Duul na lang ang átung gidulngan,</i> It is just a little way further to where we&apos;re going. <number>3b</number> just take [so-and-so] rather than some other manifestly better choice. <number>3b1</number> <ix>with nominal predicate and verb subject:</ix> [so-and-so] will do it, though it should not be so. <i>Aku na lay tiwas áni, kay madúgay ug láing táwu,</i> Let me just do this myself because it would take forever if s.o. else were to do it. <number>3b2</number> <ix>with quantities:</ix> just make it [so-and-so much] (which is less than what one would ordinarily get). <i>Trayinta na lang ni, ha?</i> Just let me have it for thirty, this time, all right? <number>3b2a</number> <formx>anhi {&mdash;|lamang}</formx> just here (when I really want to do it elsewhere). <i>Kay lisud man ug musúd, anhi na lang ku sa iskína manáug,</i> Since it&apos;s difficult to take a vehicle in, I&apos;ll just get off at the corner. <number>3b3</number> [do] as the best choice under the circumstances. <i>Gamsa na lang nang isdáa kay wà nay mupalit,</i> You might as well just salt that fish because there isn&apos;t anybody who&apos;ll buy it. <i>Ayaw na lag dad-a ug bug-atan ka,</i> Don&apos;t bother taking it if you find it too heavy. <form>sígi na {&mdash;|lamang}</form> <xr>= <sc>sígi lámang</sc>.</xr> <form>ákù, íya na {&mdash;|lamang}</form> let me (him) have it (although you might have s.t. better to do with it). <i>Ákù na lang ni, ha?</i> Let me have it, may I? <form>salámat na {&mdash;|lamang}</form> I thank you, since I can&apos;t pay you any other way. <i>Ug dì ka pabáyad, salámat na lang,</i> Since you won&apos;t let me pay you, just let me thank you. <number>3c</number> can&apos;t help [do]ing. <i>Sa tantung kapungut nalímut na lang siya sa íyang kaugalíngun,</i> He was so angry he just forgot himself. <number>3c1</number> <ix>following expressions referring to time:</ix> it&apos;s already [so-and-so] late and s.t. still hasn&apos;t happened or hasn&apos;t stopped happening. <i>Udtu na lang ug naglúkun lang gihápun sa banig,</i> It&apos;s already noon, and he&apos;s still curled up asleep. <i>Gabíi na lang wà gihápun siya,</i> It&apos;s already night and he still has not come home. <number>3c2</number> <formx>dayag, kláru na {&mdash;|lamang}</formx> obviously, can&apos;t help being that way. <i>Kláru na lang nga muhílak ug ímung kusiun,</i> Obviously he&apos;s going to cry if you pinch him. <number>3c3</number> <formx>salámat na {&mdash;|lamang} nga</formx> the only saving grace was. <i>Malumus untà ku. Salámat na lang nga dinhay nakakità nákù,</i> I would have drowned, but thank God, s.o. saw me. <number>4</number> <formx>pa {&mdash;|lamang}</formx> <number>4a</number> <ix>following expression of time:</ix> <number>4a1</number> [such-and-such] was the first. <i>Karun pa lang ku makakità sa ingun,</i> This is the very first time I ever saw anything like that. <number>4a2</number> if it was so at [such-and-such] a time already, it would be even worse later. <i>Sa súgud pa lang nahanákan na siya,</i> At the very beginning he was already out of breath. <number>4a3</number> [so-and-so] just happened now. <i>Karun pa lang siya muabut,</i> He just arrived now. <i>Daw kagahápun pa lang,</i> It seems like only yesterday. <number>4b</number> lest [so-and-so] happen. <i>Dì ku mudúul sa irù kay paákun pa lang ku,</i> I won&apos;t go near the dog, because I might get bitten. <number>4c</number> if [so-and-so] had been the case. <i>Dì pa lang ka amígu nákù, ikíha ta ka,</i> If you were not my friend, I would have filed a case against you. <i>Aku pa lay gipabúhat, gwápu tag ági,</i> if they had told me to do it, it would have come out nice.

<p id=10662><form>lam-ang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b4]</itype> <number>1</number> overstep, go over s.t. <i>Nalam-angan ku ang lítir dyi,</i> I skipped letter g. <number>2</number> go beyond what is normally expected. <i>Milam-ang sa maáyung pamatásan ang ímung pag-ukit-ukit,</i> Your inquisitiveness has gone beyond the limits of good manners. <i>Hilam-angan ra sad ang ímung pagkaáyu,</i> Your goodness is far beyond what one would expect. <pos>a</pos> taken beyond normal bounds. <i>Lam-ang kaáyu ang íyang pagpangasábà,</i> Her scolding has gone too far.

<p id=10663><form>lam-ang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> name of an Ilocano epic.

<p id=10664><form>lamánu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; ab2]</itype> shake hands. <i>Naglamánu ang managkuntra apan dúmut gihápun,</i> <pb n=566>The two protagonists shook hands but they still were full of hatred. <i>Lamanúhun ku ang bag-ung kasal,</i> I&apos;ll shake hands with the newly-weds. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> join two edges of metal sheets with one hooked into the other. <i>Lamanúhun (ilamánu) ta lang pagsumpay,</i> Let&apos;s join it bending the two edges around so that one fits into the other. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> handshake. <number>2</number> joint of two things whereby the two things fit into each other. <i>Nabungkas ang lamánu sa baldi,</i> The pail came apart because the joint where the edges of the metal were made to fit into each other came apart. <number>3</number> powdered milk donated by the U.S. government which bears a picture of a handshake (slang). &dagger;

<p id=10665><form>lamas, lámas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>spice</tr>. <i>Las-ay ang útan ug dì lamásan,</i> Vegetables are tasteless if you don&apos;t spice them. <i>Ang habubuyna ikalámas,</i> Mint can be used as a spice. <number>2</number> <itype>[b]</itype> spice s.t. not food. <i>Gilamásan sa kandidátu ang íyang diskursu ug mga kumidiya,</i> The candidate spiced his speech with jokes. <form>{(&rarr;)|lamas}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> spice. <number>2</number> s.t. that lends color or richness. <i>Ang kanta lamas sa kinabúhì,</i> Songs add spice to life.

<p id=10666><form>lámas<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>rinse off</tr>, <tr>wash</tr> s.t. to eat. <i>Gadanghag ka lang naglámas sa kamúti, lapúkun gihápun,</i> You were careless in the way you washed the sweet potatoes. They are still muddy.

<p id=10667><form>lámat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>deceive</tr> the eyes with an illusion. <i>Gilámat ra tingáli ku pagkakità adtung gwápang babáyi,</i> Maybe it was only an illusion when I saw that beautiful woman. <number>1a</number> for supernatural beings that have taken and hidden a person to put a banana trunk in the person&apos;s place and make it look like the body of the dead person. <number>2</number> <tr>enchant</tr>, bedazzle. <i>Usa ra ka pahiyum ang milámat kaníya,</i> One smile was enough to enchant him. <i>Nalámat siya sa katahum sa kagabhíun,</i> He was enchanted with the beauty of the night. <pos>n</pos> thing with which s.o. is bedazzled. <i>Ang lámat sa bahandì,</i> The enchantment of wealth. <form>{ma-un|malamátun}</form> <pos>a</pos> enchanting, bedazzling. <i>Malamátung húni,</i> Enchanting melody.

<p id=10668><form>lamaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>slop</tr> fed to animals. <i>Lúpig pay lamaw ning sud-ána,</i> This food is worse than pig&apos;s slop. <number>2</number> k.o. sweet made of the meat of young coconut mixed with its water, milk, and sugar. <number>2a</number> k.o. sweet made of a mixture of the meat of papaya or avocado with milk and sugar. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> make, eat <ix>lamaw</ix>. <form>{(&larr;)|lámaw}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> have lots of <ix>lamaw</ix>. <form>{-in-|linamaw}</form> <xr>= <sc>lamaw</sc>, <ix>n2,</ix> <ix>2a.</ix></xr> <form>{-an|lamáwan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> pail for collecting slop. <number>2</number> feeding trough for animals.

<p id=10669><form>lámay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> for a sickness, feeling, vice to become deep-seated and take root or for medicine or s.t. else taken in to take its full effect. <i>Mawad-an siya sa hwisiyu ug mulámay na ang ispiritu sa álak,</i> He loses his good judgment when the alcohol begins to take its effect. <i>Ang kalúuy milámay sa íyang kahiladman,</i> A feeling of pity took root in his innermost being. <i>Ug dílì ka magpatambal lamáyan giyud ka sa sakit,</i> If you don&apos;t submit to treatment, the sickness will get worse and worse.

<p id=10670><form>lámay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> join a <tr>wake</tr> for the dead without sleeping. <i>Ang nakalámay sa Lúnis sa Myirkulis na sad mubálik,</i> Those who kept vigil on Monday will do so again on Wednesday. <pos>n</pos> wake for the dead.

<p id=10671><form>lamba</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5c]</itype> <tr>slam</tr> s.t. long and hard against s.t. <i>Kinsang pliyíra tung milamba sa bátir sa yútà?</i> Who was that player who swung the bat hard against the ground? <i>Kupti ang h&amacracu;s sa íkug unyà ilamba sa paril,</i> Hold the snake by the tail and swing it hard against the stone wall. <i>Nalamba ang sakayan ngadtu sa kabatuan,</i> The boat was slammed against the rocks. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> pass a basketball from a distance to one&apos;s teammate. <i>Lambahi (lambáhi) tung kaúban nátung way gwardiya,</i> Throw the ball to the teammate that no one is covering. <form>lambalamba</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B5; c1]</itype> be repeatedly thrown or struck against s.t. <i>Naglambalamba ang sira sa bintánà sa kakusug sa hángin,</i> The window shutters swung back and forth against the sills with the force of the wind. <pos>n</pos> the action of throwing or striking repeatedly.

<p id=10672><form>lambang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>join</tr> two things, usually live, to each other. <i>Nagkalambang ang duha ka hiniktang sunuy nga gidúul paghigut,</i> The two roosters that were tied too closely to each other got entangled with one another. <i>Lambánga ang duha ka karabaw,</i> Tie the two carabaos together. <number>2</number> for animals to have sexual intercourse, and, by coarse extension, for people to do so. <i>Duha ka irù nga naglambang,</i> Two dogs copulating. <i>À, makiglambang lang nà bisag unsung bayhána,</i> He doesn&apos;t care who he screws.

<p id=10673><form>lambanug, lambánug</form> <pos>n</pos> alcoholic drink made from the water taken from the nipa palm bud that has been fermented and distilled.

<p id=10674><form>lambáruk</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>mackerel</tr> (small <ix>adlù</ix>).

<p id=10675><form>lambay<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>langbay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10676><form>*lambay<sub>2</sub></form> <form>{-in-|linambay}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. <tr>stage play</tr>, usually about heroic deeds of past ages, with a dialogue delivered in verse. <number>2</number> s.t. put on for the show of it. <i>Kanang paggúkud kunúhay sa mga dagkung ismaglir usa lang ka linambay,</i> The drive against the smugglers is nothing <pb n=567>but a big show. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> present a <ix>linambay</ix> stage play. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> play in a <ix>linambay</ix>.

<p id=10677><form>lambáyaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. hardwood timber.

<p id=10678><form>lambáyung</form> <pos>n</pos> creeping vine of seashore with purple morning-glory-like flowers: <bio>Ipomoea pes-caprae</bio>.

<p id=10679><form>lambì</form> <pos>a</pos> for one of two things that should fit together to overlap. <i>Lambì ang ngábil, ilhánang nanaway,</i> The lower lip is sticking out, a sign that he is criticising you. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; ac]</itype> get to be protruding. <i>Nalambì ang sira sa kaban,</i> The cover of the trunk jutted out over the edge.

<p id=10680><form>lambid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C3; a]</itype> be <tr>wound around</tr> in an irregular way. <i>Milambid ang gaway sa kugíta sa íyang páa,</i> The tentacles of the octopus were wound around his thigh. <i>Ayaw idúul ang mga hiniktan arun dílì maglambid,</i> Don&apos;t put the cocks close to each other so that their strings don&apos;t get all tangled up. <form>{-in-|linambid}</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <ix>budbud</ix> made with white and violet-colored sticky rice, such that the dark and light colored rice forms intertwining streaks. <form>linambíran</form> <xr>= <sc>linambid</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10681><form>lambígit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> get <tr>entwined</tr>, latched on to. <i>Magkítà gánì ming magsúun maglambígit dáyun mig isturya,</i> When we sisters get together we get engrossed in conversation with each other. <i>Nagkalambígit ang ílang mga ngálan tungud sa ílang kasuud,</i> Their names became linked with each other because they are close to each other. <i>Nagkalambígit ang duha ka pasul,</i> The two fishing lines got entangled. <i>Kanúnay ilambígit niíni ang hitabù,</i> Always connect the incident with it. <form>{hi-|hilambígit}/{ha-|halambígit}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> be involved, tied up in. <i>Wà ka ba mahilambigit sa tikas?</i> Are you not involved in the swindle? <i>Ag ákung kwarta nahilambígit sa tindáhan,</i> My money is tied up in the store. <form>{ka-an|kalambigítan}</form> <pos>n</pos> involvement. <i>Maprísu ka ug dúna kay kalambigítan sa huld-ap,</i> You will go to jail if you have s.t. to do with the hold-up.

<p id=10682><form>lambing</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> join two things together with a length of s.t. <i>Lambínga ang duha ka baskit,</i> Tie the two baskets together. <i>Gidúul ninyu paghigut ang kanding. Dì nagkalambing hinúun,</i> You tied the goats too close together so they got entangled. <pos>n</pos> fishing line with two hooks attached to the main line.

<p id=10683><form>lambiyaw</form> <pos>n</pos> the fry of a k.o. crevally, silver in color and glossy green on the back with smooth skin: <bio>Selaroides leptolepis</bio> (so called from the color resemblance to the <ix>bíyaw</ix> beetle).

<p id=10684><form>lambiyug, lambíyug</form> <xr>= <sc>lambuyug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10685><form>lambíyung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> <tr>whirl around</tr>, go around in circles. <i>Naglambiyung ang bintiladur,</i> The electric fan is revolving. <i>Lambiyunga (ilambíyung) ang ímung buktun,</i> Whirl your arm around. <i>Ang tugpahánan gilambiyungan sa ayruplánu únà kini mutugpa,</i> The airplane circled the airport before it landed.

<p id=10686><form>lambu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> cord made of cotton strings twisted together. <i>Lambu ang ibáat sa putus kay lig-un,</i> Use cord for tying the bundle because it&apos;s strong. <number>2</number> fishing line made from such cord. <form>{pa&N;-|panglambu}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> catch fish with a hook and line made of <ix>lambu</ix> dragged behind the boat.

<p id=10687><form>lambù</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>growing lush</tr> and tall, <tr>prospering</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3]</itype> <number>1</number> for plants to grow lush and tall. <i>Milambù ang tanum nga giabunúhan,</i> The fertilized plants grew lush. <number>2</number> <tr>prosper</tr>, <tr>flourish</tr>. <i>Milambù sa ngadtungadtu ang íyang nigusyu,</i> His business flourished with time. <number>3</number> for good feelings to grow in time. <i>Sa kadugáyan nilambù ang ákung pagbátì níya,</i> With time, my feelings for her grew intense. <form>{-anan|lambúanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> a place where s.t. flourishes. <i>Lambuánan sa mga yawan-ung hunàhúnà,</i> Place where evil thoughts flourish. <form>{ka-an|kalambúan}</form> <pos>n</pos> prosperity. <i>Álang sa kalambúan sa násud,</i> For our nation&apos;s progress. <form>{ka-an(&rarr;)|kalambuan}</form> <pos>n</pos> advancement, growth. <i>Way kalambuan ang ímung paningúhà kaníya,</i> Your romantic efforts have made no progress whatsoever. <form>{ma-un|malambúun}</form> <pos>a</pos> growing luxuriantly and tall.

<p id=10688><form>lambud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> <tr>wind around</tr>, get wound around. <i>Milambud ang gaway sa kugíta sa íyang páa,</i> The tentacles of the octopus wound around his thigh. <i>Ipalayù ug hikut ang kábaw ug kanding arun dílì magkalambud,</i> Tie the carabao and the goat far from each other so that their ropes will not get entwined with each other. <i>Ilambud ang hílu sa karitisan,</i> Wind the thread around the spool. <form>lamburan, lamburánan</form> <pos>n</pos> reel or anything on which s.t. is wound. <form>budbud linambúran</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <ix>budbud</ix> made of white and violet colored rice or millet, rolled and wound together.

<p id=10689><form>lambun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>broil</tr> s.t. in between embers. <i>Pagkúhà ug dáhun kay maglambun tag kamúti,</i> Get some banana leaves. We&apos;re going to broil some yams. <form>{-in-an|linambúnan}</form> <pos>a</pos> cooked by having been broiled in live coals.

<p id=10690><form>lambúnaw</form> <pos>n</pos> medium-sized tree of the forest producing bunches of oval, red fruit, 5 cm. or longer, with an edible pulp and a single pit: <bio>Aglaia everettii</bio>.

<p id=10691><form>lambung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> grow long and thick, clinging or hanging over s.t. <i>Naglambung na <pb n=568>sa tingkuy ang íyang buhuk,</i> His hair is already hanging thick over his nape. <i>Gilambúngan sa balantiyung ang ílang atup,</i> The squash grew over their roof, covering it entirely. a hanging long and thick covering s.t. <form>{-ay|lambúngay}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mane</tr>. <form>{pa&N;-ay|panglambúngay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> grow profusely in strands or bunches as if a mane. <i>Maáyung alutan ang ímung buhuk kay nanglambúngay na,</i> It&apos;s about time to cut your hair because it is like a mane. <form>{-ayun|lambungayun}</form> <pos>a</pos> thick and long like a mane.

<p id=10692><form>lambúnit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> fight with one another to get s.t. <i>Naglambúnit ang babáyi ug ang mangangagaw sa bág,</i> The woman struggled with the purse-snatcher.

<p id=10693><form>lambus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> strike with s.t. heavy, usually in a downward motion. <i>Mga balud nga milambus sa gamayng sakayan,</i> Waves that lashed at the small boat. <i>Makalambus ka kahà ánang kaban níya?</i> Do you think you can slam that trunk on him? <i>Gilambúsan ang kawatan sa alhu,</i> We struck the burglar with a pestle. <i>Alsáhun tikaw run ug ilambus sa yútà,</i> I&apos;ll lift you and throw you hard against the ground. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> blow with s.t. heavy. <i>Kusug nga lambus sa íkug sa buáya,</i> Heavy lash inflicted by the crocodile with its tail. <number>2</number> stick used to strike s.o.

<p id=10694><form>lambut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a2b2]</itype> reach a certain amount, length, or distance. <i>Milambut ug usa ka líbu ang ílang halin,</i> Their sales amounted to one thousand pesos. <i>Nakalambut ug usa ka gatus ang mga bisíta,</i> The visitors reached one hundred persons. <i>Lambuta ang syudad sa duha ka úras,</i> Get to within reach of the city in two hours. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> catch up or overtake. <i>Mulambut pa ta sa únang byáhi,</i> We can still make the first trip. <i>Gilambutan námù sila sa Karkar,</i> We caught up with them in Carcar.

<p id=10695><form>lambuyud</form> <pos>a</pos> feeling dizzy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b6]</itype> <tr>feel dizzy</tr>. <i>Mulambuyud (maglambuyud) ang ákung panan-aw ug magsígig libutlíbut sa halígi,</i> I get dizzy if I keep running around the post. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>lambuyug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10696><form>lambuyug, lambúyug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> whirl s.t. around on a string and throw it off in a distance. <i>Lambuyugun ku nang langgam nga nagbatug sa sanga,</i> I&apos;ll sling a rock at that bird perching on the branch. <i>Gilambuyug níya ang láang úsà pasaplúti ang báka,</i> He whirled the rope before he lassoed the cow. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> for attention, thought to veer off on a target. <i>Nalambuyug ang íyang mga mata sa nagkiaykíay nga babáyi,</i> His gaze was diverted to the girl with the swaying hips. <pos>n</pos> sling for hurling stones made of a piece of cloth, leather, or palm leaf which holds the stone and a pair of strings which are whirled around. When one of the strings is released, the missile flies off.

<p id=10697><form>lamdag</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bright</tr>. <i>Lamdag kaáyu ang síga sa plurisin,</i> The fluorescent lamp gives a bright light. <i>Ayaw pagsugà kay lamdag man,</i> Don&apos;t turn on the light because there&apos;s enough light. <i>Lamdag ug kaugmáun ang táwung kugihan,</i> An industrious person has a bright future. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> illumination. <i>Ang lamdag sa sugà,</i> The lamp&apos;s illumination. <number>2</number> enlightenment. <i>Lamdag sa Ispiritu Santu,</i> The enlightenment of the Holy Spirit. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; ab]</itype> give light or brightness; be, get bright or well-lighted. <i>Adlaw nga naglamdag sa kalibútan,</i> The sun that gives light to the world. <i>Dúnay táwu kay naglamdag mag ílang báy,</i> There must be s.o. home because the house is lighted. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> enlighten. <i>Pagtulun-an nga milamdag sa ákung hunàhúná,</i> A lesson that enlightened my mind. <number>3</number> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> for a place to be stripped of plants or parts of plants. <i>Ang pagpahit sa kamaisan sa mga bábuy mauy nakalamdag (nakapalamdag) niíni,</i> The pigs ate the corn plants and made the area bare. <i>Gilamdágan ku sa mga káhuy sa lagwirta nga gipamutlan sa mga sanga,</i> The trees in the yard looked bare to me after some of the branches were pruned. <form>{pa-|palamdag}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> go, put to a lighted or illuminated area. <i>Ayawg palamdag kay hiilhan ka,</i> Don&apos;t go under the light because you might be recognized. <i>Palamdági ku ngari arun makítà ring ákung trabáhu,</i> Give me some light here so I can see my work. <form>{ka-un|kalamdágun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>clarification</tr>. <form>{ma-un|malamdágun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>enlightening</tr>.

<p id=10698><form>lamdaman</form> (coined from <ix>lamdag</ix> &lsquo;light&rsquo; and <ix>panumdúman</ix> &lsquo;thoughts&rsquo;&mdash;root <ix>dumdum</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>inspiration</tr>. <i>Ang dalága mauy lamdaman ni Rinaldu sa íyang pagpanulat,</i> Reynaldo took his inspiration for his writings from the girl.

<p id=10699><form>lamhun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3]</itype> for a wound or bruise to get infected and swollen, but not severely so. <i>Tambáli nang núka sa dì pa makalamhun,</i> Put medicine on your sore before it gets infected.

<p id=10700><form>lamhung</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> growing thickly and profusely, esp. such that other plants are crowded out. <number>2</number> choking off or overshadowing, keeping plants from growing well. <number>3</number> swollen and inflamed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> grow thick and/or tall such that other growths get stunted. <i>Ang kamukámu milamhung sa lagwirta,</i> The morning glories spread all over the garden (and choked other plants). <number>1a</number> stunt other plants by choking them off or overshadowing them. <i>Makalamhang ang dáhun sa kaymítu <pb n=569>sa mga tanum,</i> Star apple leaves are used as a cover to kill off other plants. <i>Nalamhungan ang mga munggus sa balíli,</i> The grass stunted the bean plants. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2346]</itype> get inflamed. <i>Milamhung ang pinaakan sa lamuk,</i> The <corr sic=mosquite>mosquito</corr> bite became inflamed.

<p id=10701><form>lamhuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1236]</itype> for bruise to swell and get soft. <i>Nalamhuy ang ákung tudlù nga nadukdukan sa martilyu,</i> I struck my finger with a hammer and it became soft. <i>Wà makalamhuy ang buktun nga giiniksiyunan,</i> The arm that was injected didn&apos;t swell.

<p id=10702><form>lamì</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tasty</tr>, giving a delicious feeling or taste. <i>Lamì nga pagkáun, Delicious food. Lamì nga isturya,</i> A pleasurable talk. <number>1a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lamì} nga i-<r>[<ix>verb</ix>]</r></formx> it would be lovely to ... <i>Lamì rung ikalígù sa dágat,</i> How nice it would be to go swimming now. <number>2</number> beautiful to look at. <i>Lamì kaáyu siyag kurtína,</i> She has beautiful curtains. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>taste</tr>, <tr>flavor</tr>. <i>Way lamì, Tasteless. Kining isdáa lamig lápuk,</i> This fish tastes like mud. <number>2</number> <tr>orgasm</tr>. <i>Dúgay siyang abtan sa lamì,</i> It takes her a long time to come to her orgasm. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> <number>1</number> be, become pleasant to the senses. <i>Mulamì (malamì) ang sud-an ug bitsinan,</i> The food becomes tasty if monosodium glutamate is added to it. <i>Ang pagsinabtanay mauy makalamì (makapalamì) sa panagtiáyun,</i> Understanding is the thing that makes a marriage pleasant. <i>Lamian kung mubunal ug bátang pilyu,</i> I love to whip naughty boys. <number>2</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> reach orgasm. <form>{&mdash;|lamì} ug kalit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> take a sudden unexpected turn. <i>Maáyu pa tung ámung isturya unyà milamì lang siyag kalit, nasukù man lang nákù,</i> We were having a nice talk. Suddenly s.t. got into her, and she got mad at me. <i>Lúya na ang buksidur, unyà sa katapúsang ráwun milamì lag kalit, gidabudabuhan ang kuntra,</i> The boxer had gotten weak. Then suddenly at the last round he seemed to have gotten his second wind and rained heavy blows on his opponent. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> become more interesting. <i>Naglámì (nagkalámì) ang ílang isturya human makainum,</i> Their talk got more interesting after they had had some drinks. <form>{pa-(&larr;)|palámì}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac1]</itype> do s.t. to add to the taste, pleasurableness of s.t. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> indulge oneself in s.t. nice. <i>Nagpalámì siya ug katúlug ug wà gánì maghunàhúnàg digámu,</i> She&apos;s sleeping blissfully without even thinking about cooking breakfast. <pos>n</pos> <tr>seasoning</tr>. <form>palamìlámì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> indulge in sexual pleasures of any sort. <pos>n</pos> <tr>sexual indulgence</tr>. <form>{-an|lamían}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>delicious</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> get to be delicious.

<p id=10703><form>lamígas</form> <xr>= <sc>hulmígas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10704><form>lamigmig</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> pat successively and shake or massage lightly, usually on a full and fleshy part of body. <i>Gustu siyang mulamigmig sa ákung páa,</i> She likes to play with my thigh by patting it, shaking the hand while pressing down. <i>Lamigmígi ug asin ang hinimulbúlan nga manuk,</i> Pat some salt into the flesh of the dressed chicken. <number>2</number> <itype>[a2b2]</itype> be repeatedly hit with s.t., usually not fatal. <i>Hinglamigmigan ka lagi kay nakigsumbagay kag buksidur,</i> If you pick a fight with a boxer you&apos;ll get yourself soundly pummelled.

<p id=10705><form>lamili</form> <xr>= <sc>damili</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10706><form>lamina</form> <pos>n</pos> framed <tr>picture</tr>, esp. of a saint. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make framed pictures, esp. of saints.

<p id=10707><form>laminasiyun</form> <xr>= <sc>laminisyun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10708><form>láming</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>confine</tr> an animal for the purpose of controlling its food prior to slaughtering. <i>Lamíngun ang alimángug mga simána únà lutúa,</i> They keep mud crabs and feed them a special food about a week before they cook them. <number>1a</number> do a similar thing to people. <i>Iláming sa duktur ang pasiyinti sa dì pa upirahan,</i> The doctor will confine the patient and put him on a special diet before he operates. <number>2</number> keep s.t. in confinement. <i>Kadtung íyang pagsiyágit didtu ra maláming sa íyang kinahiladman,</i> He kept his shouts stifled in his innermost being. <i>Naláming silang tanan sulud sa balay,</i> They were all kept imprisoned in the house. <number>2a</number> in the game of <ix>tubigtúbig,</ix> imprison players in one of the squares. <pos>n</pos> animal that had been kept confined prior to slaughter. <form>{(&rarr;)|laming}</form> <xr>= <sc>láming</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <form>{-an(&rarr;)|lamingan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the first two squares the players at play enter in the game of <ix>tubigtúbig</ix>. <number>2</number> the player guarding these squares.

<p id=10709><form>laminisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lamination</tr> of plastic over s.t.

<p id=10710><form>laminit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>laminate</tr> with plastic.

<p id=10711><form>lamísa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>table</tr>, <tr>desk</tr>. <number>2</number> food set out. <i>Náa na bay lamísa dihà kay musaka mi,</i> Do you have a table set? If you do, we&apos;ll come in. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a table. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> set the table, put food on the table. <i>Lamisáhi ang bag-ung abut,</i> Put dishes on the table for the visitor that just came in. <number>2a</number> have a lot of food on the table (usage taken from the custom among poor people that a table is set only when there is a decent meal&mdash;otherwise people just take what there is and gobble it down). <i>Basta bag-ung swildu maglamísa giyud mi sa Dinghaw,</i> As soon as we get paid we&apos;ll have a banquet (lit. table set) at the Ding Hao restaurant.

<p id=10712><form>lamisíta</form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>table</tr> or <tr>desk</tr>.

<p id=10713><form>lamiti</form> <pos>a</pos> smeared with s.t. sticky. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; aP]</itype> be, become smeared with s.t. sticky. <i>Naglamiti <pb n=570>ang nawung sa bátà sa tsukulit,</i> The child&apos;s face is besmeared with chocolate.

<p id=10714><form>lamlam<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. <tr>itch</tr> affecting the parts between the toes, usually caused by walking barefoot on ground soaked with horse urine. <i>Katul kaáyu ang lamlam sa ákung tiil,</i> The itch in my toes is so bad. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; b4]</itype> get <ix>lamlam</ix>.

<p id=10715><form>lamlam<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>talk too much</tr>, nonsensically or boastfully. <i>Lamlámi lang si Tátay mu kay aku dì na mutúu,</i> Just hand that line to your father. As far as I&apos;m concerned, I don&apos;t believe you. <i>Unsa na man say gilamlam mu didtu sa imnanan?</i> What sort of foolishness did you tell the boys in the toddy stand this time? <pos>n</pos> <tr>talk</tr>, <tr>words</tr>. <i>Pulus lang lamlam nang tawhána way nabúhat,</i> That fellow is all talk, no action.

<p id=10716><form>lampaag, lampáag</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>stout</tr>, <tr>fat</tr>. <i>Kalampáag sa náwung ánang bayhána! Ikatalakpun,</i> What a broad face that woman has! You could use it as a shutter for a window. <number>2</number> spreading lushly. <i>Lampaag kaáyu ang lambáyung dapit sa hunásan,</i> The vines are spreading out lushly near the edge of the tidal flat. <number>3</number> for the hair to look bushy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> be, become broad, flat. <number>2</number> get to grow lushly. <i>Mulampáag ang mga balíli ug muuwan na,</i> The grass will grow lush when the rains come. <number>3</number> for hair to get bushy. <i>Naunsa man ang ímung hirdu nga naglampaag man. Gitís tingáli,</i> What happened to your hair that it&apos;s so bushy? You must have teased it.

<p id=10717><form>lampágà</form> <xr>= <sc>lampaag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10718><form>lampakanay nga kúgun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>reed</tr> found in marshland.

<p id=10719><form>lampánug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b3]</itype> go out without saying goodbye to escape, get out of work, in anger. <i>Túa, milampánug kay gikasab-an,</i> There, he ran out of the house because I scolded him. <i>Ang pagpanglimpiyu sa sílung muy íyang gilampanúgan,</i> He left the house to get out of helping clean out the cellar.

<p id=10720><form>lampara</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> oil or kerosene <tr>lamp</tr> without a chimney. <number>2</number> pressurized kerosene <tr>lantern</tr> where the light shines downward, used mainly for fishing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a1]</itype> make, use a lamp of this sort. <form>{pa&N;-|panglampara}</form> <pos>n</pos> type of fishing using a pressurized lantern to attract the fish, used esp. in shallow waters for catching schools of small fish. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> catch fish by this manner. <form>lamparahan</form> <xr>= <sc>lampara</sc>, <ix>1.</ix></xr> <form>lamparista</form> <pos>n</pos> one who fishes using the <ix>panglampara</ix> method. <form>lamparahánan</form> <pos>n</pos> boat used in <ix>panglampara</ix> fishing. <form>lamparilya</form> <pos>n</pos> a small kerosene or alcohol lamp without a chimney. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> make, use as a small kerosene lamp.

<p id=10721><form>lampáru</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> <tr>slap</tr> with the hand, usually at the head. <i>Dílì ku mulamparu kay piligru kunu sa útuk,</i> I would not slap anyone on the head because it might hurt the brain. <i>Gilampáru ku sa kusug nga hángin,</i> I was struck by a strong wind. <pos>n</pos> slap.

<p id=10722><form>lamparúnis</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. pussy, slow-healing <tr>abscesses</tr> around the neck that leave large scars. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B124; a4b4]</itype> be afflicted with <ix>lamparúnis</ix>.

<p id=10723><form>lampas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN2; b]</itype> <tr>cut</tr> down, <tr>sickle</tr> grass and undergrowth with a swinging motion. <i>Pagsúhul ug mulampas (manglampas) sa kalubihan,</i> Hire s.o. to cut down the grasses in the coconut grove. <pos>n</pos> the cutting down of grass or undergrowth from an area. <form>{&mdash;|lampas} tánum</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> cut down the plant growths and plant rice or corn at the same time. This is done in paddies under deep water which cannot be plowed or in second-growth forests between the trees. <i>Gilampas tánum (gilampas tanúman) ang anut,</i> The plants were cut down, and at the same time corn was planted in the second-growth forest. <pos>n</pos> the process of cutting plant growths, plant rice or corn at the same time.

<p id=10724><form>lampas<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>lápas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10725><form>lampásu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>polish</tr> a floor by rubbing a half a coconut husk or s.t. similar over it. <i>Lampasúhi ang sála,</i> Polish the floor in the living room with a coconut husk. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b2c]</itype> pummel, shake and throw to the ground. <i>Ilampásu ku kinsa ninyu magbinúang,</i> If anybody cuts up I&apos;ll scrub the floor with him. <i>Ilampásu námù ang inyung tím,</i> We&apos;ll give your team a thorough trouncing. <number>2a</number> have s.t. done thoroughly to it. <i>Hilampasuhan unyà mug kasábà,</i> You&apos;ll get a thorough tongue-lashing. <pos>n</pos> s.t. to polish the floor with, esp. a half a coconut husk.

<p id=10726><form>lampay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small shallow porcelain <tr>bowl</tr> to eat out of.

<p id=10727><form>lampin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>diaper</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put on, make into a diaper. <i>Lampínun (ilampin) lang ning dáang palda,</i> Just use this old skirt for a diaper. <i>Lampíni ang bátà,</i> Diaper the baby.

<p id=10728><form>lampíngas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>indifference</tr> to how s.o. is affected. <i>Ang lampíngas sa kapalaran,</i> The arbitrariness of fate. <form>{-an|lampingásan}</form> <pos>a</pos> indifferent and oblivious to how other persons are affected. <i>Lampingásan nga táwu nga walà mabalísa sa íyang gipamabdúsan,</i> A brute, completely indifferent to the fate of the woman who bore his child. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become indifferent, oblivious to others.

<p id=10729><form>lampínig</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>yellow jacket</tr>. <i>Ang lampínig sa panúlat nakaúkub sa íyang tingkuy,</i> He was <pb n=571>bitten by the writer&apos;s bug. (Lit. The yellow jacket of writing bit into the nape of his neck.)

<p id=10730><form>lampírung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> white, translucent material taken from the inside of the shells of certain oysters, used for windows, lampshades and other ornaments. <number>2</number> name of the oyster from which this material is taken. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> use <ix>lampírung</ix> shells for windowpanes.

<p id=10731><form>lampis</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small edible <tr>crab</tr> of streams.

<p id=10732><form>lampuay, lampúay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b6]</itype> flow or spread beyond the limits. <i>Milampuay ang íyang tiyan sa katambuk,</i> His stomach bulged from excess fat. <i>Naglampuay ang sabaw sa panaksan (ang panaksan sa sabaw),</i> The soup spilled over the edge of the bowl.

<p id=10733><form>lampurnas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>scrub</tr>, <tr>wipe</tr> with force to clean s.t. <i>Nalimpiyu ang pansayan human siya makalampurnas niíni,</i> The comfort room looked spotless after she scrubbed it. <number>1a</number> clean s.t. by splashing water over it. <i>Nakalampurnas na ku sa banyu,</i> I have already splashed water to clean the bathroom. <number>2</number> destroy. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> beat heavily. <i>Ang way kalúuyng igsúun naglampurnas níya sa gamay lang sayup,</i> His heartless brother beat him mercilessly for the slightest mistake. <number>2b</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> badly beaten in games. <i>Ilampurnas lang nang inyung tím nga bayat sa iláha,</i> Their team will just trounce your inept team. <number>2c</number> be struck by a severe storm. <i>Nangalúad ang káhuy nga gilampurnas sa bagyu,</i> The trees that were battered by the storm were uprooted. <number>2d</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> wipe off or out swiftly. <i>Gilampurnas lang ang mga pagkáun nga gid&umacracu;t sa pista,</i> The food that was served at the fiesta was rapidly wiped out. <number>2e</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> throw s.t. to the ground with force. <i>Íyang ilampurnas ang mga kaldírug way sud-an,</i> He&apos;ll smash the pots on the floor if there&apos;s no food. <number>2f</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> pet torridly with a girl (slang). <i>Gilampurnas níya ang íyang trátu sa sinihan,</i> He petted frantically with his girl friend in the movie house. <pos>n</pos> scrubbing. <i>Way lampurnas ang ílang salug,</i> Their floor has not been scrubbed.

<p id=10734><form>*lampus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A24]</itype> be <tr>successful</tr>. <i>Milampus ang íyang plánu,</i> His plans succeeded. <form>{ka-an|kalampúsan}</form> <pos>n</pos> success. <form>{ma-un|malampúsan}</form> <pos>a</pos> successful. <i>Malampúsun nga míting,</i> A successful meeting. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be, become successful. <i>Hináut untang magmalampúsun ka sa ímung tingúhà,</i> I hope you will be successful in your undertaking.

<p id=10735><form>lampuug, lampúug</form> <xr>= <sc>dampuug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10736><form>lampuyang</form> <xr>= <sc>luy-aluy-a</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>luy-a</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10737><form>lampuyut, lampúyut</form> <pos>a</pos> for flesh to be <tr>flabby</tr> and <tr>loose</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be loose and flabby. <i>Mulampúyut ang átung pus-un ug wà tay iksirsayis,</i> The lower part of your abdomen becomes loose and flabby if you do not exercise.

<p id=10738><form>lamù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> temporarily preserve tiny fish by salting lightly. <i>Lamua ang subrang tugnus,</i> Preserve the leftover fry by salting them lightly. <form>{-in-|linamù}</form> <pos>n</pos> small fish, temporarily preserved with light salt. <form>lamùlamù, lamùlámù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. fast in a slipshod and careless way. <i>Gilamùlamuan (gilamùlamù) lang nímug laba ang mga bisti u, daghan pang buling,</i> You washed these clothes so fast and carelessly. See, they are still all dirty. <i>Ayaw lamùlamúag bungat arun makasabut ku,</i> Don&apos;t speak so hurriedly and indistinctly, so I can understand. <number>2</number> done rapidly and without reserve. <i>Gilamùlamù lang níya ang usa ka panaksang pansit,</i> He just gobbled down a whole bowlful of noodles. <i>Gilamùlámù níya ang íyang uyab sa súd sa sinihan,</i> He engaged in a heavy petting session with his girl friend in the movie house.

<p id=10739><form>lamudlaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. vine of waste spaces bearing edible fruits, the size and shape of a hen&apos;s egg with stripes, acrid and pulpy, but with little juice and lots of tiny seeds.

<p id=10740><form>lamugdung</form> <pos>a</pos> overcast, gloomy. <i>Lamugdung ang lángit, muuwan tingáli,</i> The sky is overcast. It will probably rain. <i>Lamugdung siyag nawung mu rag kahilakun,</i> She has a gloomy expression as if she were about to burst into tears. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b3c1]</itype> become overcast, gloomy.

<p id=10741><form>lamúgay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> mix, jumble thoroughly. <i>Kamiy milamúgay (naglamúgay) sa balas ug simintu,</i> We mixed the sand and cement thoroughly. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26C3; c1]</itype> for a crowd to mill about in confusion. <i>Milamúgay ang mga táwu pagkakità sa kaláyu,</i> The people ran about in confused panic when they saw the fire. <pos>a</pos> topsy-turvy, in disorder. <i>Lamúgay ang sála,</i> The living room was topsy-turvy.

<p id=10742><form>lamuglamug</form> <pos>n</pos> slimy substance. <number>1</number> slime which forms where water has been allowed to stand. <number>2</number> slime exuded by certain animals, such as snails. <number>3</number> thin film that forms on the eyeballs of seriously ill persons. <number>4</number> thin, filmy membranes adhering to meat or tendons. <number>5</number> gelatinous substance found under the bark of young trees. <number>6</number> oily substance found on the surface of coconut meat ripened beyond maturity ( <xr>= <sc>dalínug</sc></xr>). <form>{&mdash;|lamuglamug} sa tubà</form> sediment in the coconut palm toddy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1246; a4b4]</itype> form slimy substances of these various kinds.

<p id=10743><form>lamugmugan</form> <xr>= <sc>limugmugan</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>limugmug</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=572>

<p id=10744><form>lamuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mosquito</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> <number>1</number> be infested with mosquitoes. <i>Ang lugar nga may lámak lamukun,</i> A place where there is standing water gets infested with mosquitoes. <number>2</number> wait s.w. too long. <i>Gilamuk na lang kug hinuwat, wà giyud mupatim-aw,</i> I waited for a long time, but he did not show up. <form>{(&larr;)|lámuk}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> be present in large numbers with confusion and bustle. <i>Naglámuk ang mga táwu sa baratilyu,</i> People crowded the bargain sale. <i>Míting man untà ni, nalámuk na man hinúun,</i> This is supposed to be a meeting, but it has become a melee instead. <number>2</number> <itype>[BC3]</itype> be, become a free-for-all, melee. <i>Nagkalámuk ang mga istudiyanti ug mga pulis,</i> There was a free-for-all between the students and the police. <pos>a</pos> busy and chaotic with large numbers of people. <pos>n</pos> a free-for-all, melee. <form>lamuklámuk</form> <xr>= <sc>lámuk</sc>, <i>n, v2.</i></xr> <form>{-ay(&larr;)|lamúkay}</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>lamúkay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10745><form>lamúkat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a]</itype> be, become disorderly, messed up. <i>Naglamúkat ang íyang nawung sa mik-ap,</i> Her make-up was in chaotic disarray. <i>Nalamúkat ang mga dáhun sa sular,</i> The leaves were strewn all over the yard. <i>Ayawg lamukáta nang ímung ásuy arun hisabtan ka,</i> Do not tell your story incoherently so that you&apos;ll be understood. <pos>a</pos> all in disorder. <i>Lamúkat nga administrasiyun,</i> A chaotic administration. <form>{ka-|kalamúkat}</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> be in chaotic disorder. <i>Nagkalamúkat ang labábu sa mga plátu ug kaldíru,</i> The sink is a mess with all the kettles and plates piled up in it. <i>Magkalamúkat ang panimalay kun way pagsinabtanay,</i> Home life is chaotic when there is no understanding.

<p id=10746><form>lamúkay</form> (from <ix>lamuk</ix>) <pos>a</pos> in chaotic disorder, topsy-turvy. <i>Lamúkay ang kwartu,</i> The room is in chaos. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> mix, stir things up thoroughly. <i>Naglamúkay si Ipì sa simintu,</i> Ipe was mixing the cement. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> for there to be chaos, things in great numbers in disorder. <i>Naglamúkay (nagkalamúkay) ang mga táwu sa tyanggihan pagsúnug,</i> The people in the market were rushing about in all directions when the fire broke out. <form>{ka-|kalamúkay}</form> <xr>= <sc>lamúkay</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr>

<p id=10747><form>lamun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. badly infected boil which goes deep and fails to develop a head. It often leads to blood poisoning. <number>2</number> word used in a curse hoping the one cursed gets a <ix>lamun</ix>. <i>Wà ka dad-a sa lamun!</i> Damn you! (Lit. Haven&apos;t you been killed by blood poisoning?) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> be infected with <ix>lamun</ix>. <i>Ang bátang gilamunan namatay,</i> The child who was infected with a <ix>lamun</ix> died.

<p id=10748><form>lámun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put large chunks of food in the mouth whole. <i>Makalámun kug usa ka parak bingka,</i> I can put a whole piece of rice cake in my mouth. <i>Kúlang ka rang lamúnun (ilámun) sa higanti,</i> You&apos;re not even enough to stuff in the giant&apos;s mouth.

<p id=10749><form>lamuruk</form> <pos>a</pos> plump in the cheeks. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> for the cheeks to become full and rounded. <i>Nagkalamuruk ang íyang áping sukad maáyu,</i> Her cheeks are beginning to get rounded now that she has recovered. <form>{-un|lamurukun}</form> <pos>a</pos> of a plump sort.

<p id=10750><form>lamuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> take in s.t. by swallowing. <i>Maglamuy kug tablítas pára katúlug,</i> I&apos;ll take some sleeping pills. <i>Gilamuy si Hunas sa balyína,</i> Jonah was swallowed by a whale. <number>1a</number> eat greedily or gluttonously (coarse). <i>À, milakaw man lang dáyun human makalamuy,</i> After he gorged himself, he immediately left the party. <number>1b</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lamuy} sa bakunáwa ang búwan</formx> <itype>[a12]</itype> for there to be a lunar eclipse (for the moon to have been swallowed by the <ix>bakunáwa</ix>). <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> swallow words or feelings. <i>Milamuy ka lang dáyun sa íyang gisulti,</i> You swallowed his story, hook, line, and sinker. <i>Gilamuy ku ang ákung kasukù arun way masilù,</i> I just swallowed my anger so that nobody would have hard feelings. <number>3</number> swallowed up in a figurative sense. <i>Galastúhan nga milamuy sa ílang tinipígan,</i> The expenses which swallowed up their savings. <i>Gilamuy siya sa kangitngit,</i> He was swallowed by the darkness. <pos>n</pos> food consumption. <i>Ang ámung mutsatsu dakug lamuy,</i> Our servant eats too much. <form>walay {&mdash;|lamuy}</form> poor as a church mouse (deprecatory). <form>{-in-an|linamúyan}</form> <pos>n</pos> manner of eating.

<p id=10751><form>lamúyà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> get excessively fat. <i>Naglamúyà siya sa katambuk,</i> He is bulging with excessive fat. <i>Nagkalamuyà ang tiyan sa palaínum,</i> The drunkard is getting a beer belly.

<p id=10752><form>lamwas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for water to come in or spread over s.t. <i>Hápit malúnud ang sakayan nga nalamwásan sa túbig,</i> The boat nearly sank because water came in it. <i>Gilamwásan ang tugkaran sa túbig gíkan sa kanal,</i> The water from the drainage ditch flooded our yard. <number>1a</number> for water to run out over a container. <i>Milamwas ang túbig sa planggána,</i> Water ran out over the basin. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> extend beyond a certain limit. <i>Mulamwas ang ákung tiil sa katri kay mubù ra,</i> My feet spill over the end of the bed because it is too short. <i>Lamwása (ilamwas) sa túhud ang sidsid sa ákung sinínà,</i> Extend the hem line of my dress beyond the knees.

<p id=10753><form>lamyat</form> <pos>a</pos> sluggish, doing things slowly and lazily. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be sluggish in doing things. <i>Nagkalamyat ang mid nga nagkadugay sa báy,</i> The longer the maid stays in the house <pb n=573>the slower she works.

<p id=10754><form>-l-an</form> alternant for <ix>-anan</ix>, added to some, but not all, bases which occur with <ix>-anan</ix> and usually with the same meaning. <i>Palalítan,</i> Place one buys things. <i>Halatagan sa limus,</i> Person to whom alms are given.

<p id=10755><form>lána<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>oil</tr> obtained from plants. <number>2</number> a concoction of oil and herbs having special curative properties or power to ward off evil of supernatural origin. <form>{&mdash;|lána} nga pangulang</form> oil to counteract supernaturally caused skin ailments. <number>3</number> <formx>may, walay {&mdash;|lána}</formx> have (not have) sexual potency in old age. <i>Mamána ka ánang tigúlang bálu? Wà na nay lána,</i> Are you going to marry that old widower? I doubt if he can do it any more. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make oil. <i>Dílì ku mulána ánang lubi kay kápuy ug kagud,</i> I will not make oil because it is tiresome grating those coconuts. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> put oil in a lamp. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lána} ug pútut</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> do the impossible (lit. extract oil from a very young coconut). <i>Maáyu pay maglána ug pútut kay sa mulansar nga way kwarta,</i> It would be easier to squeeze oil out of a young coconut than to win an election without money. <form>{(&rarr;)|lana}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> apply oil on. <i>Lanahi ang halígi arun dílì anáyun,</i> Put oil on the post so the termites can&apos;t get at it. <number>2</number> <itype>[B3(1)46]</itype> be, become oily, exude oily secretion. <i>Naglana ang íyang pánit,</i> Her skin is exuding oil. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> coax s.o. by flattery. <i>Lanahi siya dì ba húmuk musugut sa ímung hangyù,</i> Give her some sweet talk. See if she doesn&apos;t give you what you ask for. <form>lanáhan, lanhan</form> <pos>n</pos> folk doctor who practices healing with the use of special oils. <form>lanahan</form> <pos>n</pos> container for oil. <form>lanahun, lanáhun</form> <pos>a</pos> full of oil. &dagger;

<p id=10756><form>lána<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>dilána</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10757><form>lánag</form> <pos>n</pos> mild, not fatal poisoning. <i>Ang lánag ságad dílì makamatay, makapabúyud lang,</i> Mild poisoning usually doesn&apos;t kill. It just makes one dizzy. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126; b4(1)]</itype> have, be affected by poisoning. <i>Nalánag ku sa amúting káhuy nga wà maáyung pagkalung-ag,</i> I got food poisoning from the cassava that wasn&apos;t prepared properly. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be sickened, nauseated. <i>Nalánag ku sa báhù sa karni didtus ihawan,</i> I was sickened by the smell of meat at the <corr sic=abbatoir>abattoir</corr>. <number>3</number> be bored to tears. <i>Nalánag ku ánang ímung isturya nga gibalikbálik,</i> I am bored to tears by your story that you keep telling again and again. <form>{(&rarr;)|lanag}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. to smoke (derogatory). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> smoke. <i>Naglanag ka na sab nga gidid-an ka man sa duktur?</i> You&apos;re smoking again when the doctor told you not to.

<p id=10758><form>lanang</form> <pos>n</pos> watery, slushy ground. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> become watery and slushy. <i>Milanang (nalanang) ang sílung sa ulan,</i> The yard became watery and muddy in the rain. <form>{(&larr;)|lánang}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for liquid to spread out on an area. <i>Milánang ang ímung íhì sa salug,</i> Your urine flowed over the floor. <form>{-an|lanángan}</form> <pos>n</pos> slushy, muddy place. <form>lananglanang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> be <tr>greasy</tr>, <tr>oily</tr>. <i>Mulananglanang ang ímung nawung ug dí ka mamulbus,</i> Your face will get oily if you don&apos;t powder it. <i>Maglananglanang ang sud-an nga labihan kamantikáun,</i> A dish that has too much fat is greasy.

<p id=10759><form>lánap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>overflow</tr> or <tr>flood</tr> an area. <i>Ang karsáda nga gilanápan sa dágat napunù sa mga gapnud,</i> The road that the sea had flooded is full of driftwood. <i>Sa pagkusug sa ulan, gilanápan ang ámung sílung sa túbig,</i> Because of the heavy rain, our basement was flooded with water.

<p id=10760><form>lanat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>pursue</tr>, <tr>chase</tr>. <i>Dílì ku mulanat níla ngadtu sa ngitngit,</i> I will not run after them into the dark. <i>Lanata ang kawatan!</i> Chase the thief. <form>mabà ug {&mdash;|lanat}</form> tend to be short-winded, easily tiring out. <i>Dì siya kaagwanta ug bugtaway kay mabà siyag lanat,</i> He doesn&apos;t last in a race because he is short-winded. <form>{(&larr;)|lánat}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pursuit</tr>, <tr>chase</tr>, <tr>race</tr>. <i>Ang lánat sa kinabúhì,</i> The rat race of life.

<p id=10761><form>lanátad</form> <pos>n</pos> sea which is flat and even, as for example, at high tide before it begins to go out again, or water over tidal flats. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> for a large area to become covered with a smooth surface of water. <i>Ug magbahà, mulanátad ang túbig sa kaumahan,</i> When it floods, the water floods over the fields.

<p id=10762><form>lánaw</form> <xr>= <sc>danaw</sc></xr>, <xr><sc>dánaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10763><form>lánay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB2S; a]</itype> <tr>melt</tr>, <tr>become soft</tr> <i>Naglánay ku ug tinggà pára gam-ung pamatu,</i> I am melting lead to make into a sinker. <i>Naglanay ang mantikilya,</i> The butter is soft. <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lánay} ang atay</formx> <itype>[B246]</itype> get flattered. <i>Milánay ang íyang atay pag-ingun nákung gwápa siya,</i> She swelled with pride when I told her she was pretty. <form>{(&rarr;)|lanay}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>soft</tr>, partially melted. <i>Itì nga lanay,</i> Soft and watery droppings of fowl. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lanay} ug tíngug</formx> for the voice to be flat in tone, not full, as if cracked. <i>Way kaláking pamináwun ang lanay nga tíngug,</i> A flat voice is not pleasant to listen to. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> for the voice to become flat. <form>{&mdash;|lanay} ug sinultihan</form> <pos>a</pos> way of speaking characterized by a slow and slurring intonation, not brisk. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> for the manner of speaking to be slow and slurring in intonation.

<p id=10764><form>landa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put copra in a tray to dry. <i>Ákù lang landahun ang kupras kay wà may ínit,</i> I&apos;ll just dry the copra in a tray (and <pb n=574>put it in a kiln) because there&apos;s no sun. <form>landahan, landáhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> tray for drying copra. <number>2</number> kiln where copra is dried.

<p id=10765><form>landag<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> cook eggs by boiling. <i>Ayaw ug landága ang mga itlug kay papusaun,</i> Don&apos;t boil the eggs because we are going to let them hatch. <number>2</number> broil bananas or tubers that have been peeled, usually leftover. <i>Landágun nátù ang báhaw nga kamúti ugmà puhun,</i> We&apos;ll broil the leftover sweet potatoes tomorrow. <form>{-in-|linandag}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hard-boiled eggs</tr>.

<p id=10766><form>landag<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>lamdag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10767><form>landang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a powdered buri palm starch. <number>2</number> sweet preparation made of buri palm starch, sugar, juice of coconut meat to which fruit may optionally be added. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make the dish called <ix>landang</ix>.

<p id=10768><form>landasan</form> <pos>n</pos> anvil.

<p id=10769><form>landay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for female humans or mammals to <tr>be sterile</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> be, become <tr>sterile</tr>. <i>Ságad sa masakitung babáyi malanday,</i> Most sickly women tend to be sterile.

<p id=10770><form>landay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a sack that holds more than twenty-five gantas and is of a strong material, designed esp. for holding heavy contents. <i>Usa ka landayng kupras,</i> A large sackful of copra.

<p id=10771><form>landig</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> for boats or airplanes to land. <i>Ang idru mulandig sa Masbáti,</i> The plane will land on Masbate. <number>2</number> <itype>[B256]</itype> come to rest after falling. <i>Didtu mulandig (malandig) ang awtu sa sapà pagkatambug sa pangpang,</i> The car fell off the cliff and landed in the stream. &dagger;

<p id=10772><form>landing</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>airfield</tr>, <tr>airport</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> for airplanes to land. <i>Gilanding ang idru sa dáru,</i> The plane landed on the plowed field. <number>2</number> for invasion forces to land. <i>Ang pwirsa sa mga Amirkánu milanding sa Layti,</i> The American forces landed on Leyte. <form>{&mdash;|landing} bards</form> <tr>landing barge</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> go by landing barge. <form>{&mdash;|landing} pild</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>airfield</tr>.

<p id=10773><form>*landrákas</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>kalandrákas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10774><form>landung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>image</tr>, <tr>replica</tr>. <i>Daw landung sa kamatáyun ang íyang panagway,</i> Her face is a picture of death. <i>Landung giyud siya sa íyang inahan,</i> She is the image of her mother. <number>2</number> <tr>shade</tr>, <tr>shadow</tr>. <i>Ang purma sa káhuy mailhan sa íyang landung,</i> You can tell what a tree looks like just from the shadow. <pos>a</pos> shady. <i>Landung kaáyu sa kalubihan,</i> It is nice and shady in the coconut grove. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B46]</itype> for an image to form itself, come into the mind. <i>Walà mulandung sa ákung kaisípan nga mau kiniy mahitabù,</i> It never occurred to me that this is what would happen. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1B; b2]</itype> be, become shady, overcast; cause to become so. <i>Ang akasya nga naglandung sa nátad,</i> The acacia tree that shaded the yard. <i>Naglandung ang kalibútan kay bagà ang pangánud,</i> The world is overcast because there is a thick cloud covering. <i>Hinglandungan ang misítas sa lubi,</i> The ornamental plant is in the shade of the coconut tree. <form>{pa-|palandung}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>think</tr>, <tr>ponder</tr>. <i>Nagpalandung ku sa unsay mahitabù nákù,</i> I am pondering over what will happen to me. <i>Ang átung pagpamalandung gikutlù gíkan sa salmus,</i> Our meditation is taken from the Psalms. <number>1a</number> <formx>walà, dílì {&mdash;|palandung}</formx> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> not expect s.t. to happen. <i>Wà palandúnga sa tanan nga madátù ka,</i> Nobody thought you&apos;d get rich. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> put or go to the shade. <i>Palandúngi (palandungi) ang kábaw kay ínit na ang adlaw,</i> Put the carabao in the shade because the sun is hot now.

<p id=10775><form>landuylanduy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; be]</itype> gallivant about, bum around (instead of doing s.t. one should be doing) <i>Maglanduylanduy lang ku kay wà kuy trabáhu,</i> I&apos;m just bumming around because I have no work. <i>Ayawg landuylandúyi (ilanduylanduy) ang ímung pagtuun,</i> Don&apos;t spend the time you&apos;re supposed to be studying in roaming about.

<p id=10776><form>lang</form> <xr>= <sc>lámang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10777><form>lángab</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> do all of a set portion of work. <i>Langába ug sanggì ang tibuuk maisan,</i> Harvest the entire cornfield. <i>Langábun ku pagpintal ang usa ka bungbung úsà ku musúgud ug láin,</i> I&apos;ll paint one whole wall before I start the next. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> inadvertently work on an area assigned to s.o. else. <i>Nalángab ug dáru sa sinuhúlan ang nasikbit nga uma,</i> The hired hand inadvertently plowed the adjacent farm as well.

<p id=10778><form>lángan</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P; a2b3]</itype> <tr>delay</tr>, <tr>waste time</tr>. <i>Naglángan ka sa ámung byáhi,</i> You are delaying our trip. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> spend or waste time, effort doing s.t. <i>Naglángan ka lang ug limpiyu ánang kahun,</i> You are just wasting your time cleaning that box. <pos>n</pos> delay. <i>Sa walay lángan miadtu dáyun siya sa prisidinti,</i> Without delay he went at once to the President. <pos>a</pos> wasteful of time. <i>Lángan (langan) kaáyu ning paagíha,</i> This procedure is very wasteful of time. <form>{(&rarr;)|langan}</form> <xr>= <sc>lángan</sc>.</xr> <form>{-an(&rarr;)|langanan}</form> <pos>a</pos> taking a long time. <i>Langanan kaáyu siyang sugúun,</i> He takes his sweet time about it when you tell him to go s.w. <form>{ka-|kalángan}</form> <pos>n</pos> delay, waste of time. <i>Ang kalángan nákù dílì kabayran ug sápì,</i> Money cannot make up for the delay I suffered. <form>{ma-un|malanganun}</form> <pos>a</pos> wasteful of time.

<p id=10779><form>langas</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>noisy</tr>. <i>Langas kaáyu ka nga magtuun,</i> You are very noisy when you study. <number>2</number> moving about a lot, engaging in horseplay. <pb n=575><i>Langas kaáyung ikadúlug,</i> He&apos;ll bother you a lot if you sleep with him because he tosses and turns. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make noise. <i>Dílì mu maglangas kay matúlug ku,</i> You should not make noise because I&apos;m going to bed. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> breathe a word. <i>Dílì ka maglangas kang bísan kinsa sa ímung nakit-an,</i> Don&apos;t you tell anyone what you saw. <number>1b</number> shut up! <i>Langas! Naglamlam ka lang!</i> Shut up. You are talking nonsense! <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> moving about, not keeping still. <i>Langas! Ayaw paghikaphíkap,</i> Hold still. Keep your paws to yourself. <number>3</number> <itype>[A]</itype> make a fuss about s.t. <i>Mulangas man ku ug dílì bahínan,</i> I will make a fuss if you do not give me a share. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>noise</tr>. <number>2</number> fuss, ado. <i>Mitrabáhu dáyun sa walay daghan nga langas,</i> He went to work without much ado. <form>{-an|langasan}</form> <pos>a</pos> noisy, engaging in horseplay. <i>Kadtung langasan kaáyu dílì dad-un sa sini,</i> Those of you who don&apos;t keep still will not get to go to the show.

<p id=10780><form>langátad</form> <xr>= <sc>lanátad</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10781><form>lángaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>housefly</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <form>{(&rarr;)|langaw}</form> <itype>[a4]</itype> <number>1</number> be infested, swarm with flies. <i>Langawun ang pagkáun,</i> The food will be swarming with flies. <number>2</number> get tired waiting. <i>Dúgay kaáyu siya nga mag-ílis, langawun ka ug pinaábut,</i> It takes her a long time to dress up. You will get tired waiting. <number>3</number> do not sell, sell little. <i>Gilangaw ang íyang tinda, way hálin,</i> Her store did poorly&mdash;she had no sale. <form>{pa-|palangaw}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> attract flies. <i>Ang pálut sa mangga makapalangaw,</i> Mango peelings attract flies. <form>ambut sa {&mdash;|lángaw}</form> search me, I don&apos;t know (and I don&apos;t care much). <form>langawlangaw</form> <xr>= <sc>abungaw<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=10782><form>lángay</form> <pos>a</pos> wasteful of time<corr>.</corr> <i>Lángay ka kaáyu sa pagkalígù,</i> You take your sweet time about taking a bath, don&apos;t you? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> waste time. <i>Naglángay ka lang kay dílì nà musalir,</i> You are wasting time because that won&apos;t do. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> cause delay. <i>Naglángay ka sa ámung trabáhu.</i> You&apos;re holding up our work. <i>Dílì mistil langáyun ang kasal bisan ug wà pa dinhi ang amahan,</i> You do not have to hold up the wedding just because the father is not here yet. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|langayan}</form> <pos>a</pos> always dilly-dallying.

<p id=10783><form>langayà</form> <xr>= <sc>langayan</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>lángay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10784><form>langbay</form> <pos>n</pos> edible swimming <tr>crabs</tr>, found in shallow and deep waters, rather similar in shape and flavor to the blue crabs sold in the States. They differ from other crabs in that the shell has two sharp points on the sides, both claws are the same size and only slightly larger than the other limbs. Deep-sea specimens may grow as big as a foot across. <form>{pa&N;-|panglangbay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> catch this sort of crab. <form>{-an|langbáyan}, {pa&N;-an|panglangbáyan}</form> <pos>n</pos> place where these crabs are found.

<p id=10785><form>langbì</form> <xr>= <sc>lambì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10786><form>langbù</form> <xr>= <sc>lambù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10787><form>langbud</form> <xr>= <sc>lambud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10788><form>langday</form> <xr>= <sc>landay</sc>, <ix>1</ix>, <ix>2</ix>.</xr>

<p id=10789><form>langgà</form> <ix>short for</ix> <xr><sc>palangga</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10790><form>langgam</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bird</tr>. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|panglanggam}</form> <pos>n</pos> a small instrument used to cut rice panicles during the harvest. <form>{-un|langgámun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bird-like</tr>. <i>Ang íyang sunuy mu rag dílì igtalarì kay langgámun kaáyu ug hitsúra,</i> His rooster doesn&apos;t look like a fighting cock because it has a bird-like appearance.

<p id=10791><form>langgaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lukewarm</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2; c1]</itype> be, become lukewarm, cause s.t. to become so. <i>Malanggaw (mulanggaw) ang tubà ug hiinitan,</i> The palm toddy will become lukewarm if you leave it under the sun. <i>Naglanggaw siyag túbig pára ikalígù nákù,</i> She&apos;s heating water for my bath.

<p id=10792><form>langgaw<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vinegar</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make, make into vinegar.

<p id=10793><form>langgì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a]</itype> snap s.t. off from the main part at the joint. <i>Ákung langgíun ang sanga sa ímung tanum,</i> I&apos;ll break a branch off your plant.

<p id=10794><form>langgíkit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> tie or attach things together or side by side. <i>Mulanggíkit ka ug pila ka bulus kawáyan pára gam-ung gákit,</i> Tie several lengths of bamboo together to make a raft. <i>Langgikítun nákù ning duha ka buuk káhuy arun makas-a ug dala,</i> I will tie these two pieces of wood together so I can carry them all at once. <number>2</number> <itype>[C23]</itype> be near one another. <i>Sígi sila nga maglanggíkit bisag ása lakaw,</i> They are always near each other wherever they go. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> involve s.o. in s.t. <i>Ang ímung binúang naglanggíkit nákù sa kaúlaw,</i> Your foolishness involved me in your shame. <i>Ayaw kug ilanggíkit sa inyung tinuntu,</i> Do not involve me in your shenanigans. <pos>n</pos> link, means of connecting. <i>Kining suláta mauy langgíkit sa kagahápun,</i> This letter is a link to the past.

<p id=10795><form>langgilanggi</form> <pos>n</pos> shrub or small tree with a straight, light-brown trunk used for fencing. The leaves are alternate, elliptic, with entire margins, green on top, whitish on the bottom and smooth. It bears sweet, pea-sized, white berries in axillary clusters.

<p id=10796><form>langgis</form> <pos>a</pos> high-pitched, screeching noise. <i>Langgis ang ági sa tísà sa pisára,</i> It&apos;s very spine-tingling the way the piece of chalk scratches the blackboard. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make a spine-tingling, screeching noise. <i>Ayúha nang ímung pagkiskis kay naglanggis,</i> Try not to make it so spine-tingling when you scrape. <form>{ka-|kalanggis}</form> <pos>n</pos> the way s.t. is shrill and screeching.

<p id=10797><form>langgisaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish.

<p id=10798><form>langgíta</form> <pos>n</pos> loop at the waist of trousers <pb n=576>through which the belt is passed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make or attach belt loops.

<p id=10799><form>langgíti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>anvil</tr>.

<p id=10800><form>langgung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56; c1]</itype> in pool, for the cue ball to go into the hole and not be counted.

<p id=10801><form>langgus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>chafe</tr>, injure a wide area slightly. <i>Ayawg hukti ug alambri kay mulanggus sa pintal,</i> Don&apos;t tie it with a wire because it will scratch the paint. <i>Nalanggus ákung buktun pagkatumba nákù,</i> I chafed my arm when I fell.

<p id=10802><form>langgut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> for a fish to break a line. <i>Nalanggut ang pasul kay gidawíhag dakung isdà,</i> The fishing line broke because a huge fish got hooked on it. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> <tr>embezzle</tr>, <tr>cheat</tr>. <i>Nalanggutan (hilanggutan) ku níyag singku písus,</i> He cheated me out of five pesos. <i>Íyang langgútun nang inyung kwarta ug siyay inyung pagunítun ánà,</i> She will pocket your money if you entrust it to her. <form>{-íra|langgutíra}</form> <xr>= <sc>langgutíru</sc></xr> (female). <form>{-íru|langgutíru}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>embezzler</tr>, <tr>swindler</tr>.

<p id=10803><form>langgwíta</form> <xr>= <sc>langgíta</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10804><form>langì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <number>1a</number> loosen s.t. rigid and long from a place it is embedded. <i>Way makalangì sa pusting maáyung pagkataruk,</i> No one can loosen the post, it is so firmly implanted. <number>1b</number> bend s.t. rigid out of shape. <i>Nakabuhì ang isdà kay nalangì ang tagà,</i> The fish escaped because the hook was bent out of shape. <number>1c</number> break the finger or toenail. <i>Malangì ang ákung kuku ug dì hinguk-an,</i> My nails break if I don&apos;t trim them. <number>2</number> twist off a branch from plants. <i>Nakalangì ku ug usa ka sanga sa íyang san pransisku,</i> I broke a branch off from her croton. <pos>a</pos> hangnail, loose in its place. <i>Hustu nang tangung langíun. Langì na kaáyu,</i> That tooth is about ready to pull out. It has gotten very loose.

<p id=10805><form>langì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1</number> ask for affection by making demands. <number>2</number> act spoiled and abusive from having been pampered. <i>Naglangì nà siya kay labánan man.</i> He has gotten uncontrollable because s.o. always takes his side. <pos>a</pos> asking for affection, being spoiled. <i>Kanang íyang pagpangáyug pagkáun ági lang nag langì,</i> When she asks for food like that she&apos;s just asking for attention.

<p id=10806><form>langigngig</form> <pos>a</pos> for foods to be too greasy or oily to digest readily. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be too greasy and heavy in the stomach. <i>Dì mulangigngig (malangigngig) ang tiil sa bábuy basta lat-an ug butangag bátung linata,</i> Pig&apos;s legs won&apos;t be too fatty to eat if you add salted black beans. <i>Magkalangigngig ang bíku sa tantung káun,</i> The more sticky rice you eat, the heavier it is in the stomach.

<p id=10807><form>langis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> hoodwink s.o. into doing s.t. by giving him sweet talk. <i>Maáyu siyang mulangis sa íyang apuhan arun tagáan ug kwarta,</i> He is good in talking his grandfather into giving him money. <i>Gilangisan ku níyang mupalit ug libru piru íya diayng gipanugal,</i> He hoodwinked me into giving him money which he said was for a book, but actually it turned out to be for gambling. <pos>n</pos> sweet talk, flattery employed to gain one&apos;s ends. <form>{-íru|langisíru}</form> <pos>n</pos> one who sweet talks people and pulls the wool over their eyes.

<p id=10808><form>lángit</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>heaven</tr>, <tr>sky</tr>. <i>Ang lángit gibuti sa mga bitúun,</i> The sky is pock-marked with stars. <number>2</number> <tr>joy</tr>, <tr>happiness</tr>. <i>Lángit ka sa ákung panan-aw,</i> You are a joy to my sight. <form>ikapitung {&mdash;|lángit}</form> the last tier of heaven where perfect happiness is to be found. <i>Dad-un ku ikaw sa ikapitung lángit,</i> I&apos;ll bring you to the seventh heaven of happiness. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> go to heaven. <i>Ikaw kay makasasálà, dílì ka malangit,</i> You, who are a sinner, will not go to heaven. <form>kità ug {&mdash;|lángit}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> experience the most painful sensation of one&apos;s life, esp. pain in childbirth. <i>Nakakità na siyag lángit sa íyang pagpanganak,</i> She experienced the most painful sensation of her life when she gave birth. <form>{ka-an|kalangítan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>skies</tr>. <form>{-nun|langitnun}</form> <pos>a</pos> pertaining to heaven. <i>Langitnung kaháyag,</i> A heavenly light. <form>langitlángit</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>egg white</tr>. <number>2</number> canopy of an altar or bed. <number>2a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|langitlángit} sa muskitíru</formx> top of a mosquito net. <form>langitlangit</form> <xr>= <sc>langitlángit</sc>, <ix>1</ix>.</xr>

<p id=10809><form>langitngit</form> <xr>= <sc>alangitngit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10810><form>langkap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab7]</itype> take over all or part of s.o.&apos;s obligations so that they be completely fulfilled. <i>Akuy milangkap sa íyang bayranan kay wà man siyay kwarta,</i> I paid up all her obligations because she had no money. <i>Langkápa ang ákung báhin sa gunahun, kay may laktun ku,</i> Finish my weeding work for me because I have to go s.w. <i>Gilangkápan sa uyuan ang kúwang sa twisyun,</i> The uncle paid the amount lacking in the tuition fees.

<p id=10811><form>langkat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>rip off</tr>, out, <tr>tear</tr> forcibly away. <i>Átung langkátun ang salug,</i> Let us rip the floor out. <i>Ámung gilangkátan sa mga balágun ang kural,</i> We ripped the vines off of the fence. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> strip s.o. of power, rights, or privileges. <i>Gilangkátan siya sa ranggu,</i> He was stripped of his rank. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> remove s.t. as if pulled away by force. <i>Ang ímung paglúib naglangkat sa ákung gugma kanímu,</i> Your unfaithfulness has killed my love for you. <i>Sukad karun langkátun ku ang hunàhúnà nga kita manag-amígu,</i> From now on I will banish the thought that we are friends. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> slam a basketball that is in the air above the head in a downward <pb n=577>direction. <i>Pag-untul giyud sa búla sa ring, gilangkat dáyun kini ni Wilyam,</i> As soon as the ball rebounded from the ring, William slammed it down.

<p id=10812><form>langkaw</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to loaf on the job, playing hooky. <i>Gamay kag ági kay langkaw ka sa trabáhu,</i> You haven&apos;t accomplished much because you&apos;ve been loafing on the job. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> loaf on the job, play hooky. <i>Dì ka makapasar ug sígi kang langkaw,</i> You won&apos;t pass if you keep playing hooky. <i>Langkáwi ang ímung pagdáru kay minúsan ku ang ímung swildu,</i> Loaf on the job while you&apos;re plowing and I will take it off your pay. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|langkawan}</form> <pos>a</pos> always loafing or playing hooky.

<p id=10813><form>langkay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> dried coconut palm frond. <number>2</number> old maid (humorous). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become an old maid.

<p id=10814><form>langkay<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>díwit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10815><form>langkì</form> <pos>a</pos> for teeth to be crooked. <i>Makadisgwápa sa babáyi ang mga ngípung langkì,</i> Crooked teeth mar a woman&apos;s beauty. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for a tooth to become crooked. <i>Maáyung pagahilútun ang ngípung magkalangkì,</i> It&apos;s good to massage into place a tooth that is growing in crooked.

<p id=10816><form>langking</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. black pigment shaped into rectangular sticks used for shoe blacking, drawing, and by the Chinese for writing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> blacken s.t. with this material.

<p id=10817><form>langkit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> join two pieces of material together by sewing, welding, and the like at the edges. <i>Langkítun ta ang duha ka hábul arun ta makatulda,</i> We&apos;ll sew the edges of the two blankets together so we can have a tent. <i>Ilangkit ang usa ka playwud ngari,</i> Join a piece of plywood to this place. <number>2</number> <itype>[c]</itype> add an affix in grammar. <form>{ig-l-|iglalangkit}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>affix</tr>.

<p id=10818><form>langkiya, langkiyà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>spadefish</tr>: <bio>Scatophagus argus</bio>.

<p id=10819><form>langkiya<sub>2</sub>, langkíyà</form> (from <ix>kíya</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B236(1)]</itype> for airplanes or kites to wobble, dart from side to side in losing altitude. <i>Mulangkíya ang talabánug kun mabugtù ang tugut,</i> The kite will wobble from side to side and continue losing altitude when the string snaps.

<p id=10820><form>langkub</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC12; ac1]</itype> <tr>combine</tr> several things, ideas, quantities into a group at the same time. <i>Akuy mulangkub ug dala áning duha ka bugkus,</i> I will take these two bundles at one time. <i>Kining duha ka súma nagkalangkub (gilangkub),</i> The two sums have been put together. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> include, comprehend. <i>Ang lungsud naglangkub ug lima ka baryu,</i> The municipality includes five barrios. <number>1b</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be included in a group, identified with. <i>Pagkadátù níya nalangkub siya sa alta susyidad,</i> After he got rich he was identified with high society. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> make s.t. a complete whole. <i>Langkúbi (langkúba) ang kúwang sa báyad,</i> Complete the amount lacking in the payment. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> fix one&apos;s decision, decide to do s.t. with no wavering. <i>Naglangkub ku sa ákung hunàhúnà sa paglikay sa sugal,</i> I am determined to avoid gambling. <form>{-in-|linangkub}</form> <pos>n</pos> things that are taken together, done collectively. <i>Linangkub nga sisiyun,</i> A joint session.

<p id=10821><form>langkuy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b5c]</itype> <tr>walk</tr> or <tr>travel</tr> around without any particular purpose. <i>Mulangkuy sila inigpangítag bulad sa tabuan,</i> They walk about in the market when they look for dried fish. <i>Ilangkuy ang masakitun sa wiltsir sa plása,</i> Take the wheelchair patient for a walk in the park. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become an idler. <i>Malangkuy (mulangkuy) siya kun dúnay kwarta,</i> He becomes lazy when he has money. <number>3</number> <itype>[AC; a12b2]</itype> have sexual intercourse with (slang). <i>Naglangkuy ang magtiáyun súd sa kwartu,</i> The couple are making love inside the room. <pos>a</pos> idler, lazy. <pos>n</pos> sexual intercourse (slang). <form>langkuylangkuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>langkuy</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> dawdle about instead of working. <i>Sukad sa ákung pagsulud ug trabáhu dinhi wà ku makalangkuylangkuy,</i> Since I started working here I haven&apos;t dawdled around on the job.

<p id=10822><form>langkuy<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> cutlass fish: <bio>Trichiurus spp</bio>. <pos>a</pos> tall and thin (like the cutlass fish).

<p id=10823><form>langpus</form> <xr>= <sc>lampus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10824><form>lan-grábir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>landgrabber</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be, become a landgrabber.

<p id=10825><form>langsa</form> <pos>a</pos> having a fishy smell or the taste of blood. <i>Bahung langsa ang mga pasahírag isdà,</i> Fish vendors have a fishy smell. <i>Ang mulmul langsa nga isdà,</i> The parrot fish has an intense fishy taste. <i>Langsag báhù ang babáying girigla,</i> Women smell of fish when they menstruate. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be smelly from fish or blood.

<p id=10826><form>langsad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> run for an elective position or office. <i>Mulangsad ku pagkagubirnadur,</i> I will run for governor. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> take the gamecock out of his cage. <i>Ilansad ang sunuy sa silinganan,</i> Tether the rooster in the yard. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> take a hen and young chicks out of the nest and set them on the ground. <i>Ug ilansad (lansárun) ug sayu ang pisù, patyun sa umígas,</i> If you take the chicks out of the nest too early, they are likely to get killed by the ants. <form>lansaránan</form> <pos>n</pos> ground on which gamecocks are tethered out.

<p id=10827><form>langsi</form> <xr>= <sc>langsa</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10828><form>langsub</form> <pos>a</pos> for an area to be shady and dark, <pb n=578>either because it is depressed below the surrounding land or because it is surrounded by tall trees. <i>Ságad sa lugar nga langsub bugnaw,</i> A depressed or shaded area tends to be cool. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> for an area to be shady because of its depressed situation or the trees surrounding it. <i>Ang mga dagkung káhuy mauy nakalangsub áning inyung sular,</i> The trees make your lot shady.

<p id=10829><form>langtaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN13; a2]</itype> see, look at s.t. in a distance. <i>Lantáwa ang búkid ug gigabúnan ba,</i> Look at the mountain and see if it is shrouded in mist. <i>Nalantawan ku sa ákung gitindúgan ang pag-abut níya,</i> I could see him coming from where I was standing. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> watch a movie or stage performance. <i>Mulantaw kag sini rung gabíi?</i> Will you see a movie tonight? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> look to the future, perceive with foresight. <i>Lantáwun mu ang kaugmáun ug panagána,</i> Look to the future and be prepared. <i>Nalantawan ku nga kanang trabahúa walay kauswágan,</i> I have perceived that that job offers no advancement. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> look after. <i>Akuy mulantaw sa bátà ug mulakaw ka,</i> I will look after the child if you go out. <i>Lantáwa ang ákung sinugba nga isdà arun dílì mapágud,</i> Keep watching my broiled fish to see that it doesn&apos;t get burnt. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|langtawan}, {-anan|langtawanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> an elevated place which affords a good view. <form>{pa&N;-|panglangtaw}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>foresight</tr>. <i>Kanang ímung paági kúlang sa panglantaw,</i> Your procedure lacks foresight.

<p id=10830><form>langtu</form> <pos>a</pos> having the smell of green beans, spinach, burned feathers, hair, nails, and some kinds of plastic. <i>Ayaw pagsúnug ug balhíbu kay langtu kaáyu ang báhù,</i> Don&apos;t burn feathers because the odor is very disagreeable. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> get this particular smell. <i>Ang balátung mauy nakalangtu (nakapalangtu) sa linat-an,</i> The string beans made the stew taste peculiar.

<p id=10831><form>langtung</form> <pos>n</pos> the point in the tide where the highest level is reached and when it is about to start going out again. <form>{&mdash;|langtung} sa hunas</form> point in the tide where the lowest level is reached before it begins to come in again. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3N; b6]</itype> for the tide to reach its highest point. <i>Ug mulantung ang dágat muabut giyud sa ílang tugkaran ang túbig,</i> At the highest point the tide reaches their front yard.

<p id=10832><form>langù</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> dizzy due to poisoning. <number>2</number> <tr>drunk</tr> (slang). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become dizzy due to poisoning. <i>Nalangù ang iring human makakaun sa hilu,</i> The cat became dizzy after eating the poison. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1P; a]</itype> make s.o. drunk. <i>Kadtung ikaduhang lungnik mauy naglangù (nagpalangù) nákù,</i> The second fifth sure made me drunk.

<p id=10833><form>lang-u</form> <pos>a</pos> having a dank, unpleasant smell. <i><sic>Lan-u</sic> ang básung giimnan sa bátang nagsuwag inun-únan,</i> The glass that the child drank from after he ate the vinegarized fish has a dank smell. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> develop a dank smell. <i>Mulang-u ang trápung way laba,</i> A rag will develop a dank smell if you don&apos;t wash it. <form>{ka-|kalang-u}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>foul smell</tr>. <i>Ang Láyipbuy makakúhà sa kalang-u sa láwas,</i> Lifebuoy can get rid of body odor.

<p id=10834><form>lángub</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cave</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; a12]</itype> become, make into a cave.

<p id=10835><form>lang-ug</form> <pos>a</pos> having the putrid smell of severe halitosis. <i>Lang-ug ang bàbà ug bag-ung mata ug dì makapanutbras,</i> A person that has just woke up has awful halitosis until he brushes his teeth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> get a foul smell. <i>Mulan-ug ang túbig sa bangà ug dílì kailísan,</i> The water in the jar will turn foul if you don&apos;t change it.

<p id=10836><form>lángut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> stick to work until it is done. <i>Tiwas dáyun nà ug langútan nákù ug tulu ka úras,</i> It&apos;ll get done quickly if I stick to it for three hours.

<p id=10837><form>languy</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>swim</tr>. <i>Gikalambrihan siya samtang naglanguy,</i> He had an attack of cramps while he was swimming. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> float as if swimming. <i>Ayawg isirbi ang sud-ang naglanguy sa mantíkà,</i> Don&apos;t serve food that&apos;s swimming in fat. <number>3</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> for soup to be too dilute. <i>Grábi sab ka makasabaw kalanguyan man,</i> How terrible the soup is! You could practically swim in it. <form>{(&larr;)|lánguy}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> swim for pleasure. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> action of swimming. <i>Ang ámung lánguy niadtung Duminggu,</i> Our swim last Sunday. <number>2</number> swimming contest. <form>linangyan</form> <pos>n</pos> style of swimming.

<p id=10838><form>langyaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>travel abroad</tr>. <i>Mulangyaw ku inigkahíkay sa paspurt,</i> I&apos;m going abroad as soon as my passport is ready. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> emigrate. <i>Mulangyaw sila sa Mindanaw,</i> They will emigrate to Mindanao. <pos>n</pos> foreigner. <form>buhatang, kalihúkang {&mdash;|langyaw}</form> Department of Foreign Affairs. <number>2</number> extra-marital relations (humorous). <i>Human sa trabáhu dílì pa nà siya mupaúlì kay dúna pay kalihúkang langyaw nga atimanun,</i> After work he doesn&apos;t go directly home because he still has some foreign relations to attend. <form>{&mdash;|langyaw} nga kalabútan</form> foreign affairs.

<p id=10839><form>lanipgà</form> <pos>n</pos> forest tree with wood that smells like cedar, used for making cigar boxes, finger boards for guitars, et al.: <bio>Toona calantas</bio>.

<p id=10840><form>lanit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>grab</tr> s.t., usually with speed. <i>Milanit siya sa íyang amirkána ug miadtu sa huspital,</i> He grabbed his coat and went <pb n=579>to the hospital. <i>Gilanit ang íyang pitáka sa kawatan,</i> The thief snatched her purse. <i>Gilanitan ku níya sa íyang pistúla,</i> He drew his gun on me.

<p id=10841><form>laniw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small <tr>flying fish</tr>, smaller than the <ix>barúnguy</ix> and <ix>bangsi</ix>.

<p id=10842><form>lankay</form> <xr>= <sc>langkay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10843><form>lanlan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> eat food usually taken with rice or corn (<ix>sud-an</ix>) all alone. <i>Mulanlan siya sa isdà úsà mukáun sa kan-un,</i> He eats the fish and then eats his rice afterwards. <i>Mau ra niy bulad, ayaw ug lanlána,</i> This is all the dried fish we have. Don&apos;t eat it without rice. <number>2</number> by extension, eat s.t. alone that usually accompanies s.t. else. <i>Mulanlan lang siyag dyam nga way pán,</i> He eats jam all alone without bread.

<p id=10844><form>lanlídi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>landlady</tr> of a rooming or boarding house. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be a landlady.

<p id=10845><form>lansa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>launch</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> go or travel by launch. <i>Maglansa mi pag-adtu sa Buhul,</i> We will travel by launch to Bohol.

<p id=10846><form>lansad</form> <xr>= <sc>langsad</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10847><form>lansadíra</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>shuttle</tr> in weaving. <number>2</number> case for the bobbin in a sewing machine. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6(1)]</itype> make into, attach, use a shuttle.

<p id=10848><form>lansalíra</form> <xr>= <sc>lansadíra</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10849><form>lansang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>nail</tr>. <i>Lansang sa kabáyù,</i> Nail for a horseshoe. <number>2</number> dried anchovies (slang). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> drive a nail, nail. <i>Dì na ni maukang kay gilansángan,</i> You can&apos;t get this off because it is nailed down. <i>Ilansang sa bungbung ang kahun arun dílì mahúlug,</i> Nail the box to the wall so it won&apos;t fall. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> sit or stand rooted to a place, as if nailed. <i>Gilansang ku sa ákung gilingkúran sa kalísang,</i> I sat nailed to my seat in fright. <number>2a</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> for the gaze to be fixed, as if nailed. <i>Ang íyang mga mata nalansang didtu sa dalága,</i> His eyes were glued to the maiden. <number>2b</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> be fixed at a certain quantity, as if nailed. <i>Gilansang sa diyis ang ámung iskur, hangtud nahuman,</i> Our score was stuck at ten points to the very end. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b4]</itype> get a tire puncture from nails. <i>Lansángan ang dyip nga dì mubigay,</i> If you don&apos;t give protection money, they&apos;ll puncture the tires of your jeep.

<p id=10850><form>lansar</form> <xr>= <sc>langsad</sc>, <ix>1.</ix></xr>

<p id=10851><form>lansaríra</form> <xr>= <sc>lansadíra</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10852><form>lansaru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>leprosy</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be affected with leprosy. <form>lansaruun, lansaruhun</form> <pos>n</pos> leper. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become a leper.

<p id=10853><form>lansilíra</form> <xr>= <sc>lansadíra</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10854><form>lansis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN2; b]</itype> tell a <tr>lie</tr> about what one is doing when one is actually doing s.t. else, make a lying excuse. <i>Nanlansis siya paghulam ug libru apan namisíta diay,</i> He came on the pretext of borrowing a book, but he actually wanted to visit my daughter. <i>Unsa may átung ilansis sa maistru ug pangutan-un ta?</i> What excuse will we give the teacher if he asks us? <pos>n</pos> lie told to disguise one&apos;s actions.

<p id=10855><form>lansíta</form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>launch</tr>.

<p id=10856><form>lansíyang</form> <xr>= <sc>galansíyang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10857><form>lanslayid</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>landslide</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b4]</itype> for there to be a landslide. <i>Ang tibuuk lungsud gilanslayran sa mga dagkung batu ug yútà,</i> The whole town was buried under a landslide of rocks and earth.

<p id=10858><form>lansu, lansun</form> <pos>n</pos> thin, white, coarsely woven cotton <tr>fabric</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> use <ix>lansu</ix>. <i>Pubri man, dì maglansu lang,</i> I&apos;m poor, so I wear <ix>lansu</ix>.

<p id=10859><form>lansúnis</form> <pos>n</pos> tall, slender <tr>tree</tr> bearing a fruit of commercial importance. The fruit is whitish-yellow, up to <number>6</number> cm. long, growing in bunches from stalks which come out of the larger branches and trunk, and has juicy translucent pulp encasing one or two irregularly-shaped seeds: <bio>Lansium domesticum</bio>.

<p id=10860><form>lanta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dressing</tr> for open wounds consisting of absorbent cotton soaked in a mixture of lime, vinegar, and coconut oil. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make such a dressing. <form>{-in-|linanta}, {ni-|nilanta}</form> <xr>= <sc>lanta</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=10861><form>lantáka, lantákà</form> <xr>= <sc>luthang</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr> &dagger;

<p id=10862><form>lantap<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for liquids to have oil or streaks of oil on the surface. <i>Lantap kaáyu ang sabaw,</i> Soup is full of oil. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> for the surface of a liquid to be oily. <i>Naglantap ang dágat sa usik nga gasulína,</i> The surface of the sea is full of oil because of the gasoline that spilled.

<p id=10863><form>lantap<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for the sea to be high and calm, as when the tide is coming in and there is no wind. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> for the sea to get high and calm.

<p id=10864><form>lantaw</form> <xr>= <sc>langtaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10865><form>lantay</form> <pos>n</pos> anything with a top or bottom consisting of bamboo slats: a bed, table, tray, bench, shelf. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> put, make into a <ix>lantay</ix>.

<p id=10866><form>lantáyug</form> <pos>a</pos> growing very <tr>tall</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> grow very tall. <i>Mulantáyug ang lubi ug magúlang na,</i> Coconut trees grow very tall when they get mature. <i>Naglantáyug ka lang nga way buut,</i> You may be tall, but you don&apos;t have a grain of sense.

<p id=10867><form>lantì</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>clear</tr>, clearly defined with sharp edges and contrasts. <i>Lantì kaáyu ang makítà diri sa largabista,</i> I see everything very clearly with the binoculars. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become clear. <i>Mulantì ang ákung panan-aw ug mag-antiyúhus,</i> My vision becomes clear if I wear glasses.

<p id=10868><form>lanting</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> for boats with no anchor or floats to tie up to or together with another <pb n=580>boat. <i>Mulanting ku sa ímung sakayan kay walà kuy pundu,</i> I will tie up to your boat because I don&apos;t have an anchor. <i>Lantíngun ta ning duha ka bátang arun makadaug nátù,</i> Let us tie these two logs together so that they can carry us.

<p id=10869><form>lantip</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sharp</tr> of blade. <i>Lantip kaáyu ning kutsilyúha,</i> This knife is very sharp. <number>2</number> sharp of mind. <i>Lantip ug salabútan,</i> Having an incisive mind. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a2]</itype> be, become sharp-edged or sharp of mind. <i>Kanang ímung binairan dílì makalantip (makapalantip) sa sundang,</i> The machete will not get sharp the way you are doing it. <form>{-in-|linantip}</form> <pos>n</pos> a bolo always kept sharp and not usually used for household chores. <form>{ka-|kalantip}</form> <pos>n</pos> sharpness, keenness of mind.

<p id=10870><form>lantsa</form> <xr>= <sc>lansa</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10871><form>lantugay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> <tr>linger</tr>, <tr>dilly-dally</tr> over s.t. or at a place. <i>Dílì makalantugay ang ákung mga anak sa iskuylahan kay daghag búhat sa ámù,</i> My children cannot afford to linger around after school because there are so many things to do at home. <form>{pa-|palantugay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> <tr>linger</tr>, <tr>dilly-dally</tr>. <i>Hingkaadlawnan kanúnay ang bána pagpaúlì kay adtu man magpalantugay sa sugálan,</i> The husband used to come home in the wee hours of the morning because he stayed late in the gambling den.

<p id=10872><form>lantúgì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>argument</tr>, <tr>quarrel</tr>. <i>Ang inyung banhà nga lantúgì nakapamata nákù,</i> Your noisy argument woke me up. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; a2]</itype> argue, quarrel. <i>Dì ku mulantúgì nímu ánang butánga,</i> I won&apos;t quarrel with you over that matter. <i>Naglantúgì sila ug unsáun pagpaguwà sa pyánu,</i> They are arguing about how to take the piano out. <form>{ka-|kalantúgì}</form> <pos>n</pos> an opponent in an argument. <form>{ma-un|malantugíun}</form> <pos>a</pos> contentious, argumentative. <i>Malantugíun kaáyu siya nga mitubag sa íyang inahan,</i> He talked back to his mother in an argumentative tone. <form>{mag-r-|maglalantúgì}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>debater</tr>. <form>mamumulung {&mdash;|maglalantúgì}</form> <tr>orator-debater</tr>. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|lantugíun}</form> <pos>a</pos> controversial. <i>Lantugiun ang risulta sa iliksiyun,</i> The results of the election are very much a matter of controversy.

<p id=10873><form>lantung</form> <xr>= <sc>langtung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10874><form>lan-u</form> <xr>= <sc>lang-u</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10875><form>lanúbù</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> grow <tr>lush</tr> and big. <i>Lanúbù ang tanum dinhi kay tabunuk ang yútà,</i> The plants grow large here because the land is fertile. <number>2</number> be economical to use because a small amount does the same job as a larger amount of similar material. <i>Lanúbù kining bugása kay kusug mutúbù,</i> This rice is economical to use because it expands well. <i>Lanúbù kining sabúna. Gamay kaáyu ang gawíun,</i> This soap is economical. You just need to use a little. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> make s.t. go far. <i>Lanubúa (ilanúbù) ug gámit ang sabun,</i> Use the soap sparingly.

<p id=10876><form>lánug</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>loud</tr>, <tr>resonant</tr>. <i>Lánug kaáyu íyang tíngug sa pagtawag nákù,</i> He called me with a very loud voice. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> be, become loud. <i>Mulánug (malánug) ang ímung tíngug ug magmigapun ka,</i> Your voice will become loud if you use a megaphone. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> echo, resound. <i>Naglánug ang íyang singgit sa dyím,</i> His shout resounded in the gym. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> loudness. <number>2</number> echo. <i>Walay mitubag gawas sa lánug sa íyang tíngug,</i> There was no answer except the echo of his voice. <number>2a</number> echoes, reminiscenses of the past. <i>Kining mga awíta mga lánug lámang sa kanhíay,</i> These songs are but echoes of the past. <form>{pa-|palánug}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> broadcast, disseminate by word or publicity. <i>Ipalánug ning balitáa sa tibuuk násud,</i> Broadcast this news throughout the nation.

<p id=10877><form>lan-ug</form> <xr>= <sc>lang-ug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10878><form>lanulin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lanolin</tr>.

<p id=10879><form>lan-us</form> <pos>a</pos> have the bad smell of eating or drinking utensils which have been used but not well cleaned. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for utensils to develop a bad smell from not having been properly cleaned. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> let coconut milk curdle to use the curds for medicine. <i>Maglan-us kug tunù nga himúung lanta,</i> I&apos;ll ferment coconut milk to make into a medicinal plaster. <form>{-in-|linan-us}</form> <pos>n</pos> sediment from fermented coconut milk.

<p id=10880><form>lanut</form> <pos>n</pos> gelatinous water that develops when rice or beans are boiled. <i>Lanut ang ipainum sa masusu,</i> Give the baby water from boiled beans. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> develop this substance. <i>Kining humáya húmuk mulanut ug lugáwun,</i> This rice develops gelatinous water when you make porridge of it.

<p id=10881><form>lánut</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>hemp</tr> from abaca. <number>2</number> any k.o. long, tough plant fibers. <i>Ánang trabahúa ang ímung kinabúhì naglatay sa usa ka lugas lánut,</i> Your job is very dangerous. (Lit. In that job your life walks over a long thin strand.) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make hemp from abaca. <i>Anus-a man lanúta ninyu ang pinutul nga abaka?</i> When will you make hemp from that abaca you cut into pieces? <number>2</number> <itype>[B5]</itype> show fibrous components, become threadbare. <i>Dáan na kaáyung kalsunísa naglanut na gánì ang panaptun,</i> These trousers are very old. They are already threadbare. <number>3</number> <itype>[B456]</itype> for s.t. sticky like syrup, glue, and the like to show fiber-like portions when stretched. <form>{-un|lanútun}</form> <pos>a</pos> fibrous, having fibers. <i>Lanútun kaáyu ug unud ang páhù,</i> <ix>Páhù</ix> is a stringy kind of mango. <form>lanutlanut</form> <pos>n</pos> fine fibers of fruits.

<p id=10882><form>lápà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC12; a]</itype> <tr>cut</tr> into sizeable chunks. <pb n=581><i>Lapáa ang bábuy unyà atarúha,</i> Cut the pig in chunks and group them into portions for sale. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> hack to pieces. <i>Dinhi siya lapáag sundang sa naghuramintádu,</i> He was hacked to pieces in this place by a man who ran amok.

<p id=10883><form>lapad</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>flat</tr>, <tr>level</tr> surface. <i>Lapad siyag nawung,</i> She has a flat face. <i>Lapad ug tiil,</i> Flat-footed or having the toes wide apart. <number>2</number> <tr>broad</tr>, having considerable width. <i>Lapad nga karitíra,</i> The broad highway. <i>Lapad nga kayutáan,</i> Vast stretches of land. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> be flat, wide. <i>Mulapad kag baril, mauy ikural,</i> Flatten barrels to make into a fence. <i>Naglapad lang nang ilung mu,</i> Your nose is so flat. <number>2</number> <itype>[APB2; ab7]</itype> widen or broaden. <i>Nagkalapad na ang baul nga gihawánan na,</i> The field has more area now that it has been cleared of bushes. <i>Lapdan ang lamísa kay gamay ra,</i> The table will be made wider because it is too narrow. <form>{&mdash;|lapad} ang atay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> be, become flattered (lit. for the liver to expand). <i>Mulapad (malapad) dáyun nang íyang atay basta daygun,</i> It goes to her head if you flatter her. <pos>n</pos> flat, pocket-sized bottle for liquor (slang). <form>{pa-|palapad}</form> <pos>n</pos> matting made out of woven palm fronds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make this matting. <form>{pa-(&larr;)|palápad} sa papil, kaugalíngun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> do s.t. so as to project a good image of oneself. <i>Nagpalápad siya sa papil maung midunar,</i> He made a donation in order to give himself a good public image. <form>{-g-|lagpad}</form> <xr>= <sc>lapad</sc></xr> (plural). <form>{ha-|halapad}</form> <pos>a</pos> wide, broad. <form>laparun</form> <pos>a</pos> flattish in surface. <form>{ka-|kalapad}</form> <number>1</number> state of being large, broad. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>gilapdun</sc>.</xr> <form>gilapdun</form> <pos>n</pos> width. <i>Kwatru piyis ang gilapdun (kalapad) sa playwud,</i> The plywood is <measure reg="1.2 m">4&prime;</measure> in width.

<p id=10884><form>lapak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> an area differing in color or texture from the surrounding area: <tr>splotch</tr>, <tr>stripe</tr>, <tr>spot</tr>. <i>Ang sanínà may lapak nga pula ug itum,</i> The dress has red and black dots (stripes, splotches). <number>2</number> <pos>a</pos> piece, irregular scrap of material. <i>Paggunting ug lapak sa putì nga panaptun,</i> Cut a piece of white cloth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put spots, stripes, smudges on s.t. <i>Milapak ang pintal nga basà sa íyang buktun,</i> His arm got a splotch of wet paint on it. <i>Nakalapak (nakapalapak) sa salug ang húgaw nímung tiil,</i> My floor has become splotched with your dirty feet. <i>Lapakun pagtáud ang mga lainláing kulur sa buluhátung bidsprid,</i> Sew patches of assorted colors into the bedspread you are making. <form>{-in-|linapak}</form> <pos>n</pos> plaid design.

<p id=10885><form>lapak<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> <tr>spank</tr> s.o. lightly. <i>Sakit ang sinílas nga ilapak,</i> It hurts if you are spanked with a slipper.

<p id=10886><form>lápak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>step</tr> on s.t. <i>Nabuling ang linadlad kay gilapákan sa bábuy,</i> The bleached clothes got dirty because pigs stepped on them.

<p id=10887><form>lap-ak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>splotch</tr>, <tr>splatter</tr>. <i>Dakung lap-ak sa dugù sa samput,</i> The big blood stain on the bottom of the dress. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> splotch, splatter. <form>lap-aklap-ak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> splotch, splatter. <i>Gilap-aklap-ak (naglap-aklap-ak) ang íyang buktun sa bun-i,</i> His arm has ringworm marks all over it. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> do s.t irregularly, such that the results are splotched or irregularly spaced spots. <i>Ang bungbung naglap-aklap-ak sa litrátu,</i> Photos are pasted all over the wall in an irregular fashion (as if spattered on the wall). <i>Abanira giyud. Ayaw lap-aklap-áka (ilap-aklap-ak) pagpintal,</i> Paint it a square at a time. Don&apos;t skip around.

<p id=10888><form>lapalapa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sole</tr>, bottom surface of the foot. <number>2</number> sole of shoe, boots, etc. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> work on the sole of a shoe being manufactured.

<p id=10889><form>lapánag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b4]</itype> for s.t. to <tr>spread</tr> over an area. <i>Milapánag ang túbig sa daruhan,</i> The water spread over the fields. <i>Ang íyang ap-ap naglapanag sa íyang tibuuk láwas,</i> His fungus is spreading all over his body. <i>Wà makalapánag ang balità,</i> The news didn&apos;t get very far.

<p id=10890><form>lapáru</form> <xr>= <sc>lampáru</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10891><form>lápas</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>past</tr>, <tr>beyond</tr> a time or place considered right. <i>Lápas na sa alas unsi,</i> It&apos;s past eleven o&apos;clock. <i>Lápas na ang dyíp sa átù,</i> The jeep has gone past our place. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2; b6c]</itype> go past a certain time or place, do s.t. beyond, esp. where one shouldn&apos;t. <i>Bayri sa dì pa makalápas sa tagal,</i> Pay it off before it goes beyond the due date. <i>Dì na makalápas sa túhud ang sinínà sa átung mga kababayin-an karun,</i> Women&apos;s dresses these days no longer go beyond their knees. <i>Ayawg lapása (lapási, palapása, palapási) ang utlánan,</i> Don&apos;t build beyond the boundary of your land. <i>Ayaw ug ilápas (ipalápas) ang kural sa utlánan,</i> Don&apos;t have the fence go beyond the boundary. <i>Naminyù na ang ímung manghud ikaw walà pa, hinglapasan hinúun ka,</i> Your younger sister has gotten married, but you haven&apos;t. You have been passed over. <number>1a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lápas} na sa kalindaryu</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2356]</itype> for a woman to have reached an age greater than the number of days in the calendar (lit. gone beyond the calendar). <i>Lisud ka nang maminyù ug mulápas (malápas) ka na sa kalindaryu,</i> You&apos;ll find it hard to get married if you get above thirty. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> violate a law, go beyond certain rules or agreements. <i>Wà pa dungga nga mulápas kug sáad,</i> I&apos;ve <pb n=582>never been known to break a promise. <i>Nakalápas ka sa maáyung pamatásan,</i> You have gone beyond the bounds of good behavior. <form>{(&rarr;)|lapas}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>abalone</tr>, so called because the meat tends to extend beyond the shell. <form>{ka-an|kalapásan}</form> <pos>n</pos> violation, actions going beyond a code<corr sic=",">.</corr> <i>Pasaylúa kami Ginúu sa ámung mga kalapásan,</i> Forgive us, Lord, our trespasses. <form>{ma-un|malapásun}</form> <pos>a</pos> going beyond the limits of right action.

<p id=10892><form>lapasì</form> <xr>= <sc>lupasì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10893><form>lapat<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for the contents of a container to be practically gone. <i>Lapat na ang bugas,</i> The rice is right down to the bottom of the rice can. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3]</itype> be almost to the bottom of the container. <i>Nagkalapat na ang túbig sa tangki,</i> The water in the tank is getting near the bottom.

<p id=10894><form>lapat<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> clothes for home wear.

<p id=10895><form>lápaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B23; cP]</itype> go above or beyond a certain amount. <i>Milápaw na ang ákung anak nákù,</i> My son has gotten to be taller than I am. <i>Ug malápaw na sa dus písus ang gantang sa mais, ambut lang,</i> If corn goes beyond two pesos a ganta, I don&apos;t know. <i>Makalápaw ka bag luksu ánang gilay-úna?</i> Can you jump beyond that point? <i>Sa íyang abilidad dì ka makalápaw,</i> You can not surpass his ability. <i>Gilapáwan ang mga atup sa lúnup,</i> The flood water rose above the rooftops. <i>Ilápaw (ipalápaw) giyud ang sabaw sa gilung-ag,</i> The water level should be higher than the rice. <pos>a</pos> gone far beyond, over. <form>{&mdash;|lápaw} sa</form> <tr>beyond</tr>. <form>{tagi-|tagilápaw}, {tagi-(&rarr;)|tagilapaw}</form> <pos>a</pos> high above a certain level. <i>Ang bahà tagilápaw (tagilapaw) sa túhud,</i> The flood is above the knees.

<p id=10896><form>lapay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. purple-brown heron of swamps and tidal flats: <bio>Ardea purpurea</bio>.

<p id=10897><form>lapdus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>lash</tr>, <tr>whip</tr>. <i>Midágan ang kabáyù dihang gilapdúsan,</i> The horse galloped when it was lashed. <i>Makapahilánat kunu kanang íkug sa pági kun mauy ilapdus,</i> They say that it will make a person ill if you whip him with a stingray tail. <pos>n</pos> lash, a stroke with s.t. pliable.

<p id=10898><form>lapgus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> bundle of twine or hemp. <number>2</number> standard size by which a bundle of twine is sold. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> make a bundle of twine.

<p id=10899><form>lápì</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> bend or fold s.t. over <tr>double</tr>. <i>Lapía ang panaptun ug adtu guntínga sa piniluan,</i> Fold the cloth over and cut it in the fold. <number>1a</number> <itype>[C3]</itype> for two flat surfaces to be close together as if there were only one. <i>Ábi kug usa ra ni ka písus. Duha man diay, nagkalápì lang,</i> I thought there was only one peso, but it turned out they are two bills stuck together. <number>2</number> <itype>[B3(1)6]</itype> <tr>double</tr>, <tr>increase twofold</tr> or by extension, a few folds more. <i>Milápì (nalápì) ang prisyu karun sa tanang mga palitúnun,</i> The price of everything has doubled. <i>Anam-anamun ku ni pagbúhat arun dílì maglápì,</i> I will do the work as it comes up so I won&apos;t have but one thing to do at a time. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> do s.t. to two where one is usual. <i>Búang ka ug lapíun nímug pangulitáwu ang mga mag-ágaw,</i> You&apos;re crazy if you court both the cousins at the same time. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> break s.t. off a plant by bending it over and twisting. <i>Maglápì lang kug ígù tilaubun,</i> I&apos;ll pick just enough young corn to broil. <i>Putla, ayaw lapía ang pagkúhà sa sanga,</i> Cut the branch off, don&apos;t break it off. <i>Malápì nang palwa ug ímung tungtúngan,</i> The frond will break off if you step on it. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> action of folding s.t double. <number>2</number> times in division. <i>Pila ka lápì ang unum sa trayinta?</i> How many times does six go into thirty? <form>{(&rarr;)|lapì}</form> <pos>a</pos> coconuts with dry, oilless meat that is easily detached from its shell, and which has failed to sprout. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become a <ix>lapì</ix> coconut. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|lapian}</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. coconut, the fronds and fruit bunches of which break off easily.

<p id=10900><form>lapida</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tombstone</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a tombstone, put a tombstone on.

<p id=10901><form>lapikì</form> <pos>n</pos> repeated, sharp smacking sounds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make a smacking sound. <i>Milapikì ang íyang nawung pagtamparus nákù,</i> Her face resounded when I slapped her. <i>Gilapikig latus sa kutsíru ang kabáyù,</i> The rig driver cracked his whip on the horse.

<p id=10902><form>lapilapi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56; c1]</itype> for a liquid to reach the brim or to the top of an embankment, almost spilling over. <i>Milapilapi na ang subà. Maglúnup man kahà,</i> The river has risen to the banks. It looks as though it&apos;s going to flood. <i>Gilapilapi nákù ang tása sa kapi,</i> I filled the cup to the brim with coffee. <pos>a</pos> filled up to the brim.

<p id=10903><form>laping</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; c1]</itype> graze s.t. but not hit it squarely. <i>Swirti kay milaping lang níya ang batu,</i> Fortunately the stone just grazed him. <i>Gilapingan lang ku sa bála,</i> The bullet only grazed me.

<p id=10904><form>lapínig</form> <xr>= <sc>lampínig</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10905><form>lapis<sub>1</sub>, lápis<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> do the same thing to two things at once. <i>Lapísa ang duha ka langgam sa usa ka tíru,</i> Hit two birds with one shot. <i>Ayaw lapisa sa paghigugma ang duha ka magsúun,</i> Don&apos;t fall in love with both sisters. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> be included in s.t. that happened to s.o. else. <i>Nalapis ku sa kasábà kúmu kaúban,</i> I was included in the scolding since I was their companion.

<p id=10906><form>lapis<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. leather jacket: <bio>Scomberoides spp</bio>.

<p id=10907><form>lápis<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pencil</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> write with a <pb n=583>pencil. <i>Lapísa lang pagsulat. Usbunun pa bítaw nà,</i> Just write it with a pencil. It has to be rewritten anyway.

<p id=10908><form>lapiti</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> make s.t. dirty by bespattering it. <i>Siyay nakalapiti ug lápuk sa bungbung,</i> He spattered mud on the wall. <form>{ka-|kalapiti}, {ka-(&larr;)|kalapíti}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> get s.t. smeared, spattered all over one. <i>Nagkalapíti ang bátà sa tái,</i> The child got smeared all over with his stool.

<p id=10909><form>laplap<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for clothing to be loose and flapping. <i>Namanus kag sinínà nu kay laplap man kaáyu nímu,</i> You must be wearing s.o. else&apos;s clothes because they are so loose on you. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> for s.t. to flap or clothes to be loose. <i>Naglaplap ang bandíra sa hángin,</i> The flag is waving in the breeze.

<p id=10910><form>laplap<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab7]</itype> slice off s.t. from a surface. <i>Mulaplap kug gamay sa karni pára isugba,</i> I&apos;ll slice off a small piece of meat to broil. <i>Laplápa ang apdu ug ilábay,</i> Slice off the gall bladder and throw it away. <i>Laplápi ang lapalapa sa kúbal,</i> Cut the callous off the sole of your foot.

<p id=10911><form>lapnis</form> <pos>n</pos> fiber stripped off the outside of a banana or abaca trunk used to tie things.

<p id=10912><form>lapnut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for liquids to be thick and sticky. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> be thick and sticky. <i>Mulapnut (malapnut) ang sabaw sa útan ug dúnay ukra,</i> Vegetable soup gets sticky if you put okra in it.

<p id=10913><form>lapnut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; ab2]</itype> remove s.t. rooted, attached, or sticking fast. <i>Kinsay milapnut sa papil nga ákung gipilit sa lamísa?</i> Who ripped off the paper that I had pasted on the table? <i>Íyang gilapnut ang íyang lásu kay gisáput na man pud,</i> She pulled the ribbon out off her hair because she was in a bad mood again.

<p id=10914><form>lapnuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> glide, move through an area smoothly. <i>Milapnuy lag lísu sa santul sa ákung tutunlan,</i> The seed of the santol slipped down my throat. <i>Mulapnuy ang kasíli sa kadanglug,</i> The eel is so slippery, it will come right out of your hands. <pos>a</pos> moving through an area smoothly. <i>Lapnuy ianak ang gamayng bátà,</i> You will have a smooth delivery if it&apos;s a small baby. <form>lapnuylapnuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> glide up and down on a surface. <i>Naglapnuylapnuy ang gapnud sa mga balud,</i> The driftwood is gliding over the waves.

<p id=10915><form>lapris</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rabbet plane</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make or smooth a groove with a rabbet plane. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make into a rabbet plane.

<p id=10916><form>lapsaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>watery</tr>, <tr>diluted</tr> in taste. <i>Lapsaw kaáyu ang ílang litsi kay giligaban ug túbig,</i> Their milk is watery because they adulterated it with water. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a2]</itype> get to be watery, have a diluted taste. <i>Kinsay ganáhan sa ímung sabaw nga naglapsaw ang lamì?</i> Who likes your soup since it tastes so watery? <form>{&mdash;|lapsaw} ug dugù</form> <tr>sluggish</tr>, lacking in vigor, movement. <form>{&mdash;|lapsaw} ug útuk</form> <tr>stupid</tr>.

<p id=10917><form>lapta</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>splotchy</tr>. <i>Lapta kaáyu ang pagkapintal sa kisami kay nubátus ang nagpintal,</i> The paint of the ceiling is splotchy because the painter is inexperienced. <form>laptalapta</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be splotchy. <i>Naglaptalapta ang mga bun-i sa íyang buktun,</i> Ringworms are appearing in splotches on her arms.

<p id=10918><form>lápu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>spank</tr> s.o. with the hand or with s.t. long, rigid, and flat. <i>Lapúhun ta ka íring lipak ug dì ka mutúman,</i> I&apos;ll spank you with this bamboo slat if you don&apos;t obey.

<p id=10919><form>lapug</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large grouper.

<p id=10920><form>lápuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>mud</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>derogatory remarks</tr>. <i>Nag-iyáhay lag lábay ug lápuk ang mga kandidátu,</i> Political candidates resorted to mudslinging. <form>{&mdash;|lápuk} sa agtang</form> <pos>a</pos> smear on a man&apos;s reputation incurred when his wife commits adultery. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; a]</itype> be, become muddy. <i>Mulápuk (malápuk) lang kita dinhi kun mag-ulan,</i> This place becomes muddy when it rains. <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lápuk} sa agtang</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b5]</itype> for a wife to smear her husband&apos;s reputation by committing adultery. <form>lapuklapuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b5]</itype> make muddy. <i>Gustu giyud maglapuklapuk ang mga bátà,</i> Children enjoy getting themselves all muddy. <i>Gilapuklapukan ang salug sa mga bátà,</i> The children made the floor muddy. <form>{ka-|kalápuk}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> be spattered with mud. <i>Nagkalápuk ang tiil sa irù,</i> The dog&apos;s feet are muddy. <form>{-un|lapúkun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>muddy</tr>. <form>{ka-an|kalapúkan}</form> <pos>n</pos> places that are muddy.

<p id=10921><form>lapulápu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> commercial name given to groupers (<ix>pugápu</ix>).

<p id=10922><form>lapung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> involve s.o. in s.t. bad that he should not be involved in or do s.t. to more members of a group than should have had it done to them. <i>Siyay naglapung ug pangulitáwu sa tulu námù ka tindíra,</i> He courted all the three of our salesgirls at one time. <i>Makalapung kag dakup niánang mga manúka?</i> Could you catch all those chickens at one time? <i>Gilapung ku níyag áway bísag wà ku makasâ,</i> She quarreled with everyone, including me, even though I had not done anything wrong. <i>Nalapung ang ámung balay sa súnug,</i> Our house got burnt along with the others.

<p id=10923><form>lapus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; ac]</itype> <tr>penetrate</tr>, <tr>pierce</tr> through the opposite side. <i>Dì makalapus ang ulan sa atup,</i> The rain can&apos;t penetrate the roof. <i>Nalapsan sa panà ang isdà,</i> The spear went through the fish. <number>1a</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> have one&apos;s menstrual blood penetrate to one&apos;s clothing. <i>Gilapsan ku, maung mag-ílis ku,</i> I got menstrual <pb n=584>blood on my dress so I have to change. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>bypass</tr>, pass through or beyond a point. <i>Dì na ku mulapus ngadtu sa píkas bungtud,</i> I won&apos;t go beyond the other side of the hill. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A12; b6(1)]</itype> finish one&apos;s studies. <i>Nakalapus na siya sa abugasíya,</i> He has gotten through his law course. <number>2b</number> <itype>[A2; a1c]</itype> go up to, reach. <i>Milapus ba ning karsadáha ngadtu sa Lilúan?</i> Does this road go all the way through to Liloan? <number>3</number> <itype>[C23; a12]</itype> for two holes to lead through to each other. <i>Ang duha ka lángub naglápus,</i> The two caves lead into each other. <number>4</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> for the foreskin of the penis to get loose so that the glans can be exposed. <i>Magpatúlì ku kun mulapus nag ákung tintin,</i> I&apos;ll get circumcised when the foreskin of my thing is loose enough to pull back all the way. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> be finished with one&apos;s course of studies. <number>2</number> turn out to be relatively more beautiful than the others in a group. <i>Námung magsúun si Nína ray lapus,</i> Nena is the only good-looking one among us children. <form>{(&larr;)|lápus}</form> <pos>a</pos> going clear through the other side. <i>Lápus ba ang lungag sa masig ka dawunggan?</i> Do the earholes go clear through the head to the other side? <form>lapsanan</form> <pos>n</pos> place where s.t or s.o. exits<corr>.</corr> <i>Dúna bay lapsanan ning pasilyúha?</i> Does this passageway have an exit?

<p id=10924><form>laput</form> <pos>n</pos> term for various kinds of fry or tiny fishes caught by the <ix>sanggab</ix>.

<p id=10925><form>láput</form> <xr>= <sc>lap-ut<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=10926><form>lap-ut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b2]</itype> get slightly burnt, lightly injured from heat or acid. <i>Nalap-ut ang ákung tudlù sa asidu muryatiku,</i> My finger got scalded with muriatic acid. <i>Nalap-ut ákung bukubuku sa ínit,</i> My back got burnt in the sun. <pos>n</pos> light burn.

<p id=10927><form>lap-ut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for a liquid to get thick and sticky. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)]</itype> for soup to thicken. <i>Mulap-ut ang sabaw sa útan nga sagúlan ug bisul,</i> Vegetable soup thickens if yautia is stewed with it. <i>Haúna sa dì pa makalap-ut,</i> Take it out before it gets thick. <i>Ang harína nakalap-ut (nakapalap-ut) sa sabaw,</i> The flour made the soup too thick. <form>{-ay|lap-útay}, {-ay(&rarr;)|lap-utay}</form> <xr>= <sc>lap-ut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10928><form>lapuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a4b4]</itype> be <tr>weary</tr>, <tr>fatigued</tr>. <i>Nalapuy (milapuy) ang ákung mga buktun sa pagginúna,</i> My arms have become fatigued from weeding. <i>Gilapuy (gilapuyan) kug maáyu sa paglinanguy,</i> I was exhausted from swimming so much. <pos>a</pos> <tr>fatigued</tr>. <form>{ka-|kalapuy}</form> <pos>n</pos> body fatigue.

<p id=10929><form>lapwa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> put s.t. in boiling water, to blanch, sterilize, or prepare it for further cooking. <i>Lapwái (lapwáhi) ang kutsára sa masakitun,</i> Sterilize the patient&apos;s spoon in boiling water. <i>Lapwáhi ang útuk sa túbig nga may asin,</i> Parboil the brain in salted water.

<p id=10930><form>lapya</form> <pos>n</pos> lapping or dashing of waves, sound of waves coming onto the shore. <i>Ang lapya sa mga balud sa baybáyun,</i> The lapping of the waves on the shore. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for the waves to strike the shore. <form>lapyahan, lapyahánan</form> <pos>n</pos> the place where the waves strike the shore. <form>{-in-|linapya}</form> <pos>n</pos> sound of waves striking the shore.

<p id=10931><form>lapyà</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>broad</tr> in face, flattened out. <i>Lapyag nawung,</i> A broad, <tr>flat</tr> face. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be, become flattened out. <i>Nalapyà ang nígu nga naligsan sa trák,</i> The winnowing tray is flattened out because the truck drove over it.

<p id=10932><form>lapyat</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fat</tr> and <tr>flabby</tr>. <i>Dalágang úlay kunu piru lapyat na ug dughan,</i> She&apos;s supposed to be a virgin but she has sagging breasts. <number>2</number> slow and languid in movement. <i>Lapyat nga manlihuklihuk,</i> Moving sluggishly. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> be, become flabby or lacking in fullness. <i>Wà kay iksirsayis maung nagkalapyat ang ímung buktun,</i> You lack exercise. No wonder your arms are getting flabby. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> move without energy. <i>Dì giyud mahuman ang ímung trabáhu ug maglapyat ka,</i> Your work will never get done if you work slow.

<p id=10933><form>lapyù</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>young</tr> and <tr>tender</tr>. <i>Ang lapyung bágu mauy maáyung utánun,</i> Young and tender <ix>bágu</ix> leaves make an excellent vegetable stew. <i>Lapyù nga kaisípan,</i> Young and tender minds.

<p id=10934><form>lárag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> for leaves to yellow. <i>Nagkalarag ang mga tanum kay way ulan,</i> The plants are becoming yellow because there hasn&apos;t been any rain. <number>1a</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> for leaves or flowers to wither and fall off. <i>Nalárag ang mga dáhun sa lawus nga kamunggay,</i> The withered <ix>kamunggay</ix> leaves dropped off. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> be faded. <i>Nalárag na ang íyang kaanyag,</i> Her beauty has faded. <number>2a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lárag} ang búlak, pagkabúlak</formx> lose one&apos;s virginity (for the flower to fade). <i>Nalárag ang íyang pagkabúlak sa dihang gipaangkan siya,</i> She lost her chaste beauty when she became pregnant. <number>3</number> <itype>[B]</itype> get completely drunk. <i>Sa ílang pag-ínum gabíi si Tunyu ang únang nalárag,</i> In their spree last night Tonio was the first one to get under the table. <number>3a</number> <itype>[B12; a1]</itype> be fascinated with s.o. <i>Ang íyang kaanyag mauy nakalárag (nakapalárag) nákù,</i> Her beauty fascinated me. <form>{(&rarr;)|larag}</form> <pos>a</pos> withered, yellowed leaves, flowers, faded beauty, unchaste. <i>Gipangasáwa siya bísan usa na siya ka larag nga búlak,</i> S.o. married her even though she was a faded flower (no longer a virgin). <pos>n</pos> fallen leaves.

<pb n=585>

<p id=10935><form>láran</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> <tr>beat</tr>, <tr>outdo</tr>. <i>Dakù túud si Klí apan walà siya makaláran ni Prísir,</i> Clay may be big but he couldn&apos;t beat Frazier. <form>{pa-|paláran}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> allow oneself to be outdone. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> allow oneself to get carried away with his emotions. <i>Magpaláran ka gánis ímung kaguul, masakit ka giyud,</i> If you allow yourself to get carried away with your emotions, you will surely get sick.

<p id=10936><form>lárang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> stew s.t. with coconut milk and nothing else but spices. <i>Lamì ang kyampaw ug ilárang (larángun),</i> The best way to cook ray is by stewing it in coconut juice. <number>2</number> reheat s.t. to remove the fat. <i>Laránga ang adúbu arun dílì kaáyu ngilngig,</i> Heat the <ix>adúbu</ix> so it won&apos;t be so greasy. <pos>n</pos> dish stewed in coconut milk, usually stingray.

<p id=10937><form>láras</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>saw</tr> along the length. <i>Larásun nátù ang átung giputul nga káhuy,</i> We&apos;ll saw the log into lumber. <form>{(&rarr;)|laras}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. to all of a group. <i>Ang huramintádu nga milaras ug patay sa tibuuk pamilya,</i> The amok who killed all the members of the family. <i>Ayaw mi larasa (ilaras) ug kasábà kay usa ray nakasâ,</i> Don&apos;t include us all in the scolding because only one of us did anything wrong. <i>Gilaras ku pagsuruysúruy ang mga dálan dinhi,</i> I wandered through all of the streets. <number>2</number> do s.t. to a larger number of a group than would ordinarily be expected. <i>Gilaras níyag pangulitáwu ang duha ka magsúun,</i> He courted two of the sisters at the same time. <pos>n</pos> ripsaw, saw for cutting with the grain. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|larasan}</form> <pos>n</pos> sawhorse. <form>{-in-|lináras}</form> <pos>n</pos> boards sawed off with a ripsaw.

<p id=10938><form>láraw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab]</itype> <tr>make plans</tr> to do s.t. <i>Nagláraw ang prisidinti nga magdiktadur,</i> The president is planning to become a dictator. <i>Dúna siyay gilárawng buhátun nímu,</i> He is plotting to do s.t. against you. <i>Ikay gilaráwan níyang patyun,</i> He is planning to kill you. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> plan how and where s.t. is to be built. <i>Magláraw ta sa átung balayan,</i> We&apos;re going to map out the place where the house is to be built. <pos>n</pos> plan, plot. <i>Wà kuy láraw sa pagbiyáhi,</i> I have no plans to travel. <form>{-an|laráwan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>picture</tr>. <number>2</number> graven image (Biblical). <i>Dílì ka magsimba sa mga laráwan,</i> Thou shalt not worship graven images. <number>3</number> image, likeness of. <i>Laráwan ka sa ímung inahan,</i> You are your mother&apos;s image. <number>4</number> typical example. <i>Laráwan sa kakúgi ug kabuútan,</i> Paragon of industry and virtue. <i>Laráwan sa kahimsug,</i> A picture of health. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> showing clearly, picture s.t. <i>Ang ílang kahimtang naglaráwan sa túmang kakabus,</i> The condition shows what utter poverty is. <i>Nalaráwan sa íyang panagway ang kahadluk,</i> Fear was etched on her face. <i>Larawána kunúhay ang lángit,</i> Try to picture heaven in your mind.

<p id=10939><form>laray<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> sing a song with meaningless syllables (<ix>la la la</ix>). <i>Naglaray siya sa bátà nga git&umacracu;g,</i> She hummed the child to sleep. <pos>n</pos> song sung with meaningless syllables.

<p id=10940><form>láray</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> be in a <tr>row</tr> or <tr>line</tr>; cause s.t. to be so. <i>Siyay miláray sa mga masitíra sa agiánan,</i> She lined the path with flower pots. <i>Nagláray ang mga patyunun atúbang sa payring iskwad,</i> The condemned men were lined up before the firing squad. <pos>n</pos> line, row. <form>{(&rarr;)|laray}<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>láray</sc>, <i>n.</i></xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> display goods for sale on the sidewalks or in open booths in the public market. <i>Adtu tas tábù tan-áwun tag unsay gilaray,</i> Let&apos;s go to the market and see what is being displayed.

<p id=10941><form>larga</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B36]</itype> for a passenger vehicle to leave. <i>Milarga (nalarga) ang trák binyáan ang kunduktur,</i> The bus went off, leaving the conductor behind. <number>1a</number> leave for a distant place. <i>Mularga mi ugmà pára Butwan,</i> We&apos;ll leave for Butuan tomorrow. <i>Ug malarga na mi mahibáwu ka ra,</i> You&apos;ll surely know it if we have gotten off. <number>1b</number> used in commands only: go ahead, start. <i>Ug muingun kung &lsquo;larga&rsquo;, dágan ... Na, larga na,</i> When I say &lsquo;OK&rsquo;, run ... OK, run! <form>{&mdash;|larga} manuk</form> <xr>= <sc>larga</sc>, <ix>1b.</ix></xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; b]</itype> allow, permit s.o. to do s.t. freely. <i>Kinsa may naglarga nímu nga ipatandug nang trabahúa?</i> Who gave you a free hand to touch that work? <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> meet a price offered, agree to do s.t. for a certain price offered. <i>Mularga ku ánà sa bayinti,</i> I&apos;ll let it go for twenty. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b7]</itype> pay out the line. <i>Ayaw palabii ug larga sa tugut ang tabánug,</i> Don&apos;t pay out the string of your kite too much. <i>Largahi ang pasul,</i> Pay out the fishline. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> let cocks go for a fight. <i>Largáhan na gánì nang duha ka manuk, súgud na ang búlang,</i> When those two cocks are released, that means the game is on. <number>4a</number> <itype>[B; b]</itype> set on s.o. <i>Gilargahan siya sa mga buguy,</i> The bullies set on him. <form>{-da|largáda}</form> <pos>n</pos> all set to go, well-prepared, showing confidence as one goes into a fight, examination, or contest. <i>Hustu sa largáda si Klí. Walà giyud magpakítag kahadluk,</i> Clay was all set to go with complete confidence. He didn&apos;t show a trace of fear. <form>{-dur(&rarr;)|largadur}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> one who releases cocks in cockfighting. <number>2</number> one who formally announces the candidacy of s.o. running for an elective office.

<p id=10942><form>largabista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>binoculars</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> look at s.t. with binoculars.

<p id=10943><form>largu</form> lead directly to. <i>Kining dalána largu sa subà,</i> The path leads directly to the river. <pos>v</pos> <pb n=586><number>1</number> <itype>[A2; ac]</itype> go straight, take a straight course s.w. <i>Mulargu lang ku ngadtu sa íla,</i> I&apos;ll just go straight to their place. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; abc]</itype> do s.t. directly straight away. <i>Mulargu ka lang ug hílak bísan gipangutána ka lang,</i> You cry right away even though I only asked you. <i>Dílì ka makalargu ug sulud,</i> You can&apos;t just go straight in. <i>Ay na lang ug sukda. Largúha na lang pagputul,</i> Never mind measuring it. Just cut it right off. <i>Largúhi lang siyag ingun nga wà kay gustu,</i> Just tell him directly that you don&apos;t like him. <i>Ayaw ilargug hátag,</i> Don&apos;t give it to him directly. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> happen fast without any previous indication. <i>Milargu ug butu ang ribintadur ug wà gánì musíyù,</i> The firecracker exploded right away and it didn&apos;t even sizzle. <number>3</number> <itype>[B16; c1]</itype> be, become straight. <i>Naglargu lang ning sinináa mu rag sáku,</i> This dress is straight at the sides like a sack. <form>larguhánan</form> <pos>n</pos> short, direct route toward. <form>{di-|dilargu}, pantalun {di-|dilargu}</form> <pos>n</pos> long pants.

<p id=10944><form>láring</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>sword</tr> similar to the <ix>kanduwálì</ix> but with a slight curve to the blade.

<p id=10945><form>larínu</form> <pos>a</pos> speaking clearly and fluently. <i>Larínu kaáyu nang Kanúa mubinisayà,</i> That American speaks Cebuano very fluently. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> speak clearly and fluently.

<p id=10946><form>láruk</form> <xr>= <sc>lagduk</sc>, <i>in all meanings except 1a.</i></xr>

<p id=10947><form>larut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>pull up</tr> by the roots. <i>Maglarut kug mani pára lapwáan,</i> I&apos;ll pull up some peanuts to boil. <i>Íyang larutun ning tangúha,</i> He&apos;ll pull this tooth out. <number>2</number> pull s.t. off from its moorings, as if uprooting it. <i>Bagyu ang nakalarut (nakapalarut) sa mga barungbárung,</i> The typhoon knocked the shanties over. <number>3</number> <itype>[B12N; b3]</itype> lose one&apos;s hair. <i>Nanglarut ang íyang buhuk,</i> His hair is falling out. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> hair that has fallen out. <i>Matag kalígù níya dúnay daghang larut,</i> Every time he takes a bath he loses a lot of hair. <number>2</number> bad luck, allegedly brought on by s.o. <i>Ngánung miduwà pa giyud ka, napildi na núun ta. Ikaw lay nagdá sa larut,</i> Why did you have to play with us? Now we lost. You must have brought this bad luck. <form>{(&larr;)|lárut}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab7]</itype> take rice seedlings out from their bed ready for transplanting. <i>Larútun na nátù ang similya kay andam na ang basak,</i> Let&apos;s take the seedlings out of the seedbed now because the field is ready for planting.

<p id=10948><form>laruylaruy, laruyláruy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>roam</tr> idly, aimlessly about instead of doing s.t. <i>Gilaruylarúyan níya ang íyang pagtuun maung nahagbung,</i> He wandered about instead of studying, so he failed.

<p id=10949><form>laryang</form> <pos>n</pos> meaningless word used in singing a song without words.

<p id=10950><form>las</form> for the <tr>last</tr> time. <i>Hatági pa ku bi, las na lang,</i> Please let me have one more. This is the last one, for sure.

<p id=10951><form>lása<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>oil</tr> floating on top of liquids. <i>Lása kaáyu ang sabaw sa linat-ang manuk,</i> The chicken soup is oily because the chicken is fat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S]</itype> for oil to appear on liquids. <i>Naglasa ang dágat tungud sa gasulína,</i> The sea is covered with a film of oil from the gasoline leak.

<p id=10952><form>lása<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>taste</tr>. <i>Tayam ang lása sa ílang túbig imnunun,</i> Their drinking water has a salty taste. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2346; c5]</itype> be <tr>tasty</tr>. <i>Dì mulása ang útan ug daghan ang sabaw,</i> Vegetable stew does not taste good if there&apos;s too much water. <pos>n</pos> spices. <form>{(&rarr;)|lasa}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6c1]</itype> add or use spices. <i>Mulasa kug tanglad sa linat-ang manuk,</i> I use lemon grass to spice chicken stew.

<p id=10953><form>las-ag</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>puddle</tr>, esp. a dirty one.

<p id=10954><form>lasak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>money</tr> contained in s.t. (slang). <i>Pilay lasak sa pitákang inyung gilunggub?</i> How much was in the bag you snatched?

<p id=10955><form>lasang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>forest</tr>, <tr>jungle</tr>. <number>2</number> the trees on such land. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become a forest. <i>Malasang (mulasang) ning yutáa ug dì nímu trabahúun,</i> This land will become a forest if you don&apos;t cultivate it. <form>{ka-an|kalasangan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>forests</tr>. <form>{-nun|lasangnun}</form> <pos>a</pos> from the forest. <i>Lasangnun nga mga mananap,</i> Jungle animals. <form>{(&larr;)|lásang}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> clear the forest. <i>Nangahánaw ang mga Suban-un sa dihang gilásang (gilasángan) na ang ílang lugar,</i> The Subanos disappeared when their land was deforested.

<p id=10956><form>lásaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for liquids to <tr>flow</tr> or <tr>spread</tr> all over. <i>Mulásaw ang ámung sílung ug mag-ulan,</i> Water flows under our house when it rains. <i>Mu rag túbig ang álak nga naglásaw sa kumbira,</i> Wine flowed like water at the party. <form>{(&rarr;)|lasaw}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>diluted</tr>, <tr>watery</tr>. <i>Lasaw ang miskla sa simintu,</i> The cement is watery. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; b7]</itype> dilute s.t., make a mixture thin. <i>Ayaw lasawa ang kapi,</i> Don&apos;t make the coffee so weak. <form>{&mdash;|lasaw} ug dugù</form> <pos>a</pos> cowardly. <i>Ang lasaw ug dugù níyang manghud wà muambak,</i> His brother was too chicken to jump.

<p id=10957><form>las-ay</form> <pos>a</pos> lacking flavor. <i>Las-ay ang sabaw, kúwag útan,</i> The soup is <tr>tasteless</tr> because it lacks vegetables. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> get to be tasteless. <i>Ang manggang ahat pagkahinug las-ayg lamì,</i> Mangoes which are not tree-ripened have an insipid taste.

<p id=10958><form>lasbi</form> <form>{&mdash;|lasbi} ug</form> <tr>rather</tr> than that [so-and-so] happen (s.t. else is better). <i>Maáyu pa ug bayran nímu ang buhis, lasbi ug mamurúsu ang yútà!</i> Pay your taxes. It&apos;s <tr>better</tr> than to have your land foreclosed. <i>Dawáta na lang ning diyis, lasbig wâ,</i> Just accept this dime. It&apos;s better than nothing. <i>Gihátag na lang nákù, <pb n=587>lasbig kawátun,</i> I just gave it to him. Better than having him steal it.

<p id=10959><form>lasgas</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for a smooth surface to be <tr>rough</tr> with tiny scratches, such that it would make a grating sound if s.t. were rubbed over it. <number>2</number> for corn to be mature (for the husks to become dry and <tr>rough</tr>). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> for a smooth surface to <tr>get roughened</tr>, cause it to do so. <i>Nalasgas ang imabaw sa lamísa kay gikuriskurisan,</i> The table top got all scratched because s.o. rubbed <corr sic="on "></corr>s.t. sharp over it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> get a k.o. scaly formation on the skin, caused by contact with contaminated water. <i>Naglasgas ang ákung pánit kay nagtrabáhu mi sa kanal,</i> My skin is infected with scales because we have been working in the ditch. <number>3</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> for corn to mature (from the notion that the husks get <tr>rough</tr> and wrinkled when the fruit is mature).

<p id=10960><form>lasib</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>slice</tr> into long, thin pieces or slice a thin portion off a larger slab. <i>Lamì ang hamun ug nipsun paglasib,</i> Ham tastes better if you slice it thin. <i>Aku na lay mulasib íning karni nga ipanugba,</i> I will slice off portions from this meat to broil. <i>Basta mag-apritáda lasibun ang karni,</i> <ix>Apritáda</ix> is made with meat cut into slivers.

<p id=10961><form>lasid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>involve</tr>, include with the others, esp. in s.t. unpleasant. <i>Ang kastígu sa Diyus mulasid sa tanan,</i> Everybody gets involved in God&apos;s punishment. <i>Bísag usa ray makasalà, lasirun (ilasid) ming tanan ug búnal ni Máma,</i> Mother whips everybody even if only one of us does s.t. wrong.

<p id=10962><form>lásik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; b8]</itype> <tr>be thrown off</tr> <corr sic=in>for</corr> a distance under a forceful impact. <i>Milásik (nalásik) ug layù ang búla nga íyang gipatíran,</i> He kicked the ball and it went far. <i>Hilasikan (nalasikan) siya sa lápuk,</i> She got mud splashed on her.

<p id=10963><form>lasing</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>drunk</tr>. <i>Kusug na nà siya muisturya ug lasing na kaáyu,</i> He becomes talkative when he is very groggy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13B12; a]</itype> <tr>get drunk</tr>, cause s.o. to do so.

<p id=10964><form>laski</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>be fast</tr>, sprightly in doing s.t. <i>Laski mulakaw,</i> A fast walker. <i>Laski ang láwas,</i> A body that is active and full of energy. <i>Laski siyang muhímug kálù,</i> He is energetic in making hats. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be fast or brisk in doing s.t. <i>Mulaski (malaski) nà siyang sugúun ug suhúlan,</i> She&apos;ll run an errand with alacrity if you pay her. <i>Nagkalaski na ang nagluyang mga manuk,</i> The chickens were weak, but they are regaining their strength now.

<p id=10965><form>laskúta</form> <pos>n</pos> guy <tr>rope</tr>: <number>1</number> a rope, chain, or rod to guide a carabao in plowing. <number>2</number> a rope tied from the boom of a sail to the stern to control the sail. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> use or attach a guy rope to a carabao or to a sail. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make into a guy rope.

<p id=10966><form>laslas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>cut</tr> s.t. with a sawing motion to make a <tr>slash</tr> in it or to remove leaves and small twigs. <i>Gilaslas níya ang mga lukay,</i> He cut off the leaflets from the palm frond. <i>Gilaslasan sa kawatan ang ákung bag,</i> The thief made a gash in my bag. <i>Malaslas na lang nang ímung bàbà ug tinambag, dílì gayud pamatíun,</i> You can give him advice till you&apos;re blue in the face (lit. you can rip your mouth giving him advice), but he won&apos;t listen to you. <pos>n</pos> slash, cracks like slashes.

<p id=10967><form>lasmu</form> <pos>a</pos> having the fishy odor of stagnant water or a body of a person who has not bathed in weeks. <i>Lasmu kaáyu ang kabù kay walà kahugási,</i> The dipper smells bad because it hasn&apos;t been washed. <i>Lasmu kaáyu ang isdà sa batu,</i> Fishes that live in rocks tend to have a revolting smell. <form>way {&mdash;|lasmu}</form> <pos>a</pos> without making a fuss or bother (colloquial). <i>Wà giyud nay lasmung amahána. Muhátag dáyun bísag unsay pangayúun sa anak,</i> That father never makes a fuss. Whatever his son asks for he gets. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> smell fishy or revolting like stagnant water. <i>Mulasmu ang plátung dì sabunan inighugas,</i> Plates develop a fishy smell if you don&apos;t wash them with soap.

<p id=10968><form>lasnit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>tear</tr> s.t. that sticks or is attached off with force. <i>Akuy milasnit sa ngil-ad ritrátu nga ímung gipilit sa bungbung,</i> I stripped off the indecent picture that you had pasted on the wall. <i>Gilasnítan níyag pánid ang nutbuk,</i> He tore a page out of his notebook.

<p id=10969><form>laspa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB126; c1]</itype> do s.t. which brings ill or good to s.t. else besides the thing for which it was intended. <i>Ang inyung binúang nakalaspa (nakapalaspa) ug daghang táwu,</i> Your foolishness has involved lots of people. <i>Kay dihà man ku pagpanghátag sa mga kindi, gilaspa hasta aku,</i> When they gave out the candy, I also got some because I happened to be there. <i>Íyang gilaspa ug larut ang tanum uban sa sagbut,</i> He uprooted the plant together with the weeds.

<p id=10970><form>last<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> in table tennis, one point away from winning. <i>Ug makapuntus siyag kausa daug na, kay last na man ang íyang iskur,</i> If he makes one more point, he wins because he needs only one point. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56]</itype> be a point away from winning.

<p id=10971><form>last<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>las</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10972><form>lastats</form> <pos>n</pos> in basketball, the one who was the last to touch a ball which went out of <pb n=588>bounds. <i>Inyu ang búla kay lastats man ang inyung kuntra,</i> It&apos;s your ball because your opponents touched the ball last. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1236]</itype> be the <tr>last</tr> to touch a ball which went out of bounds.

<p id=10973><form>last díl</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>last deal</tr> in a mahjong or card game before quitting. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> be the last deal in a mahjong or card game. <i>Last dílun (ilast díl) na ni nátù kay buntag na,</i> Let&apos;s make this our last deal because it&apos;s already morning.

<p id=10974><form>lasti</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>carry</tr>, <tr>ride</tr> with s.o. on a bike or other vehicle meant for one. <i>Dílì ka makalasti kay kúlang ug hángin ang gúma,</i> You cannot ride double with me because there isn&apos;t enough air. <number>2</number> <tr>tie</tr> a rock to leaves or fronds which hang down from a raft to keep them from floating. <i>Ang palwa sa lubi gilastíhag batu arun dílì mulutaw,</i> The palm fronds have rocks tied to them so they won&apos;t float.

<p id=10975><form>lastiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>rubber band</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>slingshot</tr> made of a rubber strip. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> <tr>bind</tr> or <tr>fasten</tr> with a rubber band. <i>Ákung gilastikuhan ang usa ka bugkus lápis,</i> I bound the bundle of pencils with a rubber band. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>shoot</tr> with a slingshot. <i>Lastikuhun lang ang kaimítu,</i> Get the star apple with a slingshot. <form>{pa&N;-|panglastiku}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> go hunting with a slingshot. <i>Manglastiku ku ug manuk ihálas,</i> I&apos;ll go hunting wild chickens with a slingshot. <form>{di-|dilastiku}</form> having an elastic garter. <i>Dilastiku ang ákung panti,</i> I am wearing a <corr sic=pantie>panty</corr> with an elastic garter.

<p id=10976><form>lastrip</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>last trip</tr> of the day by passenger vehicles or trains. <number>2</number> one&apos;s trip to the cemetery (humorous). <number>3</number> last chance to get married. <i>Nangartig maáyu si Marta arun dì hibyaan sa lastrip,</i> Martha makes herself up carefully in the hope that she can still make the last train. <i>Bisag lastrip basta pransit,</i> It does not matter if it&apos;s the last trip (last chance to get married), so long as it&apos;s the front seat (that is, a rich husband). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> take the last trip, be the last trip. <i>Mulastrip ku rung hápun,</i> I&apos;ll take the last trip this afternoon. <i>Ug malastrip na ni, musakay na lang ku,</i> If this is the last trip, I&apos;ll just take it. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> <tr>die</tr> (humorous slang).

<p id=10977><form>lásu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ribbon</tr>, <tr>bow</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>lasso</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>tie</tr> into a bow. <i>Lasúha ang listun, ayawg balitùtúa,</i> Lace the shoelace, don&apos;t tie it into a knot. <i>Gilasúhan níya ang íyang dalága,</i> She tied a ribbon in her little girl&apos;s hair. <number>2</number> <tr>lasso</tr>. <i>Lasúha ang kábaw nga nakabuhì,</i> Lasso the carabao that escaped. <number>3</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> get entangled in a rope or vines. <i>Nalásu ang mangangayam sa daghang bágun,</i> The hunter got entangled in the vines.

<p id=10978><form>lasù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>masturbate</tr> (coarse). <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>misuse</tr> s.t. so as to break it. <i>Hala, lasua nang bisiklíta kay ikaw mauy mupaáyu,</i> OK, fool around with that bicycle, and you will have to fix it.

<p id=10979><form>las-u</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> heat s.t. by pouring boiling water on it. <i>Wà pa ku makalas-u sa gikan-an sa pasyinti,</i> I haven&apos;t poured boiling water over the patient&apos;s eating utensils. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; b4]</itype> get <tr>burnt</tr> with s.t. very hot. <i>Nalas-u (nalas-úhan) ang ákung kamut sa bágang ákung nahikapan,</i> I burnt my hand with the coals that I touched.

<p id=10980><form>lasugas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>expose</tr> oneself to the elements. <i>Ngánung naglasugas ka man íning ulan nga dakù?</i> Why are you going out in this heavy rain? <i>Dì maáyung lasugasun nátù ang ínit,</i> It is not good to expose yourself to the sun.

<p id=10981><form>las-ung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>catch</tr> with a noose. <i>Maglas-ung tag tamsi pinaági íning láang,</i> Let&apos;s catch a small bird with this noose. <i>Las-únga nang kabáyung idlas,</i> Catch that wild horse with a lasso. <pos>n</pos> <tr>lasso</tr> or <tr>noose</tr> that tightens when you pull it.

<p id=10982><form>las-ut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bad</tr>, <tr>ugly</tr>. <i>Las-ut kaáyug batásan nang bayhána,</i> That woman has a very bad character. <i>Las-ut ug dagway,</i> Ugly in face. <number>2</number> <tr>shoddy</tr>, badly done, poor in quality. <i>Las-ut kaáyung pagkabúhat ning trabahúa,</i> This piece of work is very badly done. <i>Las-ut nga klási sa panaptun,</i> A lousy k.o. cloth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a2]</itype> get to be bad, ugly, poor in quality, do s.t. badly. <i>Ang kadaghan sa adurnu mauy nakalas-ut (nakapalas-ut) sa íyang sinínà,</i> Her dress was spoiled by the excessive decorations. <i>Ayaw las-úta ning ímung ági,</i> Don&apos;t make your penmanship poor.

<p id=10983><form>las-ut<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>lap-ut<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=10984><form>laswa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; b5]</itype> pour boiling liquid on. <i>Ákung gilaswáan (gilaswáhan) ang giíhaw nga manuk arun himulbúlan,</i> I poured hot water on the slaughtered chicken to get the feathers off. <i>Pagbutukbutuk sa mantíkà nalaswahan (nalaswa) ku,</i> When the fat popped, I got burnt.

<p id=10985><form>lasyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>canal</tr> for diverting water. <number>2</number> grooving plane. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> divert water with a canal. <i>Lasyúha (lasyuha) ang túbig sa tubud arun ipatubig,</i> Divert the water from the river for irrigation. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> cut a groove. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make into a grooving plane. <form>lasyadur</form> <pos>n</pos> grooving plane.

<p id=10986><form>lat</form> <xr>= <sc>usab</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p id=10987><form>láta</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> tin <tr>can</tr>. <i>Láta sa gátas,</i> Can of milk. <number>2</number> a canful of. <i>Usa ka látang biskwit,</i> A canful of biscuits. <form>{-in-(&rarr;)|linata}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>canned goods</tr>. <i>Karni nga linata,</i> Canned meat. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b1c1]</itype> <pb n=589>prepare canned food for a meal. <i>Maglinata lang ta kay kápuy ilútù,</i> Let&apos;s just have canned foods because I&apos;m too lazy to cook. <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> can s.t. <form>{di-|diláta}</form> <xr>= <sc>linata</sc>.</xr> <form>{abri-|abriláta}</form> <pos>n</pos> can opener. <form>{batu-|batuláta}</form> <pos>n</pos> game of kick-the-can.

<p id=10988><form>latà</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for fruits to be extremely soft or rotten. <i>Ipásaw ang mga latà nga prútas,</i> Feed the rotten fruits to the pigs. <number>1a</number> decayed, rotted. <i>Latà na ang halígi,</i> The posts are rotten. <number>2</number> for foods to be cooked, well-done, and soft, <i>Latà na ang linúgaw,</i> The porridge is soft now. <number>3</number> rotten in character. <i>Ang latà nga pamunúan ni Markus,</i> The rotten Marcos administration. <number>3a</number> for a woman to have been had so often she is putrid (coarse). <number>4</number> slow in action as well as thinking power. <i>Unsáun nátù pagkadaug nga latà kaáyu ang kuts?</i> How can we win with a rotten coach? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> become rotten or very soft. <i>Náay ilagà nga nalatà sa tangki,</i> There&apos;s a dead rat that has rotted in the water tank. <i>Nagkalatà ang mga nuug nga pirming gihúmul,</i> The cloth is rotting because it is always kept in water. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ab]</itype> boil food until it is tender. <i>Ayawg lat-a paglútù ang kamúti kay mawálà ang lamì,</i> Don&apos;t cook the sweet potatoes too soft or they will lose their flavor. <i>Lat-i ang karni úsà adubúha,</i> Boil the meat tender before you fry it. <number>3</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> be crushed to flatness. <i>Malatà giyud ka ug hiligsan ka sa pisun,</i> You&apos;ll be crushed flat if you are run over by a steam roller. <number>4</number> <itype>[A3P; b]</itype> maul, gang upon s.o. viciously with blows. <i>Ang kawatan kun hisakpan lat-an sa mga táwu,</i> The people will maul the thief if they catch him. <number>4a</number> <itype>[b1]</itype> defeat badly. <i>Gilat-an ang bangà nílang tím,</i> Their lousy team got a sound thrashing. <number>4b</number> <itype>[b]</itype> subject to vigorous questions or criticisms. <i>Gilat-an ang tistígus sa abugádu,</i> The lawyer absolutely pulverized the witness. <i>Pirming lat-an si Markus sa piryudiku,</i> The newspapers always lambast Marcos. <form>{ka-(&larr;)|kalátà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be present in huge quantities. <i>Nagkalátà lang ang sayup sa íyang papil,</i> There were plenty of mistakes on his paper. <i>Nagkalátà ang lansúnis didtu sa Misámis,</i> There are plenty of lanzones in Misamis. <form>nilat-an, linat-an</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. stewed.

<p id=10989><form>látab</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to young <ix>samúk</ix>: <bio>Gerres spp</bio>.

<p id=10990><form>látab<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b]</itype> for liquids to have oil, usually edible, floating on top. <i>Ang sabaw naglátab sa mantíkà,</i> The soup has streaks of oil floating on top of it.

<p id=10991><form>látab<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> for liquor to be present in inexhaustible quantities. <i>Maglátab ang tubà sa ámù maduminggu,</i> The toddy simply flows at our place on Sundays.

<p id=10992><form>látad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> spread s.t. out under the sun. <i>Ilátad ang mais (kupras) arun mauga,</i> Spread the corn (copra) under the sun. <i>Ilátad ang putì,</i> Bleach the white clothes under the sun. <form>lataran</form> <pos>n</pos> place one spreads things out under the sun.

<p id=10993><form>látag</form> <xr>= <sc>látad</sc>.</xr>

<p id=10994><form>latagaw</form> (from <ix>tagaw</ix>) a <tr>wanderer</tr>, rambling about without destination. <i>Ang latagaw dílì mahimuyù,</i> A vagabond won&apos;t stay in one place. <i>Latagaw ang ílang isturya,</i> Their conversation wandered from one topic to another. <i>Latagaw ug mata,</i> Having eyes which rove all over. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13B2; b(1)]</itype> wander aimlessly about, without destination. <i>Mulatagaw (malatagaw) ang irù ug dílì pakan-un,</i> A dog roves about if you don&apos;t feed it. <i>Síging yawyaw ang maistra piru naglatagaw ang ákung hunàhúnà,</i> The teacher kept talking away but my mind wandered. <i>Bisan unsang dapíta ang íyang gilatagawan karun,</i> He roams about any place he feels like going.

<p id=10995><form>latak</form> <pos>a</pos> standing out <tr>clear</tr>. <i>Latak kaáyu ang panti,</i> You can clearly see her panties (through her skirt). <i>Latak kaáyu ang litra sa aybiim,</i> The <xr><sc>ibm</sc></xr> typewriter types clearly. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)]</itype> for a mark, outline or imprint to stand out clear.

<p id=10996><form>látak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B36]</itype> for fruits, flowers, or leaves to fall. <i>Malátak ang mga mangga kun hinug na,</i> Mangoes fall off the tree when they are ripe. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN]</itype> lower (not cast) fishing equipment into the sea. <i>Anhi ta dinhi manlátak sa báling,</i> We&apos;ll lower the net in this place.

<p id=10997><form>latang</form> <pos>a</pos> soft and <tr>ripe</tr> to the point just prior to getting rotten. <i>Tam-is kaáyu ang búngan ug latang na,</i> The green table bananas are very sweet when they are ripened soft. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become very ripe.

<p id=10998><form>lat-ang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>miss</tr> or <tr>skip</tr> a chance in a series. <i>Ug makalat-ang kag tumar sa tablítas, maburus ka dáyun,</i> If you miss taking a pill you will get pregnant. <i>Lat-angig duha ka linya úsà isulat ang uluhan,</i> Leave two lines before writing the title. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> for s.t. to be placed in between s.t. else. <i>Upisína sa prinsipal ang nakalat-ang sa ámung duha ka kwartu,</i> The principal&apos;s office is between our two rooms. <i>Lat-ángi ug munggus ang mga tudling sa mais,</i> Plant mung beans between the rows of corn. <form>lat-anglat-ang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> for things to be in a series so that they alternate; put them so. <i>Naglat-anglat-ang ang mga babáyi ug láki paglingkud,</i> The boys and girls are seated alternately.

<p id=10999><form>latas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>cross</tr> or <tr>pass through</tr>. <i>Latasun <pb n=590>nímu nang subáa padúng sa íla,</i> You have to cross that river to their place. <number>2</number> pass or go through experiences. <i>Mga kalisud nga íyang gilatas,</i> Difficulties he passed through. <form>{&mdash;|latas} sa</form> <tr>across</tr>. <i>Mipánaw aku latas sa kadagátan,</i> I travelled across oceans. <form>{-unun|latasunun}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. to be crossed.

<p id=11000><form>lat-as</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b5c]</itype> <number>1</number> go straight across s.t., take a <tr>short cut</tr>. <i>Milat-as (nanglat-as) kug ági sa plása arun maapsan ka,</i> I walked across the plaza to catch up with you. <i>Dílì mahímung lat-asan ang lún,</i> You&apos;re not allowed to take a short cut across the lawn. <number>2</number> <tr>go across</tr>. <i>Mulat-as úsà kag subà adisir ka muabut sa íla,</i> You have to cross a river before you get to their house. <form>{-anan|lat-asanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> path, road for taking a short cut.

<p id=11001><form>látay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S; b5c]</itype> go over a narrow walkway. <i>Milátay sa andamyu ang mga pasahíru,</i> The passengers walked over the gangplank. <i>Usa ka gamayng alambri ang gilatáyan (gilátay) sa sirkadur,</i> It was only a small piece of wire the acrobat walked over. <number>1a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|látay} sa usa ka lugas lánut</formx> be precarious (passing over a single strand). <i>Ang kahimtang sa gikidnap naglatay sa usa ka lugas lánut,</i> The kidnap victim&apos;s life is hanging by a thread. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2S; b(1)]</itype> run, flow through a tube or tube-like thing. <i>Dúnay dugung Aliman nga naglatay sa íyang kaugatan,</i> There is German blood running in her veins. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> for a feeling to creep through. <i>Ang kabugnaw sa íyang nahikapan milátay sa íyang tudlù ngadtu sa íyang buktun,</i> The coldness of what he touched crept from his fingers up to his arm. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23; c]</itype> add a new debt to one&apos;s current account. <i>Ilátay na lang ning útang sa ákung ristanti,</i> Just add this debt to my bill. <pos>n</pos> small wooden bridge for pedestrian or vehicles. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|latayan}, {-anan|latayanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> narrow bridge or passageway to walk over.

<p id=11002><form>latbù</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>fast-growing</tr>. <i>Latbù kaáyug tinubuan ang bátà nga daghang sustansiya,</i> A child grows fast if he gets good food. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> grow or develop fast. <i>Mulatbù (malatbù) ang tinubuan sa tanum ug abunúhan,</i> Plants grow fast if they are fertilized. <i>Nagkalatbù kining syudára,</i> This city is growing by leaps and bounds.

<p id=11003><form>latbug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> throw or knock s.t. heavy, using force, usually with an initial backward swing. <i>Tabangan nátug latbug ang patayng irù sa dágat,</i> Let&apos;s all help throw the dead dog into the sea. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> for the mind to wander away from the subject or situation at hand. <i>Samtang nagklási mi, layù ug gilatbúgan ang ákung hunàhúnà,</i> My mind wandered far while we were in class.

<p id=11004><form>lathang</form> <pos>n</pos> space between two adjacent teeth which are not close together. <i>Ayaw ug ngísi kay ngil-ad tan-áwun ang lathang,</i> Don&apos;t smile because the spaces between your teeth are ugly.

<p id=11005><form>lati</form> <xr>= <sc>nati</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11006><form>latíba</form> <xr>= <sc>labatíba</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11007><form>látid</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>line</tr> which delineates an area or <tr>boundary</tr>. <i>Sa taliwálà sa dálan dúnay látid nga putì,</i> A white line is drawn in the middle of the road. <i>Sapà ang látid sa duha ka lungsud,</i> A river is the boundary between the two towns. <number>2</number> path, plan by which s.t. is carried out. <number>3</number> rules, laws. <i>Dúnay mga látid ang pagdúlag baskitbul,</i> Basketball is played according to set rules. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> delineate an area, esp. where s.t. is to be built. <i>Pagkúhà ug lambu kay maglátid ta sa ámung balayan,</i> Get some string because we will stake out where the walls for the house are to be put. <number>2</number> plan or arrange a method to be followed or done. <i>Ang mga Libiral naglátid sa ílang buhátun sa kampanya,</i> The Liberals were laying out plans for their campaign. <i>Mauy átung pagasubáyun ang nalátid sa átung kapaláran,</i> What fate has decreed for us to do is what we must follow. <number>3</number> establish laws or rules.

<p id=11008><form>latigu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>whip</tr>. <i>Latigu sa kabáyù,</i> Horsewhip. <number>2</number> punishment inflicted with a whip. <i>Nakadawat ug latigu kay nakasalà man,</i> He got a whipping because he did s.t. <number>3</number> k.o. aerial orchid with small, violet flowers and long, whip-like projections. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <number>1</number> whip. <i>Gilatigu sa kutsíru ang kabáyù kay misúki,</i> The rig driver flogged his horse because it balked. <number>2</number> attack with scathing criticism. <i>Ang kandidátu sa upusisiyun milatigu sa kaatbang,</i> The opposition candidate lashed out at his opponent.

<p id=11009><form>latik</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>syrup</tr> made of sugar and water or sugar and coconut milk. <number>2</number> sweet prepared from seedless breadfruit (<ix>kulu</ix>) cooked in syrup mixed with coconut milk. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1B23(1); a]</itype> make syrup, for syrup to develop. <i>Ilúnud ang ságing kun mulatik (malatik) na ang gipabúkal nga kámay,</i> Put in the bananas when the sugar turns into syrup. <number>2</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> put syrup on food. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> prepare the <ix>latik</ix> made from breadfruit. <form>{-in-|linatik}</form> <xr>= <sc>latik</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr>

<p id=11010><form>látik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> for a school of fish to swim near the surface and disturb it. <i>Andáma ang inyung pasul kay nía na ang bansíkul naglátik,</i> Prepare your lines because there is a school of mackerel thrashing around on the surface.

<p id=11011><form>latin</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>Latin</tr>. <number>1a</number> special k.o. prayer with <pb n=591>magical effects. <i>May nakat-unan kung latin nga sumpà sa kasukù,</i> I know of a special prayer that works against anger. <number>2</number> a tongue-lashing. <i>Ayaw paglangaylángay ug paúlì kay ang latin sa ímung asáwa taas ra ba kaáyu,</i> Don&apos;t tarry on your way home. Your wife&apos;s tongue-lashings are no joke. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> speak Latin. <number>1a</number> utter a special magical prayer. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> give s.o. a tongue-lashing. <i>Gilatinan ku ni Máma pagpaúlì nákù,</i> Mother gave me a good tongue-lashing when I got home.

<p id=11012><form>lating</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b4(1)]</itype> for a missile to <tr>ricochet</tr>. <i>Ang bála dílì makalating kay húmuk ang yútà,</i> The bullet cannot bounce off because the ground is soft. <i>Nalatingan ku sa bála,</i> The bullet ricocheted off on me.

<p id=11013><form>láting</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B246]</itype> for a wound or other injury to <tr>swell</tr> because of an infection. <i>Muláting ang samad ug ibuwad sa ínit,</i> A wound swells if you let the sun get on it.

<p id=11014><form>látu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126; a2]</itype> have so much of s.t. that one loses pleasure in it or it fails to have the normal effect. <i>Latúhun ta kag pakáun ug mangga,</i> I&apos;ll give you so many mangoes you will get sick of them. <i>Nalátu na ku sa ímung pangatarúngan,</i> I can&apos;t believe your sob stories any longer. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2PB12; a1]</itype> feel nauseated from exposure to s.t., cause s.t. to do so. <i>Dugà sa tabákù ang ilátu sa tamalà,</i> Stupefy the octopus with tobacco-leaf juice.

<p id=11015><form>latù</form> <pos>n</pos> a branching, semi-transparent <tr>seaweed</tr>, greenish in color and edible. It has small, rounded growths on the branches which pop when pressed.

<p id=11016><form>latuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b(1)]</itype> have a blank and stupid look on the face. <i>Naglatuk lang ang tuntu. Wà makasabut,</i> The idiot just stared blankly. He didn&apos;t understand. <i>Gilatukan lang ku sa íyang mata dihang ákung gisultíhan,</i> She just stared at me blankly when I talked to her.

<p id=11017><form>latuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cassava flour</tr>, very fine, white sediment from cassava juice.

<p id=11018><form>latun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> cylindrical <tr>pail</tr> with the mouth as big as the bottom. <number>2</number> drum for petroleum products.

<p id=11019><form>latundan</form> <xr>= <sc>alitundan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11020><form>latung</form> <pos>a</pos> very <tr>ripe</tr>, bordering on over-ripeness. <i>Húmuk na kaáyu ang kapáyas kay latung na man,</i> The papaya has turned soft because it is very ripe. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become very ripe.

<p id=11021><form>latungdan</form> <xr>= <sc>alitundan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11022><form>latus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>whip</tr> with anything flexible. <i>Dílì giyud tu mulatus ang ámung amahan apan mahadluk giyud mi níya,</i> My father never whipped us but we feared him. <i>Ang mga madri maglatus sa ílang kaugalíngun inigka Byirnis Santu arun pagsakripisyu,</i> The nuns flog themselves on Good Fridays to mortify themselves. <number>2</number> attack, criticize severely. <i>Kanúnay níyang latusun si Markus sa íyang lindug,</i> He always criticizes Marcos in his column.

<p id=11023><form>latuy</form> <pos>a</pos> for edible beans or pea pods to be tender. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> cook s.t. together with tender pods. <i>Latuyi ang linat-an nga báka,</i> Put tender string beans into the beef stew.

<p id=11024><form>lau</form> <xr>= <sc>lalau</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11025><form>laubláub</form> <pos>a</pos> increasing and diminishing in intensity periodically. <i>Laubláub ang hilánat íning batáa,</i> This child&apos;s fever rises and falls. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B456]</itype> for s.t. to increase and diminish in intensity periodically. <i>Mulaubláub giyud ang nigusyu,</i> Business <tr>fluctuates</tr>, as you would expect. <i>Maglaubláub ang pagguwà íning tabuguk,</i> <ix>Tabuguk</ix> octopuses appear in great numbers from time to time. <i>Ang tilíik sa sirína naglaubláub,</i> The wailing of the siren rises and falls.

<p id=11026><form>laud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>tie</tr> s.t. to s.t. letting the rope go around it several times before knotting it. <i>Ang kunduktur mauy mulaud sa mga kargamintu sa stipburd,</i> The conductor ties loads to the running board. <i>Ang táwung gikastígu gilaud sa halígi ug gipahulmigasan,</i> The offender was tied to a post and left to the ants.

<p id=11027><form>laug</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>liking</tr> s.t. very much and, therefore, disliking to share it. <i>Laug kaáyu kug ayis krim,</i> I&apos;m very fond of ice cream. <i>Laug siyag bayli,</i> She loves to dance. <number>2</number> <tr>selfish</tr>. <i>Laug nga batáa, dílì manghátag,</i> What a selfish child. She won&apos;t give anything to anyone else. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be <tr>greedy</tr>. <form>{(&larr;)|láug}<sub>1</sub></form> <itype>[B12]</itype> take a strong liking to s.t. <i>Nía rag ímung libru. Way naláug,</i> Here&apos;s your damn book. Who wants it anyway (lit. no one has taken a liking to it).

<!-- láug_1 is in article above -->

<p id=11028><form>láug<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> go out to go about with no particular purpose. <i>Unsay ímung giláug didtu? Dúna kay gibisitáhan?</i> What did you stroll over to their place for? Did you visit s.o.? <number>2</number> get out of a place, <tr>flee</tr>. <i>Miláug ang manuk,</i> The chicken flew the coop. <i>Laúgan ka sa ímung mga sákup kun mag-inistriktu ka,</i> Your employees will leave you if you are too strict. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|laugan}</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to go out to roam about. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be a roamer.

<p id=11029><form>laugdu</form> (from <ix>ugdu</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <tr>pile</tr>, <tr>heap</tr> up. <i>Nagkalaugdu ang mga sagbut nga wà kuháa sa mga basuríru,</i> The garbage is piling up because it hasn&apos;t been collected by the garbage men.

<p id=11030><form>láum</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>expect</tr> s.t. hopefully. <pb n=592><i>Nagláum ku nga mausab pa siya,</i> I still have hopes that he&apos;ll change. <i>Laúmi ang íyang pagbálik,</i> Hope for his return. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; bc5]</itype> rely. <i>Makaláum ba ku sa ímung sáad?</i> Can I trust your promises? <i>Kining lúti ang bugtung námung gilaúman sa panginabúhì,</i> This small lot is our sole means of support. <form>{ka-an|kalaúman}, {pag-|pagláum}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>hope</tr>. <i>Nawad-an na siyag pagláum sa kinabúhì,</i> He has lost hope in life. <i>Kini rang midisináha ang ákung pagláum,</i> This medicine is my only hope. <form>{ma-un|malaúmun}</form> <pos>a</pos> full of hope.

<p id=11031><form>laumlaum</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> prolong one&apos;s <tr>stay</tr> in a certain place for a purpose. <i>Naglaumláum ang mga batan-un human sa pangadyì tungud sa bayli,</i> The young men who joined the prayers stayed late for the dance. <i>Gilaumlaúman nákù sa Manílà ang pagpaluap sa ákung apuyintmint,</i> I stayed in Manila for some time to follow up on my appointment.

<p id=11032><form>laun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>aged</tr>: <number>1</number> for s.t. that gets better as it grows old to be mature. <number>1a</number> mellowed, aged. <i>Bínung laun,</i> Aged wine. <i>Tabákung laun,</i> Mellowed tobacco. <number>1b</number> for a plant or animal commonly found immature to grow to its full extent and thus improve. <i>Laun nga aháan ang midáwi kaníya,</i> He caught a full-grown giant snapper. <number>2</number> old stock left over from the previous harvest. <i>Unáhug dispatsar ang laun,</i> Get rid of the old stock first. <number>3</number> old maid (humorous). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3; b4(1)]</itype> for s.t. to age. <i>Ang kamúti nga malaun (mulaun) sa uma dagkù ug tam-is,</i> If you leave sweet potatoes in the ground to maturity, they will be big and sweet. <i>Wà makalaun ang tabákù kay anam,</i> The tobacco didn&apos;t get a chance to age because they kept smoking it as it matured. <i>Ug subra ka kaistrikta, hilaunan kag dalága,</i> If you are too strict, your daughter is going to turn into an old maid on you.

<p id=11033><form>launduk</form> <xr>= <sc>taliunduk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11034><form>laung</form> <xr>= <sc>ingun<sub>2</sub></sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p id=11035><form>laus</form> <pos>a</pos> past one&apos;s peak or popularity. <i>Laus na ang buksidur,</i> The boxer is past his prime. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be past one&apos;s peak or popularity.

<p id=11036><form>laúsag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4]</itype> for undesirable characteristics to <tr>worsen</tr>. <i>Milaúsag ang íyang kakiriwan,</i> His thievery got <tr>worse</tr>. <i>Naglaúsag ang pagkapilyu sa bátà,</i> The child misbehaved more and more.

<p id=11037><form>lauy</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lacking</tr> <tr>sleep</tr>. <i>Lauy ku kay nagbilar ku gabíi,</i> I lack sleep because I kept vigil last night. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> lack sleep. <form>{(&larr;)|láuy}<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> stay up late at night. <i>Nagláuy siya tungud sa íyang paynals,</i> He is staying up late to study for his finals.

<p id=11038><form>láuy<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> go, see to <tr>visit</tr> or to see how s.t. is doing. <i>Muláuy (magláuy) ku sa ákung higála sa uspital,</i> I will visit my friend in the hospital. <i>Laúyun (iláuy) nátù ang kamaisan sa walug kun túa na ta sa búkid,</i> While we are in the mountains we will go see how the corn we planted in the valley is doing.

<p id=11039><form>láwà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>spider</tr>. <form>lawàlawà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>spider web</tr>, <tr>cobweb</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> <number>1</number> be filled with cobwebs. <i>Gilawàlawaan na lang ang ímung makinilyang way gáwì,</i> Your typewriter is all covered with cobwebs because it&apos;s never used. <number>2</number> for a dying man&apos;s eyes to become dull and blurred (lit. have cobwebs in one&apos;s eyes).

<p id=11040><form>láwà<sub>2</sub></form> (from <ix>walà</ix>) not have (slang). <i>Láwà nu siyay takwal,</i> He says he&apos;s out of dough.

<p id=11041><form>lawáan</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to a number of forest trees producing inexpensive timber, widely used in construction: <bio>Pentacme</bio> and <bio>Shorea spp</bio>. <form>{&mdash;|lawáan} nga putì</form>: <bio>Pentacme contorta</bio>. <form>{&mdash;|lawáan} pula</form>: <bio>Shorea negrosensis</bio>.

<p id=11042><form>láwag</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fishing with lights. Several boats illuminate a wide area and when the fish appear, the boats gradually converge, drawing the fish into a small area from which they can be scooped up with a net.

<p id=11043><form>lawak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>room</tr> in a house or building. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> make a room. <i>Gilawakan ku ang sílung pára sa mga gamit,</i> I made a room in the basement for the tools.

<p id=11044><form>láwang</form> <pos>a</pos> for an area to be <tr>wide</tr>, <tr>spacious</tr>. <i>Mas láwang ang tinisan kay sa baskitan,</i> A tennis court is wider than a basketball court. <pos>n</pos> space across, width. <i>Pila ka mitrus ang láwang sa kalsáda?</i> How many meters wide is the road? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B23]</itype> be, become wide or spacious. <form>lawanglawang, lawangláwang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4]</itype> <number>1</number> have too much space for the amount of material put in. <i>Naglawanglawang ang trák padúlung sa syudad kay way pasahíru,</i> The truck went to the city nearly empty because there were no passengers. <number>2</number> be in a place which is too spacious. <i>Maglawanglawang ta sa dakung balay,</i> We&apos;ve got room to burn in that huge house. <number>3</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> make s.t. wider. <i>Gilawanglawang ang silya sa manidy&icaron;r,</i> The manager&apos;s chair was given a wider seat.

<p id=11045><form>lawanlawan</form> <xr>= <sc>lawanglawang</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>lawang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11046><form>láwas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>body</tr> of human or animal. <form>taput {&mdash;|láwas}</form> the clothes on one&apos;s back. <i>Ang ákung nasalb&acaron;r sa súnug ang taput láwas,</i> All I could save from the fire was the clothes on my back. <number>2</number> the frame or main part of a structure. <i>Láwas sa ayruplánu,</i> Fuselage of the plane. <i>Ang láwas sa angkla,</i> The shank of the anchor. <number>3</number> one&apos;s turn in a game where the players perform one at a time in succession. <pb n=593><i>Sa bíku kamuy páris ug aku rang usa, apan duhay láwas ku,</i> It&apos;ll be you two against me in hopscotch, but I get two turns. <number>4</number> <formx>{&mdash;|láwas} ug katarúngan</formx> body and reasoning, all one arms oneself in fighting for justice (as opposed to money, weapons). <i>Láwas ug katarúngan ang ákung iatúbang sa ímung lantúgì,</i> I come here not to fight, but to talk it out (offer my reasoning). <number>5</number> one who takes another person&apos;s place, performing his functions in his absence. <i>Ang kinamagulángang babáyi mauy láwas sa íyang inahang patay na,</i> The eldest daughter took the mother&apos;s place when she died. <number>6</number> tantamount to, as good as. <i>Sa pag-insultu nímu sa ákung bána láwas ug aku ang ímung gipasakitan,</i> If you insult my husband it is the same as if you hurt me. <i>Bisag usa ray ákung anak, láwas gihápun ug tulu kay duha may ákung binuhì,</i> I have only one child, but it is good as three because I have two adopted ones. <number>6a</number> good for. <i>Miurdir kug pagkáun láwas ug tulu ka táwu,</i> I&apos;ll order food enough for three persons. <number>7a</number> physical strength, resistance. <i>Tungud niíning ákung sakit walà na akuy láwas nga ikatrabáhu,</i> Because of my illness I do not have the strength to work. <number>7b</number> one&apos;s single body, all that one has to dispose of in working (and no more). <i>Ug ákù ang tanan, unsa pa may ákung láwas?</i> How could I possibly do everything. I don&apos;t have but two hands. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B145]</itype> have a certain k.o. body. <i>Kaniadtu nagláwas sab kug sáma kalísun kanímu karun,</i> Formerly, I had as nice a body as you have now. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> make a body for some structure. <i>Kining kahúya ígù rang makaláwas sa píkas kílid sa sakayan,</i> These boards are only enough to make one side of the boat. <form>{(&rarr;)|lawas}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>internode</tr>, section of a plant stem between two successive nodes. <i>Tag-as kaáyug lawas kining ímung tubu,</i> Your sugar cane stalks have long internodes. <number>2</number> strands of hair above the base. <form>{pa&N;-|panglawas}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> be in the upper part of the strands of hair. <i>Kasagáran manlawas ang lusà basta mamusà na,</i> Usually nits stay in the upper part of the strands of hair when they hatch. <form>{-in-|lináwas}, {-in-(&rarr;)|linawas}</form> <pos>n</pos> in person, one&apos;s physical presence. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> appear personally. <i>Mulinawas pagsalída si Súsan Rúsis,</i> Susan Roces will appear personally. <form>{hi-|hiláwas}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ANC12; bN]</itype> have sexual intercourse outside of marriage. <i>Dì mahilangit kadtung manghiláwas,</i> Those who <tr>fornicate</tr> will not go to heaven. <i>Dì ka makighiláwas sa mga way bunyag,</i> Lie not with the heathen. <form>{panghi-|panghiláwas}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fornication</tr>. <form>makighi-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>fornicator</tr>. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|lawasan}</form> <pos>a</pos> physically <tr>well-built</tr>, <tr>stocky</tr>. <form>{ka-an|kalawásan}</form> <pos>n</pos> the whole body. <form>{pa&N;-|pangláwas}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>health</tr>; general well-being of a person or animal. <form>{tagi-|tagiláwas}, {tag-|tagláwas}</form> <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s person, what k.o. body one has. <i>Náa ra sa tagiláwas ug makaagwanta ba sa bug-at nga trabáhu,</i> It depends on the person if he can stand hard work. <form>lawasnun</form> <pos>a</pos> pertaining to the body or flesh. <i>Lawasnun nga kalimpiyu,</i> Cleanliness of the body. <i>Lawasnun nga kahínam,</i> Desires of the flesh.

<p id=11047><form>láway</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>saliva</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|láway} ray puhúnan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>persuasive talk</tr> (lit. spit was all that was used). <i>Láway ray ákung puhúnan áni kay ákù siyang giulug-ulúgan,</i> I got this by fast talk because I soft-soaped him in giving it to me. <form>{(&rarr;)|laway}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B46]</itype> <tr>drool</tr>. <i>Milaway dáyun ákung bàbà pagkakità nákù sa hilawng mangga,</i> My mouth watered when I saw the green mangoes. <i>Maglaway siya nga matúlug,</i> He drools when he sleeps. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1456]</itype> feel very desirous of s.t. one cannot have. <i>Maglaway ta áning mga dátù nga makapalit bísag unsa,</i> All we can do is drool at what rich people have. <form>{pa-(&rarr;)|palaway}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; a1]</itype> make s.o. desire s.t. strongly which he cannot have. <i>Dì úsà ku magminyù, magpalaway ku úsà sa mga laláki,</i> I won&apos;t get married yet. I&apos;ll just let men drool over me. <i>Ímu lang kung gipalaway sa ímung tíbi,</i> You were just making me envious of your TV set. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|lawayan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a <tr>folk doctor</tr> who treats patients with his saliva. <number>2</number> k.o. carangoid fish, shiny-white in color, that spits a transparent, sticky liquid. <form>lawaylaway</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to various whelks.

<p id=11048><form>law-ay</form> <pos>a</pos> offensive to decency, revolting to the taste. <i>Gisinsur ang law-ay nga libru,</i> The obscene book was censored. <i>Law-ay kaáyung tan-áwun ang dakù nga magbinátà,</i> It&apos;s disgusting to see a grown-up act like a child. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be <tr>lewd</tr>, <tr>obscene</tr>. <i>Nagkalaw-ay ang mga sini karun,</i> Movies are all lewd nowadays. <i>Gilaw-ayan ku sa báhù sa patay,</i> The odor of the corpse was revolting to me.

<p id=11049><form>lawgaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>touch</tr>, stir up s.t. with the bare hands. <i>Panghunaw kay milawgaw ka man sa pasaw,</i> Wash your hands because you stirred the slop with them. <i>Ayawg lawgáwa nang túbig imnunun,</i> Don&apos;t stick your hands in the drinking water. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1]</itype> be all mixed up, <tr>confused</tr>. <i>Naglawgaw ang iksplikasiyun. Wà kung kasabut,</i> His explanation was all mixed up. I couldn&apos;t understand it. <number>2a</number> get to be no good. <i>Nalawgaw ang ílang sáyaw kay yabag ang dúyug,</i> Their dance number was unsuccessful because the music was out of tune. <number>3</number> <itype>[AN]</itype> mix into s.t. and disturb its orderly performance. <i>Ngánung gilawgaw man nímu si Pidru nga nangamural?</i> Why did you butt in on Pedro just <pb n=594>when he was proposing? <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> falling below good standards. <i>Lawgaw tawhána puru lang sáad,</i> He is no good. He is all promises. <number>2</number> <tr>mixed up</tr> and <tr>chaotic</tr>. <i>Lawgaw tung iliksiyúna, dúnay pálit,</i> The election was chaotic with rampant vote-buying. <number>3</number> creating disturbance or confusion in an otherwise orderly performance. <i>Ay siyag paintraha sa sáyaw kay lawgaw,</i> Don&apos;t let him take part in the folk dance because he tends to bungle. <form>{ma&N;-r-|manglalawgaw}</form> <pos>n</pos> one who habitually creates trouble and confusion in otherwise smooth and peaceful proceedings.

<p id=11050><form>láwi, láwì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sickle feather</tr>, one of the long curved feathers in the tail of domestic cocks. <form>lawiláwi</form> s.t. like a tail feather. <i>Lawiláwi sa kúgun,</i> The flower of the cogon grass. <form>lawían, lawíhan</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to fish of various families that have filamentous projections, usually from the fins.

<p id=11051><form>lawig</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>pasture</tr> livestock. <i>Ilawig ang kábaw sa lagúna,</i> Pasture the carabao in the meadow. <number>1a</number> give an additional length of line. <i>Lawigi ang tugut sa tabánug,</i> Pay out more string to the kite. <i>Lawigi ang kábaw arun daghan ang masabsab,</i> Give the carabao more rope so that it can graze over a wide area. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> tie an anchor to a boat. <i>Lawigi ang sakayan arun dì madala sa sulug,</i> Keep the boat anchored so the current won&apos;t carry it away. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>sail</tr>. <i>Naglawig na ang barku pagdasmag sa unus,</i> The boat was on the high seas when a storm hit us. <i>Kadagátan nga gilawigan sa barku,</i> The seas the ship sailed across. <number>2a</number> <tr>travel</tr> in general. <i>Bag-u ka pa gánì nahiulì mulawig na pud ka?</i> You have just arrived and now you are going to take another trip? <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> cord tied to s.t. <number>1a</number> <tr>anchor rope</tr>. <number>1b</number> tether <tr>rope</tr>. <number>1c</number> cord wound around the neck. <i>Taas ug lawig ang íyang pag-antus,</i> She has a long chain of suffering tied around her neck. <number>2</number> <tr>tentacles</tr>. <form>{-an|lawigan}</form> place s.t. is tethered. <form>{-l-an(&larr;)|lalawígan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>province</tr> (lit. place one sails to). <form>{-um-(&larr;)|lumáwig}</form> <pos>n</pos> a slender thread which, in folk belief, attaches the placenta (<ix>inunlan</ix>) to the womb (<ix>matris</ix>) s.w. in the vicinity of the umbilical cord (<ix>púsud</ix>) and is the passageway for food from the mother to the baby. The <ix>lumáwig</ix> is considered very delicate, and if there is intense bleeding during childbirth it is believed due to a rupture of the <ix>lumáwig</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> have one&apos;s <ix>lumáwig</ix> ruptured and then suffer intense bleeding.

<p id=11052><form>lawiláwi</form> <pos>n</pos> variety of croton (<ix>kalípay</ix>).

<p id=11053><form>lawis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>spit</tr>, a point of low land extending from the shore into the water. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6]</itype> <tr>jut out</tr>. <i>May unud nga daw tudlù ang milawis sa kumagkù sa táwu,</i> A finger-like growth is sticking out from the man&apos;s thumb. <i>Nasungkù aku sa naglawis nga kawáyan,</i> I bumped my head on a piece of bamboo that was sticking out. <i>Gibaligyà ang yútà nga nalawis sa kinadak-an sa yútà,</i> They sold the lot that was jutting out from the main portion of their land.

<p id=11054><form>lawiswis</form> <xr>= <sc>alawiswis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11055><form>lawit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B456]</itype> for s.t. almost cut off to dangle. <i>Naglawit ang ákung tudlù kay nabakgutan sa sanggut,</i> My finger is dangling because I nearly cut it off with a sickle. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> hang, cling barely or precariously to s.t. <i>Naglawit ang kinabúhì sa masakitun sa usa ka lugas lánut,</i> The patient&apos;s life is hanging by a single thread. <form>lawitlawit</form> <pos>n</pos> pieces of tissue hanging from cuts of meat.

<p id=11056><form>lawitan</form> <pos>n</pos> the two boats holding the ends of the net in a k.o. fishing with a large net (<ix>sinsúru</ix>) where the fish are driven into a small area by small boats (<ix>buntúlan</ix>) converging.

<p id=11057><form>lawlaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>slacken</tr> a line. <i>Maglawlaw ku áning mikubit arun dì mabugtù ang pasul,</i> I am paying out extra fishing line so the line won&apos;t break. <i>Ayaw ilawlaw (lawláwa) ang hayhayan,</i> Don&apos;t make the clothesline so loose it sags. <number>1a</number> <itype>[B]</itype> get to be loose, <tr>sagging</tr>. <i>Mulawlaw ang kurtína kun luagun ang hílu,</i> The curtain will sag if you make the string loose. <number>1b</number> <itype>[AB]</itype> for trousers to be cut loose at the crotch, wear trousers cut loose at the crotch. <i>Ságad sa tigúlang maglawlaw ang kinarsunisan,</i> Most old people wear pants loose at the crotch. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b3]</itype> go round the edge of s.t. instead of directly across or along it. <i>Manglawlaw tag ági diri kay dì man katadlasan ang ílang baul,</i> We&apos;ll have to go around this way because they won&apos;t let people cut across their field. <pos>a</pos> be cut loose at the crotch. <form>{pa-|palawlaw}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> let time pass idly by. <i>Ang nagpalawlaw sa panahun way maáni,</i> Those who waste their time doing nothing will have nothing to harvest.

<p id=11058><form>lawlaw<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> sardines which have been preserved in a large quantity of salt, such that not all the salt is dissolved in the juices of the fish, and the result is a dry fish enveloped with fishy grains of salt.

<p id=11059><form>lawngun</form> <xr>= <sc>lalungun</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>lálung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11060><form>lawril</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bay leaves</tr> used as a spice.

<p id=11061><form>lawriyat</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. Chinese banquet with ten or more courses tendered on special occasions.

<p id=11062><form>lawsi</form> <number>1</number> poor, <tr>sloppy</tr>, bad in quality or appearance. <i>Lawsi siya mamisti,</i> She dresses poorly. <i>Lawsi kadtung pagkáun,</i> That was lousy food. <number>2</number> <tr>boring</tr> and <tr>uninteresting</tr>. <i>Lawsing parti,</i> A lousy party. <i>Lawsi tung salidáha,</i> <pb n=595>That was a lousy movie. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a12b6]</itype> be, become lousy.

<p id=11063><form>lawting</form> <pos>n</pos> attic consisting of a shelf built underneath a roof and which runs part of the distance covered by the roof. It is used as a storage place or sleeping area. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> make a <ix>lawting</ix>.

<p id=11064><form>lawud</form> <pos>n</pos> deep open <tr>sea</tr>. <form>pitu ka {&mdash;|lawud}</form> <tr>seven seas</tr>. <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>lábang</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2NP; a]</itype> <number>1</number> go out into the <tr>deep sea</tr>, usually to fish. <i>Ug maáyu ang panahun mulawud (manglawud) ku karung gabíi,</i> If the weather is good, I will go out to sea tonight. <i>Kinahanglang lawrun ta giyud ang malasugi,</i> You have to go to the deep to get the sailfish. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> <xr>= <sc>lawudláwud</sc>.</xr> <form>lawudláwud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> be like a sea. <i>Naglawudláwud ang halapad nga humayan,</i> The vast rice field is like a sea. <form>{i-(&larr;)|iláwud}</form> <pos>n</pos> place toward town and away from rural areas. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; ac6P]</itype> go, bring s.t. toward town. <form>{i-|ilawud}</form> <xr>= <sc>iláwud</sc>, <ix>v</ix>.</xr> <form>kalawran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>seas</tr>. <form>kinalawran</form> <pos>n</pos> deepest part of the sea. <form>lawudnun</form> <pos>n</pos> of the seas.

<p id=11065><form>láwug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2SB]</itype> for stiff and long things to <tr>warp</tr> or <tr>bend</tr>. <i>Miláwug ang tabla human initi,</i> The board warped after having been exposed to the sun. <form>{(&rarr;)|lawug}</form> <pos>n</pos> long bent things.

<p id=11066><form>láwung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lionfish</tr>, a brightly colored fish of coral reefs with very poisonous dorsal fins: <bio>Pterois spp</bio>.

<p id=11067><form>lawus</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>withered</tr>. <i>Ngánung lawus ang utanung ímung gipalit?</i> Why did you buy withered vegetables? <number>2</number> withered or <tr>wizened</tr> from age or sickness. <i>Lawus na si Glurya Rumíru, gúwang na man gud,</i> Gloria Romero is faded now. She is quite old. <number>3</number> past one&apos;s prime. <i>Lawus nang pagkabuksingíru si Ilurdi,</i> Elorde is over his peak as a boxer. <number>4</number> for feelings to have faded. <i>Lawus na ang ímung pagbátì nákù,</i> Your love for me has faded. <form>{(&larr;)|láwus}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> get <tr>withered</tr>. <i>Ang búlak muláwus (maláwus) ug initan,</i> Flowers wither if you expose them to heat. <i>Nagkalawus na ang tanum kay wà katubigi,</i> The plants are getting withered because they were not watered. <number>2</number> <tr>get old</tr> and shriveled. <i>Naglawus ka man. May balatían ka?</i> You look shrunken. Are you ill? <number>3</number> get beyond one&apos;s prime. <number>4</number> for feelings to fade. <i>Kanang prisyúha makaláwus (makapaláwus) giyud sa gána,</i> That price sure throws cold water on my desire. <i>Nagkalawus ang ákung pagláum nga maulì pa siya,</i> My hope for his return is wavering.

<p id=11068><form>láwut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> for liquids to become thick and gooey. <i>Magkalawut ang linúgaw madúgayng sinukgay,</i> The more porridge is stirred the thicker and more viscous it becomes. <pos>a</pos> thick and <tr>gooey</tr>. <i>Láwut ning utána kay náay tugábang,</i> This vegetable dish is gooey because it contains <ix>tugábang</ix>.

<p id=11069><form>law-uy</form> <pos>a</pos> cooked vegetables without fish, meat, or fat. <i>Law-uy lang ning útan kay way subak,</i> This vegetable dish is cooked just plain because we have nothing to cook with it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13B; a12]</itype> cook vegetables plain, be plain and tasteless.

<p id=11070><form>láya</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. shallow water cast net, conical in shape, made of fine sewing thread with a fine mesh. Weights are put on the mouth to spread the net when thrown, and when the net is lifted the weights cause the mouth to contract so that escape is impossible. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; a2]</itype> catch fish with a <ix>láya</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make into a <ix>láya</ix>. <form>layaláya</form> <pos>n</pos> very thin membrane that envelopes the stomach, used as a wrapper for <ix>murkun</ix>.

<p id=11071><form>*láya</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>iláya</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11072><form>layà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fresh-water fish which grows <measure reg="61 cm">2&prime;</measure> long and <measure reg="15 cm">6&Prime;</measure> wide, with big, silvery scales, spotted with black.

<p id=11073><form>láyà</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dried</tr>, <tr>withered</tr> up. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B23(1)]</itype> <tr>dry</tr>, become dry or withered. <i>Unyà ra daúbi ang sagbut kun muláyà (maláyà) na,</i> Burn the leaves when they become dry. <i>Himalatyun na ning kahúya kay nagkalayà nag mga dáhun,</i> This tree is going to die because its leaves are withering. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> for the ears of corn to mature. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|láyà} ang bágà</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a12]</itype> for the lungs to be damaged from drinking too much. <pos>n</pos> <tr>paper money</tr> (slang). <form>{(&rarr;)|layà}<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> dried up. <number>2</number> for ears of corn to be mature. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|layà} ug bágà</formx> having inflamed lungs from overindulgence in drinking. <number>4</number> <formx>dáhung {&mdash;|layà}</formx> <tr>paper money</tr> (slang).

<p id=11074><form>láyag<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sail</tr> of a boat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> put up the sail. <i>Mularga na ang sakayan kay gilayágan na,</i> The boat is ready to sail because they have hoisted the sails. <form>{(&rarr;)|layag}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <number>1</number> for a sailboat to sail. <number>1a</number> <formx>lantaw ug {&mdash;|layag}</formx> sit idly by watching people that are working without lifting a finger to help (as if watching s.o. sailing). <i>Naglantawg naglayag bisag gikinahanglan kaáyu ang íyang pagtábang,</i> He just sits idly by watching, even though his help is badly needed. <number>2</number> for the ears to stick out. <i>Naglayag ang dunggan,</i> His ears stick out. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|layagan}</form> k.o. volute shell growing to <measure reg="7.7 cm">3&Prime;</measure> by 1½&Prime; with no operculum. Edible but bitter. <form>{-in-an|linayagan}</form> <pos>n</pos> boat with sails. <form>{-un|layagun}</form> <pos>a</pos> favorable for sailing. <form>{-un|layagun} ug dátù</form> for a wind to be slow (lit. good only for rich people with plenty of time to sail with). <form>{-um-an|lumayagun}</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small squid, growing to <measure reg="20 cm">8&Prime;</measure> with a very reduced internal plate. <form>{pa&N;-um-an(&rarr;)|panglumayagan}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c]</itype> go to catch <ix>lumayágan</ix>. <form>panlumayaganan</form> <pb n=596>place one can fish for <ix>lumayágan</ix>. <number>2</number> boat for fishing for <ix>lumayágan</ix>.

<p id=11075><form>láyag<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the missing of one&apos;s menstruation but not because of pregnancy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> miss one&apos;s period. <i>Ábi kug gilayágan ku, burus giyud diay,</i> I thought I just missed a period, but I was actually pregnant.

<p id=11076><form>láyag<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> join others who have food, drinks, or cigarettes to mooch off of them. <i>Way makaláyag níya kay adtu siya sa tágù magkaun,</i> He ate in seclusion because he didn&apos;t want anyone to mooch off of him.

<p id=11077><form>layangláyang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> awning or temporary <tr>shelter</tr> made of four posts and a cloth or thatch covering. <number>2</number> principal rafters placed at the thwart edges of a roof which, in a thatched roof, hold the thatch in place. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put a temporary shelter s.w.

<p id=11078><form>láyas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> leave a place to avoid s.t. unpleasant. <i>Miláyas siya sa dagmalan níyang inaína,</i> She escaped from her cruel stepmother. <i>Gilayásan siyag suluguun,</i> Her servant walked out on her. <number>2</number> get out of a place for any reason. <i>Láyas, animal,</i> Leave this home, you beast. <form>{(&rarr;)|layas}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>escapee</tr>. <i>Siya layas sa Bilíbid,</i> He is an escapee from Bilibid prison.

<p id=11079><form>layat<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> <tr>jump</tr> to a place: up, down, or over. <i>Milayat ang kabáyù sa kural,</i> The horse jumped over the fence. <i>Layata lang nang bintánà nga mubù,</i> Just jump down from that low window. <pos>n</pos> act of jumping.

<p id=11080><form>layat<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> large, edible tree fungus, shiny, dark-brown in color.

<p id=11081><form>láyaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> for animals to roam about. <i>Muláyaw ang mga háyup nga buhían,</i> Domestic animals stray if you don&apos;t tether them. <form>{(&rarr;)|layaw}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> animal that has been allowed to stray. <i>Kinahanglang lamíngun ang manuk layaw kay langsag unud,</i> You have to keep stray chickens and feed them special food before you kill them; otherwise they have a terrible flavor. <number>1a</number> going out when one should not be doing so, person that has been allowed to stray. <i>Madisgrasya giyud ang babáying layaw,</i> A woman that gallivants about is likely to get into trouble. <number>1b</number> off the mark, far from correct. <i>Layaw kaáyu ang ímung pangagpas,</i> Your conjecture is way off the mark. <number>2</number> for a mixture to be too weak in consistency. <i>Layaw nga pintal,</i> Paint that&apos;s too thin. <number>3</number> <ix>in phrases:</ix> <form>{&mdash;|layaw} ug dugù</form> <tr>cowardly</tr>, lacking guts. <form>{&mdash;|layaw} ug hunàhúnà</form> given to sudden whims or fancies. <i>Way pundu ang táwung layaw ug hunàhúnà,</i> A person who is given to sudden whims or fancies is unstable. <form>{&mdash;|layaw} ug útuk</form> a dull person. <i>Ang táwung layaw ug útuk gáhing makasabut,</i> A dull person does not understand easily. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> become a wanderer, one who gallivants around. <form>{-an|layawan}</form> <pos>n</pos> open land where animals are allowed to roam and graze. <form>{pina-|pinalayaw}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>spoiled</tr>, left alone by parents to do as he pleases. <i>Way trabáhung makat-unan ang bátang pinalayaw,</i> A spoiled child that has been left to do as he pleases will not learn a trade.

<p id=11082><form>laybrari</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>library</tr>. <form>{-yan|laybrariyan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>librarian</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> be a librarian.

<p id=11083><form>laygay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P; a12]</itype> make s.o. <tr>bedridden</tr>. <i>Sakit nga milaygay kaníya,</i> The sickness that incapacitated him. <i>Gilaygay siyag tísis,</i> He was bedridden with T.B. <number>2</number> <itype>[a4]</itype> be affected with great financial difficulty. <i>Mga kabus nga gilaygay sa kalisud,</i> Poor people who are wallowing in difficulty. <pos>a</pos> <tr>incapacitating</tr>, leaving one bedridden. <i>Laygay sakíta nang paralisis,</i> Paralysis leaves one bedridden.

<p id=11084><form>layhan</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>*lahay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11085><form>layi diantigwa</form> <pos>n</pos> old, outmoded laws or customs. <i>Sunud ka man ánang layi diantigwa. Kabag-úhan na run!</i> You&apos;re following old, out-moded ways. We&apos;re in the Twentieth Century now!

<p id=11086><form>láyì</form> <pos>n</pos> tool for cutting abaca fibers or buri strips, made of a thin, flat piece of <ix>bagákay</ix> bamboo, <measure reg="7.7&ndash;10 cm">3&Prime;&ndash;4&Prime;</measure> long.

<p id=11087><form>láyik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> have a <tr>liking</tr> or crush for s.t. or s.o. (slang). <i>Nakasabut giyud ku nga nakaláyik nà si Idyun nímu,</i> I realize that Edion has taken a liking to you.

<p id=11088><form>layiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>layman</tr>, <tr>laity</tr>. <i>Ang buluhatun sa layiku sa iglisya,</i> The role of the laity in the church.

<p id=11089><form>láyip</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>life imprisonment</tr>. <i>Gisintinsyahan siyag láyip,</i> He got life imprisonment.

<p id=11090><form>layit wit</form> <pos>n</pos> lightweight boxer or wrestler.

<p id=11091><form>laylay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tired</tr>, <tr>drooping</tr> from fatigue. <number>2</number> for plants to be limp or drooping. <i>Pangúhag laylay nga mais, itambug sa kabáyù,</i> Get the drooping corn leaves to feed the horses. <number>2a</number> for leaves to be colored red or yellow. <number>2b</number> people at the bottom strata of society. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[BN; a2b4]</itype> be <tr>tired</tr>. <i>Milaylay (nalaylay) ang ákung abága ug pinas-an sa baskit,</i> My shoulders got tired from carrying the basket. <i>Wà mu layláyig tinindug,</i> Aren&apos;t you all exhausted from standing? <number>2</number> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> <tr>droop</tr>, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Naglaylay ang abaga,</i> His shoulders are drooping. <i>Layláya (ilaylay) ang sanga arun makab-ut ang búnga,</i> Bend the branch so you can reach the fruit. <number>2a</number> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> gather bent or discolored leaves. <form>{ka-|kalaylay}</form> <tr>tiredness</tr>, feeling of being weak from fatigue. <pos>n</pos> yellowed leaves on trees that are about to drop.

<pb n=597>

<p id=11092><form>laylay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> sing with no words other than meaningless syllables. <i>Naglaylay ang inahan nga nagpakatúlug sa bátà,</i> The mother is singing the baby to sleep. <pos>n</pos> song hummed or sung with syllables <ix>la, la</ix>.

<p id=11093><form>laylu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> not do s.t. one would normally do, esp. combat, because of some danger. <i>Manglaylu tag panágat kay nagdáut ang panahun,</i> We won&apos;t go out fishing because the weather is bad. <i>Manglaylu lang ku, kay náa ang amahan,</i> I won&apos;t visit her for the while because her father is home. <i>Wà na gániy bála, laylúhun (ilaylu) dáyun sa mga girilya ang ílang kalihúkan,</i> When the <corr sic=guerillas>guerrillas</corr> run out of bullets, they lie low for awhile.

<p id=11094><form>layning</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lining</tr> or cloth used for lining. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put a lining in s.t.

<p id=11095><form>laysul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lysol</tr>.

<p id=11096><form>Layti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Leyte</tr>.

<p id=11097><form>laytir</form> <pos>n</pos> cigarette <tr>lighter</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> light with a lighter.

<p id=11098><form>layu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> broil unhusked young corn over flames, cooking it half-way. <i>Layuhun (ilayu) nátù ang linghud arun dalì rang malútù,</i> Let&apos;s just pass the young corn unhusked through the flames so it won&apos;t take long to cook it.

<p id=11099><form>layù</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>far</tr>, <tr>distant</tr>. <i>Layù kaáyu ang Urúpa,</i> Europe is far away. <i>Paryinti mi piru layù na,</i> We are relatives but rather distant. <number>1a</number> far from being correct. <i>Layù ra kaáyu ang ímung tubag sa dyakpat kwistiyun,</i> Your answer to the jackpot question was far off the mark. <number>1b</number> <formx>{&mdash;|layù} ra sa tinái</formx> for mishaps not to be serious (far from the intestines). <i>Gamay ning samára layù ra sa tinái,</i> It&apos;s a superficial wound. It&apos;s not serious. <number>1c</number> <formx>{&mdash;|layù} ra sa tinái sa manuk</formx> for answers and guesses to be wide off the mark. <i>Ang ímung tubag sayup ug layù ra sa tinái sa manuk,</i> Your answer is wrong and is way off the mark. <number>2</number> comparatively far behind in some good trait. <i>Layù ra si Magsaysay ni Salungga sa abilidad,</i> Magsaysay can&apos;t hold a candle to Salonga. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B25C; ab7c]</itype> be <tr>far</tr>. <i>Ug mulayù ang tugdúnan sa búla, ipakúhà lang,</i> If the ball lands far away have s.o. go get it. <i>Ug makigláyù ka nákù, mingawun ku nímu,</i> If you want us to be far from each other, I&apos;ll miss you. <i>Layúun ta mu kay palaaway mu,</i> I&apos;ll keep you two far apart because you are quarrelsome. <i>Layui pa kay duul ra nà,</i> Move it farther away because it&apos;s too close. <form>dílì {ig-(&larr;)|igláyù}</form> not distantly related by blood. <i>Dílì ta igláyù magtagsa ang átung inahan,</i> We are not distantly related because your mother is my mother&apos;s first cousin. <form>{hi-|hilayù}/{ha-|halayù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> get to be far away. <form>{pa-|palayù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> go far away, stay away from a place, hold s.t. at a distance. <i>Ngánung magpalayù ka man kanámù?</i> What makes you want to keep your distance from us? <i>Gipalay-an ni pagsiyát arun makúhà ang byú,</i> This picture was shot from a distance to get the view. <form>{pahi-|pahilayù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a3]</itype> go far away. <i>Tungud sa ákung kahiubus, magpahilayù ku,</i> I&apos;m going away because I was terribly hurt. <form>linay-ánay, linay-anay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> be far from one another. <form>{-g-|lagyù}</form> <xr>= <sc>layù</sc></xr> (plural). <form>{ha-|halayù}</form> <xr>= <sc>layù</sc>, <ix>a 1.</ix></xr> <form>gilay-un, kalay-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>distance</tr>. <i>Usa ka kilumitru ang gilay-un,</i> The distance is one kilometer. <form>kinalay-an</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>farthest</tr>.

<p id=11100><form>lay-u<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a body of standing water in low-lying areas formed by overflowing floodwaters or heavy rains. <i>Dúnay daghang isdà sa lay-u,</i> There are lots of fish stranded in the pool.

<p id=11101><form>lay-u<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> for plants to wither from being in the heat after being uprooted or damaged by wind. <i>Malay-u (mulay-u) ang mga tanum sa kusug nga hángin,</i> The plants will wither because of the strong wind. <i>Lay-úhun nang mga sagínga nga nangatumba sa ínit run,</i> The heat will wither those plants that were uprooted.

<p id=11102><form>layug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>grapple</tr> with s.o. <i>Giulang ku ang duha ka bátà nga nagláyug,</i> I intervened when the two boys were wrestling with each other. <i>Gilayug ku siya kay ákung giílug ang kutsilyu,</i> I wrestled with him to get the knife from him. <number>2</number> <tr>wrestle</tr> with a woman in foreplay. <i>Daw may gilayug nga dalága,</i> It seems that s.o. was wrestling with a girl (to rape her). <form>{tig-|tiglayug}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> fond of wrestling. <number>2</number> fond of mutilating plants by breaking off branches, flowers, etc. as if having wrestled with them. <i>Kining mga bátà dinhi muy tiglayug sa mga tanum,</i> It&apos;s the children that destroy the plants here.

<p id=11103><form>láyug</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>tall</tr> and quite straight. <i>Láyug kaáyu nang lubíha,</i> That coconut tree is very tall. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> become <tr>tall</tr>. <i>Muláyug (maláyug) nang kahúya ug dì pul-úngan,</i> That tree will grow tall if you don&apos;t prune it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>fly</tr> (usually said of fowls that keep to the ground). <i>Miláyug ang manuk nga gigúkud sa irù,</i> The chicken flew up when the dog chased it. <i>Taas ug gilayúgan ang manuk,</i> The rooster flew high up. <pos>n</pos> flight of birds or fowl. <i>Gisunud kug tan-aw ang láyug sa mga langgam,</i> I followed the flight of the birds with my eyes.

<p id=11104><form>lay-ug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; c1]</itype> for plants to be badly shaken by a strong wind, such that they are damaged and likely to die in hot weather. <pb n=598><i>Kusug hángin ang milay-ug (mipalay-ug) sa mga tanum,</i> A strong wind caused severe damage to the plants. <i>Ug malay-ug ang mga lubi, madagdag ang mga búnga,</i> If a coconut tree is shaken by the wind, its fruit will fall off.

<p id=11105><form>layuglayug</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible brown seaweed with a leaf-like structure.

<p id=11106><form>layun</form> <pos>a</pos> for bananas to be almost ripe, but still hard. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B23(1); b6]</itype> for bananas to be almost ripe. <i>Hustung pritúhun ang kardábang malayun na,</i> Cooking bananas are best to fry when they are nearly ripe.

<p id=11107><form>láyus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> for plants or fruits to <tr>wither</tr>. <i>Nagkalayus ang mga tanum kay dúgayng wà ulana,</i> The plants are withering gradually because it has not rained for a long time. <i>Naláyus ang mga utanun nga wà mangahálin,</i> The vegetables that were left unsold withered. <form>{(&rarr;)|layus}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>withered</tr> (of plants or fruits).

<p id=11108><form>lí</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lei</tr>, a garland of flowers hung on visitors&apos; necks as a sign of welcome. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> give, make a lei.

<p id=11109><form>líab</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>neckline</tr> of garment. <i>Ang íyang bistída mabà ug líab,</i> Her dress has a low neckline. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> put a neckline. <form>{(&rarr;)|liab}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> grab s.o. by the collar. <i>Bi, tan-áwun ta ug muliab ba giyud siya nákù!</i> Well, let&apos;s see if he dares grab me by the collar.

<p id=11110><form>liad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> bend or throw one&apos;s body backward. <i>Dílì makaliad ang bátà kay ákung gigunítan ang abága,</i> The baby can not throw his body backward because I&apos;m holding onto his shoulder. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12P]</itype> be in a position with the stomach sticking out and shoulders back. <i>Dílì ka muliad ug maglakaw ka,</i> Don&apos;t walk with your stomach sticking out a in a position with the stomach sticking out and the shoulders back. <number>3</number> <itype>[B3(1); b6]</itype> for lumber to warp or twist. <i>Nagkalíad ang mga káhuy nga gibulad sa ínit,</i> The pieces of wood they dried under the heat of sun are getting warped. <form>liadlíad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> writhe about in pain. <i>Nagliadlíad siya sa kasakit,</i> He is writhing in pain. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> walk with a distended stomach due to pregnancy or obesity. <i>Nagliadlíad ang mabdus nga naglakaw sa karsáda,</i> The pregnant woman walked down the street with her stomach sticking out.

<p id=11111><form>líap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make a shot from under the goal in basketball. <pos>n</pos> a shot of this sort in basketball.

<p id=11112><form>liat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>skip over</tr>, <tr>by-pass</tr>. <i>Dì mu makaliat sa ámù kay mag-atang mi sa bintánà,</i> You could not miss our house because we will be watching for you at the window. <i>Way giliatan ang íyang láwas sa labud,</i> His body is covered with welts. <i>Way giliatan sa kaláyu,</i> The fire got everything. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> go, <tr>pass</tr> by in time or space. <i>Muliat sa duha ka lungsud ang trín,</i> The train will pass through the two towns. <i>Mubáyad ku nímu sa dì pa makaliat ang usa ka simána,</i> I will pay you before a week goes by. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> take time out to go s.w. for a short while. <i>Muliat giyud nà siyag tábì bísag daghang búhat,</i> She takes time out for some quick gossip, even if she&apos;s very busy. <i>Liata ang kan-un ug lútù na ba,</i> Take a quick peep at the rice to see if it is cooked yet. <i>Iliat ni Nánay ning matam-is,</i> Run to Grandma&apos;s and give her these sweets.

<p id=11113><form>líawt</form> <pos>n</pos> proper, optimum disposition of things or component parts put s.w. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put things in their proper relative positions. <i>Ilíawt úsà ang mga kuniksiyun úsà suldáha,</i> Lay the connections out in their proper disposition before you solder them.

<p id=11114><form>líb</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> go on <tr>leave</tr> from a job. <i>Mulíb siya usa ka simána antis manganak,</i> She will take her maternity leave one week before she has her baby. <form>matirniti {&mdash;|líb}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>maternity leave</tr>. <form>sik {&mdash;|líb}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sick leave</tr>.

<p id=11115><form>líbà</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ignorant</tr>, lacking knowledge of certain ways. <number>1a</number> disrupting by adding confusion to s.t. that is otherwise smooth and orderly. <i>Ay nà siyag paintraha sa dráma kay líbà,</i> Don&apos;t assign him a role in the play because he is a great bungler. <number>2</number> acting in a socially unacceptable way so as to cause resentment. <i>Líbà kaáyu nang maistráha, duha ray gipapasar,</i> That teacher really has a lot of nerve. She failed the whole class except two. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become <tr>ignorant</tr>, lacking in knowledge of certain ways. <i>Malíbà ka sa bag-ung dapit,</i> If you go to a new place, you will be ignorant of how things are there. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>fool</tr>, pull a trick on s.o. <i>Nakalíbà silag duha ka sapíang Insik,</i> They swindled two rich Chinese. <i>Malíbà kahà nà siya sa baráha?</i> Can anyone pull one over on him in cards?

<p id=11116><form>líbad pa</form> it&apos;s the same thing, it&apos;s just as good. <i>Samu lang ug di ku makaadtu sa parti. Tutal muadtu man ang ákung páris. Líbad pa,</i> Never mind if I can&apos;t attend the party. Anyway my husband will attend. That&apos;s just as good. <i>Dílì na ku makahuwat sa ímung bána. Líbad pa ug ikawy ákung tagáan sa kwarta?</i> I can&apos;t wait for your husband any longer. Wouldn&apos;t it be the same thing if I gave the money to you? <i>Bisag ása sa duha. Líbad pa,</i> Either one of the two. It&apos;s all the same.

<pb n=599>

<p id=11117><form>libadúra</form> <pos>n</pos> leaven. <i>Pán nga way libadúra,</i> Unleavened bread.

<p id=11118><form>libagbag</form> <xr>= <sc>*alibagbag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11119><form>libaghà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2N; b4N]</itype> <number>1</number> develop a rash on the skin. <i>Nanglibaghà (gipanglibagháan) ákung pánit human nákug káun ug bulad,</i> I broke out in a rash after I ate dried fish. <number>2</number> for an emotion to show itself to a great degree. <i>Sa íyang nawung nilibaghà ang kalísang,</i> A look of terror erupted on her face. <pos>n</pos> rash on the skin.

<p id=11120><form>libak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a1]</itype> backbite, say bad things about s.o. when his back is turned or cannot understand them. <i>Maáyung mudáyig sa atubángan, manlibak sa luyu,</i> She says nice things to your face, but turn your back, and you&apos;ll get it. <form>{pa-|palibak}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> allow s.o. to backbite. <form>walà, dílì {pa-|palibak}</form> appear right after being spoken about. <i>Walà palibak si Duruy ug nakaabut sa ámung ínum,</i> Talk about the devil and there he is &mdash; Doroy arrived at our drinking session just as we were discussing him. <pos>n</pos> backbiting. <form>{-iru(&larr;)|libakíru}, {ma&N;-r-(&larr;)|manglilíbak}, {ma-un(&larr;)|malibákun}</form> <pos>a</pos> given to backbiting. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become fond of backbiting. <form>{-ira(&larr;)|libakíra}</form> <xr>= <sc>{-iru(&larr;)|libakíru}</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=11121><form>libákag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> stand up on its ends. <i>Mulibákag ang ákung balhíbu kung makadungug kug irù nga mag-ulang,</i> My hair stands on end whenever I hear a dog howling. <i>Milibákag ang ákung dalunggan sa pagkadungug ku sa íyang ísug nga sinultihan,</i> My ears perked up when I heard her commanding voice.

<p id=11122><form>liban</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> <number>1</number> overlook s.t. inadvertently. <i>Naliban ku sa pagsukip sa kwarta,</i> I forgot to include the money in the letter. <number>2</number> be preoccupied and fail to notice s.t. <i>Naliban ku, wà ku kamatngun pag-ági níya,</i> I was preoccupied. I didn&apos;t notice her going by.

<p id=11123><form>libang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> activities or chores to keep one busy. <i>Dì ku makaatiman niánà kay daghan kug libang sa panimalay,</i> I have no time to take care of that because I have lots of chores to keep me busy at home. <pos>a</pos> having many things to attend to. <i>Libang siya kaáyu mau nga labihan kalimtánun,</i> She has so many things to attend to, she tends to forget details. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b3(1)]</itype> be busy attending to s.t.

<p id=11124><form>*libang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125]</itype> <tr>defecate</tr>. <i>Nalibang (mikalibang) ku hasta kalima kay naghibús ku,</i> I defecated five times because I had <abbr expan="loose bowel movements">LBM</abbr>. <form>{&mdash;|libang} ang bàbà</form> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>vomit</tr> (humorous and coarse). <form>{ka-|kalibang}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> defecate, move one&apos;s bowels. <i>Gikalibangan sa bátà ang íyang karsúnis,</i> The child defecated in his pants. <i>Gikalibang nákù ang lísu sa santul,</i> I expelled santol seeds when I defecated. <form>{ka-|kalibang} ang bàbà</form> <itype>[B1236]</itype> <tr>vomit</tr> (humorous and coarse). <form>{ka-(&larr;)|kalíbang}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146]</itype> have diarrhea. <pos>n</pos> <tr>diarrhea</tr>. <i>Kalíbang ang namatyan sa bátà,</i> The child died of diarrhea. <form>súka {ka-(&larr;)|kalíbang}</form> <pos>n</pos> vomiting combined with diarrhea. <form>{ka-an(&larr;)|kalibángan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>toilet</tr>. <form>{kina-|kinalibang}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stools</tr>. <form>{ka-un|kalibangun}</form> <pos>a</pos> feel like defecating.

<p id=11125><form>libanta</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B36; b3(1)c1]</itype> for a dog&apos;s ears to prick up in alertness. <i>Mulibanta dáyun ang ámung irù ug náay kasíkas,</i> Our dog pricks up his ears when there is a slight noise. <form>sinta {&mdash;|libanta}</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>sinta</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11126><form>libas</form> <xr>= <sc>alabíhid</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11127><form>libat</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>cross-eyed</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become cross-eyed. <i>Nalibat ang bátà kay nahagbung,</i> The child became cross-eyed because he had a fall. <form>{(&larr;)|líbat}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; a2]</itype> cross one&apos;s eyes. <i>Nalíbat siya pagkaigù sa ákung kúmù,</i> His eyes went to the center of his head when I hit him with my fist. <i>Libáta ímung mata arun ang mga bátà mangatáwa,</i> Cross your eyes to make the children laugh. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> look at s.t. so hard one gets cross-eyed. <i>Nalíbat kug pangítà nímu,</i> I got cross-eyed looking for you. <i>Ang kadaghan sa gwápa nakalíbat (nakapalíbat) nákù,</i> I got cross-eyed looking at the pretty girls.

<p id=11128><form>libaung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>potholes</tr> in a road. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get potholes in it. <i>Malibaung ang dálan ug muulan,</i> The road gets potholes in it when it rains. <form>{ka-(&larr;)|kalibáung}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be full of potholes. <form>{-un|libaungun}</form> <pos>a</pos> having potholes.

<p id=11129><form>libayan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish.

<p id=11130><form>libgaw</form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>anchovy</tr>, a kind of <ix>bulinaw</ix>: <bio>Stolephorus commersonii</bio>.

<p id=11131><form>libgus</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible mushroom growing to a height of <measure reg="7.7&ndash;10 cm">3&Prime;&ndash;4&Prime;</measure>, having a conical pileus around <measure reg="5.1 cm">2&Prime;</measure> in diameter, usually gray in hue and somewhat darker at the center. It is a good deal thinner than the <ix>úhung</ix> and thicker than the <ix>uwáping</ix>.

<p id=11132><form>libiláwu</form> <xr>= <sc>nibiláwu</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>nibil</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11133><form>libílu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>libel</tr>.

<p id=11134><form>libinta</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> for s.t. to give way because what is in it is too big for it. <i>Nilibinta ang sáku kay gidasuk ug maáyu ang sulud,</i> The sack ripped open because the contents were stuffed in too tight.

<p id=11135><form>libintadur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>firecrackers</tr>.

<p id=11136><form>libiral<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>liberal</tr>, <tr>generous</tr>. <i>Ang pilantrupu libiral kaáyu nga muhátag,</i> A philanthropist gives liberally. <number>2</number> permissive, not strict. <i>Libiral kaáyu nang amahána nga mudala sa ílang mga anak,</i> That father is very liberal in bringing up his children. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become generous or permissive.

<p id=11137><form>libiral<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> Liberal, member of the Liberal Party. <form>partídu {&mdash;|libiral}</form> the Liberal Party. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> <pb n=600>become a Liberal. <i>Ang Nasyunalista nga mayur naglibiral na,</i> The mayor, who was a Nacionalista, has crossed over to the Liberal party.

<p id=11138><form>libirasiyun, libirisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> the period following the ouster of the Japanese and the achieving of independence (end of 1944&ndash;1946). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be the liberation time.

<p id=11139><form>libirt&acaron;d</form> <pos>n</pos> freedom. <i>Ang ákung bátà way libirt&acaron;d sa pagpílì sa íyang gustu,</i> She has no freedom to choose what she wants.

<p id=11140><form>libítus</form> <xr>= <sc>lubítus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11141><form>libkas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB3(1)]</itype> for a trap to spring, for s.t. held back to be released suddenly; cause it to do so. <i>Milibkas na ang pas-ung, tingáli nakakuhà,</i> The trap sprung. Maybe it has caught s.t. <i>Milibkas ang kabli dihang napalus sa ligid,</i> The cable lashed out when it slipped off the wheel. <i>Hilibkasan ka bayà ánang bawug,</i> The spring pole might snap back on you. <number>1a</number> slip off under weight. <i>Ayúhag bángil ang tiil arun dì makalibkas,</i> Put the support under the leg carefully so that it won&apos;t slip off. <number>2</number> <itype>[B3]</itype> for s.t. to slip inadvertently out of the mouth. <i>Nalibkas sa bàbà ang tinúud, maung nahibaw-an sa tanan,</i> The truth inadvertently slipped out of my mouth so that everyone found out. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> appear, occur all of a sudden. <i>Usa ka pahiyum milibkas sa íyang nawung,</i> A smile lit his face. <i>Nakapaúlì siya sa wà pa mulibkas ang gúbat,</i> He had a chance to go home before the war suddenly broke out. <form>{pa-|palibkas}</form> <pos>n</pos> slingshot.

<p id=11142><form>libra<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> pound, a unit of weight. <i>Napúlù ka libra,</i> Ten pounds. <form>{-s|libras}</form> <xr>= <sc>libra</sc> (plural).</xr> <i>Diyis libras,</i> Ten pounds.

<p id=11143><form>libra<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the Libra in the horoscope.

<p id=11144><form>libri<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> free, not restricted. <i>Libri na ang binilanggù,</i> The prisoner is free. <i>Way pugsanay, libri sa gustu ang táwu,</i> There&apos;s no forcing. Each man is free to do as he wishes. <number>2</number> without cost or payment. <i>Libri ang íyang káun, libri siya sa káun,</i> He gets his meals free. <number>3</number> having clearance for passage. <i>Inig-ági sa trák sa gawang, tan-áwa ug libri ba ang kílid,</i> When the truck passes through the gate, see if both sides have clearance. <number>4</number> safe from destruction. <i>Libri na ang giupirahan,</i> The patient who was operated on is safe. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> give s.o. free use of s.t. by paying for him or not obliging him to pay. <i>Íya kung libríhun sa pasáhi,</i> She is going to pay for my fare. <i>Nalíbri ku sa plíti,</i> I got to ride free. <number>2</number> save from s.t. bad. <i>Ang balanghuy makalibri sa gútum,</i> Cassava can save you from starvation. <form>{&mdash;|libri} kumída, {pasáhi|libri pasáhi}</form> <pos>n</pos> free meal(s), free passage. <i>Libri pasáhi ka sa barku kay díay rikumindasiyun iadtu sa kapitan,</i> You get free passage on the boat because I have a recommendation for you to give to the captain. <form>librilibri</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. <tr>kick-the-can</tr> game. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12C; b(1)]</itype> play kick-the-can. <form>librihay, librihánay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C13]</itype> do s.t., each man for himself. <i>Maglibrihay (maglibrihánay) tag plíti,</i> Let&apos;s each pay his own fare.

<p id=11145><form>libri<sub>2</sub></form> <ix>humorous expression uttered upon hearing s.o. clearing his throat:</ix> &lsquo;spit it out&rsquo;.

<p id=11146><form>libriríya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>library</tr>.

<p id=11147><form>libríta</form> <xr>= <sc>librítu</sc>, 2.</xr>

<p id=11148><form>librítu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a small book containing magical prayers (<ix>urasiyun</ix>) which comes into a person&apos;s possession through the agency of a supernatural force. The uttering of the prayers by the owner of the book is thought to have special healing or protective powers. <number>2</number> any small <tr>booklet</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|librítu} sa bangku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bankbook</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|librítu} sa tíkit</form> <pos>n</pos> book of tickets.

<p id=11149><form>libru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>book</tr>. <number>2</number> subject one is enrolled in. <i>Tulu na lang ka libru ang íyang kúlang pára nga makagraduwar siya,</i> He lacks three courses to graduate. <number>3</number> <tr>accounts</tr>. <form>tinidur {di-|dilibru}</form> bookkeeper. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> bind into books. <form>librulibru</form> <xr>= <sc>mandunggu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11150><form>líbu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> one <tr>thousand</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B256]</itype> be a thousand. <i>Mulíbu na run ang sáka sa lubi,</i> The coconut trees now yield one thousand nuts. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> do by the thousand. <i>Libúhun (ilíbu) ni nákù pag-ihap,</i> I&apos;ll count these by the thousands. <form>libulíbu</form> thousands and thousands. <form>{-in-(&rarr;)|linibu}, {ni-(&rarr;)|nilibu}</form> <pos>n</pos> by the thousand. <i>Linibu ang ílang gastu matag búlan,</i> They spend by the thousands every month. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> do by the thousands. <form>kalibúan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>thousands</tr>. <i>Kalibúan ang íyang gitabángan,</i> He has helped thousands of people. <form>libúhay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> about a thousand. <i>Libúhay ra ang íyang nagastu,</i> He spent about a thousand. <number>2</number> thousands of. <i>Libúhay ka mga túig,</i> Thousands of years.

<p id=11151><form>líbu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> carry a number in addition. <i>Singku imas utsu, trísi, líbu únu,</i> Five and eight is thirteen, carry your one. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> carry a number. <i>Ug pilay ímung ilíbu isulat sa ibabaw sa numiru nga nagsunud,</i> Write the number you carry above the next column.

<p id=11152><form>líbud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>go around</tr> a place. <i>Libúra úsà ang abúhan únà ka mulíbud sa kalibútan,</i> Don&apos;t tell me you&apos;re going around the world. You haven&apos;t even gone in back of your stove! <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> go, bring around to several places. <i>Ang bangkadur mauy mulíbud sa baráha,</i> The dealer will distribute the cards. <i>Libúrun ku ang mga saup arun patambúngun sa míting,</i> I will go around to all the tenants to have them attend the meeting. <pb n=601><i>Mani ang ákung ilíbud ugmà,</i> I&apos;ll go around selling peanuts tomorrow. <number>3</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be round about. <pos>a</pos> round about. <i>Líbud na kaáyu ug muhapit pa mi sa inyu,</i> It will be a very long way out of the way if we go by your place first. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> church procession. <number>2</number> round in games. <form>{(&rarr;)|libud}</form> <xr>= <sc>líbud</sc>, <i>a</i>.</xr> <form>{(&rarr;)|libud} suruy</form> <pos>n</pos> tramp, one who wanders from place to place with no particular course or destination. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> become a roamer. <i>Maglibud suruy na lang ku ug wà na kuy trabáhu,</i> I&apos;ll just become a tramp when I have no more work. <form>libudlíbud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> roam around aimlessly.

<p id=11153><form>líbug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1B1; a2b3(1)]</itype> confuse, be confused. <i>Naglíbug kug diin nákù ikabutang ang kwintas,</i> I&apos;m at a loss to figure out where I could have put my necklace. <i>Ay kug tudlúi. Naglíbug ka lang nákù,</i> Don&apos;t try to teach me. You are just confusing me. <number>2</number> <itype>[AP; a2b3(1)]</itype> cause s.o. to go crazy through supernatural means or from natural causes. <i>Ang mga kalakíhan makamaung mulíbug (mupalíbug) sa úlu sa táwu,</i> People who possess supernatural powers can make people insane. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a1b8]</itype> make the rounds, attending to each and every member of a group or assemblage. <i>Akuy naglíbug ug kík sa mga bisíta,</i> I was the one who passed the cake around to the visitors. <i>Libúga (libga) pagpangutána ang tanang mitambung sa míting,</i> Ask each and every one who attended the meeting. <pos>a</pos> perplexing. <i>Líbug kaáyu ning prublimáha,</i> This is a perplexing problem. <form>{(&rarr;)|libug}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fuss or ado about s.t. <i>Way daghang libug mikúut siyag kwarta unyà gibayran ang manunúkut,</i> Without much ado he took the money out of his pocket and paid the bill collector. <number>2</number> be of mixed blood. <i>Libug kining batáa. Ang amahan Pilipínu ug ang ínahan Amirkána,</i> This child is of mixed blood. The father is a Filipino and the mother an American. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|libugan}, libgánun</form> <pos>a</pos> prone to get confused. <i>Libugan (libgánun) kaáyu siya kay húmuk ra mawálà bisan sa kinasayunang iksplikasiyun,</i> She easily gets confused because she gets lost with the easiest of explanations. <form>{-ay(&rarr;)|libugay}</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. work bee wherein the members work for each other in turn and each member repays the people who worked for him with an equivalent amount of work. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> hold this sort of work bee. <form>{ka-|kalibug}</form> <pos>n</pos> confusion. <form>{ka-an|kalibúgan}, {ka-an(&rarr;)|kalibugan}</form> <pos>n</pos> a crossbreed or person of mixed blood. <i>Ang anay pulantsína ug ang butakal dyirsi. Ang mga baktin kalibugan na,</i> The sow is a Poland China variety and the boar a Jersey. The offspring are a crossbreed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a2]</itype> become a crossbreed. <form>{maka-r-|makalilíbug}</form> <pos>a</pos> causing confusion.

<p id=11154><form>lib-ug</form> <pos>n</pos> pool in the tidal flat, left when the tide goes out.

<p id=11155><form>libun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tick</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> get infested with ticks.

<p id=11156><form>libun<sub>2</sub>, líbun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>solid</tr>, not hollow. <i>Líbun ang ligid sa íyang bisiklíta,</i> His bicycle has solid rubber wheels. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256; a]</itype> be solid. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> for a boil not to come to a head. <i>Nalíbun ning hubága maung nagngutngut,</i> This boil hasn&apos;t come to a head; that&apos;s why it aches. <number>3</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> in a game of <ix>sungkà</ix>: to take all of one&apos;s partner&apos;s stones without giving the opponent a chance to take his turn. <i>Sayun ang maglíbun ug tuluy sunug,</i> It is easy to get all of your opponent&apos;s stones when he has three empty holes.

<p id=11157><form>líbun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>thicket</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B]</itype> become a thicket. <i>Mulibun (malibun) pagbálik ang kaíngin nga byáan,</i> The abandoned clearing will revert to a thicket. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>reforest</tr> with small trees or shrubbery. <i>Byatilis mauy maáyung ilíbun sa mga yútà nga dagul,</i> <corr sic=Ipilipil>Ipil-ipil</corr> is suitable for reforesting infertile lands. <form>{ka-an(&rarr;)|kalibunan}</form> <xr>= <sc>líbun</sc>, <ix>n, v1.</ix></xr>

<p id=11158><form>líbur</form> <pos>n</pos> amount paid for the labor on a piece of work. <i>Mugastu ka sa mga matiryális lang. Walay lábut sa líbur,</i> Your only costs will be the materials. The labor is free. <form>{&mdash;|líbur} dí</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Labor Day</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|líbur} yunyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>labor union</tr>.

<p id=11159><form>libúrus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S3(1); b6]</itype> have rashes or hives. <i>Milibúrus ang ákung buktun sa pinaakan sa mga namuk,</i> My arms are covered with <tr>rash</tr> from the mosquito bites. <i>Til-as ang nakalibúrus (nakapalibúrus) sa ákung nawung,</i> The hairs of the caterpillar caused my face to break out.

<p id=11160><form>líbut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> go, bring, put s.t. around a place. <i>Mulíbut siya sa punúan sa káhuy,</i> He&apos;ll go around the tree. <i>Siyay milíbut ug batu sa mga tanum,</i> She put stones around each plant. <i>Libúta ang pusti makalima, dì ka ba malílung,</i> Go around the post five times. See if you don&apos;t get dizzy. <i>Ákù siyang ilíbut sa syudad,</i> I&apos;ll take her around the city. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2S; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>surround</tr>. <i>Dì makalíbut ning tirása sa líab,</i> This lace isn&apos;t enough to go all around the neckline. <i>Gilibútan ang mga sundáwu sa mga kaáway,</i> The soldiers were surrounded by the enemies. <pos>n</pos> action of going around. <form>{&mdash;|líbut} sa</form> <tr>around</tr>. <i>Mudágan ku líbut sa plása,</i> I&apos;ll run around the plaza. <form>{pa-|palíbut}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>surroundings</tr>. <i>Limpiyu kaáyu ang inyung palíbut,</i> Your surroundings are very clean. <form>{ka-an|kalibutan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the <tr>world</tr>, the <tr>earth</tr>. <number>1a</number> <formx>láing {ka-an|kalibutan}</formx> the next world. <number>2</number> sexual activity (euphemism). <i>Ayaw mu pagpalábi <pb n=602>sa kalibútan,</i> Don&apos;t indulge in sexual activity too much. <form>{ka-ánun|kalibutánun}</form> <tr>worldly</tr>. <i>Kalibutánung mga kalípay,</i> Worldly pleasures.

<p id=11161><form>*líbut<sub>2</sub></form> <form>unsay {ka-an|kalibútan} <r>[<i>gen.</i>]</r></form> what does [gen.] know about it? <i>Unsay kalibútan ku kun diin ka paingun?</i> How would I know where you went to? <form>walay {ka-an|kalibútan}</form> <number>1</number> <tr>unconscious</tr>. <i>Gidá siya sa uspital nga way kalibútan,</i> They brought her to the hospital unconscious. <number>2</number> <tr>unaware</tr>. <i>Way kalibútan ang ákung gipangulitawhan nga minyù na ku,</i> The girl I&apos;m courting has no idea I&apos;m married.

<p id=11162><form>libutug</form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>bulge</tr>, <tr>swelling</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b4]</itype> <tr>swell</tr>, <tr>bulge</tr>. <i>Mulibutug ang pinaakan sa lamuk ug kalútun,</i> Mosquito bites swell if you scratch them.

<p id=11163><form>libúu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible clam which buries itself into the mud of mangrove swamps. It has a thin, greyish shell, growing to <measure reg="7.7 cm">3&Prime;</measure>.

<p id=11164><form>líbuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> handle of a plow. <number>2</number> <tr>penis</tr> (humorous euphemism). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a]</itype> put, use as a plough.

<p id=11165><form>libwas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> put a new roof on a house. <i>Íyang gilibwásan ang tanang atup nga dáan,</i> He replaced all the old roofing. <number>1a</number> <tr>replace</tr> anything. <i>Maáyung malibwásan mu ang ímung kinaíya,</i> You had better change your ways. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> for one&apos;s savings to be used up (lit. get to the stage that it must be replenished). <i>Nalibwas ang tanan kung tinagúan karung Paskúha,</i> Christmas ate up all of our savings. <form>{-únun|libwasúnun}</form> <pos>a</pos> needing a change of roof. <number>3</number> <itype>[B; b]</itype> for one generation to replace another. <i>Maglibwas ang táwu sa kalibútan,</i> A new generation will replace the old generation of people in the world. <form>libwaslibwas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b]</itype> do s.t. several times. <i>Walà pa giyud ka mabusug nga naglibwaslibwas man kag káun?</i> Haven&apos;t you gotten your fill? You have eaten several times.

<p id=11166><form>líd<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lead guitar</tr>. <number>2</number> music performed by the lead guitar. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> play the lead guitar in a combo performance. <form>{&mdash;|líd} gitar</form> <xr>= <sc>líd</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr>

<p id=11167><form>líd<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lead-projectile</tr> of a bullet.

<p id=11168><form>lidgid</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>grate</tr>. <i>Lidgíra ang kamúti,</i> Grate the sweet potatoes. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make the delicacy called <ix>lidgid</ix>. <pos>n</pos> sweet made of a mixture of finely grated cassava or sweet potato mixed with grated young coconut and sugar which is rolled, wrapped in banana leaves, and boiled. <form>{ni-|nilidgid}, {-in-|linidgid}</form> <xr>= <sc>lidgid</sc>.</xr> <form>lidgiran, lidgíran, lidgiránan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>grater</tr>.

<p id=11169><form>lidibag</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>ladybug</tr> commonly found on squash plants.

<p id=11170><form>lídir<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ward-leader</tr> or other person who can command a block of votes. <number>2</number> <tr>leader</tr> of a group. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; c1]</itype> be, become a political leader. <form>{-atu(&larr;)|lidirátu}</form> <pos>n</pos> political <tr>leadership</tr>. <i>Kusgánun ang lidirátu ni Duránu sa Sugbu,</i> Durano has strong political influence in Cebu.

<p id=11171><form>lídir<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>go-between</tr> or one who is the bearer of communications between lovers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; b8]</itype> make s.o. a go-between between lovers.

<p id=11172><form>lidirátu</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>lídir<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p id=11173><form>*lídis</form> <form>{&mdash;|lídis} dringk</form> <pos>n</pos> a drink with only a small amount or no liquor for ladies to drink at a party. <form>{&mdash;|lídis} diyis</form> <pos>n</pos> a dance number where the ladies choose the men and the men have to pay ten centavos per dance, which goes to charity. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> make a dance number, one where the men have to pay ten cents. <form>{&mdash;|lídis} tsuys</form> ladies&apos;-choice-dance number where the girls choose the partners. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> make a number a ladies&apos; choice.

<p id=11174><form>lidlid</form> <xr>= <sc>lidgid</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11175><form>liga, líga<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. added to s.t. to enhance its quality. <i>Táyid nga may ligang anyil,</i> Detergent with bluing added. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> put an addition to s.t. <i>Ligahi ug suwà ang lána,</i> Put citrus juice into the coconut oil. <number>2</number> <tr>adulterate</tr>. <i>Giligáhan ang tablíyag mani,</i> They adulterated the unsweetened chocolate with roasted peanuts. <form>{&mdash;|líga} puul</form> <pos>a</pos> being enough to give one his fill until he tires of it. <i>Líga puul giyud ang súruy rung bakasiyun,</i> When I get my vacation I&apos;m going to roam about until I get sick of it.

<p id=11176><form>líga<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tournament</tr>. <i>Líga sa baskitbul,</i> Basketball tournament. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> hold a tournament.

<p id=11177><form>líga<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> The <tr>League of Nations</tr>.

<p id=11178><form>lígad<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; c6]</itype> for people or animals to <tr>lie down</tr>. <i>Ayaw ilígad ang ímung igsilimba,</i> Do not lie in your Sunday clothes.

<p id=11179><form>lígad<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b5]</itype> <tr>pass</tr>, <tr>pass by</tr>, <tr>go by</tr>. <i>Wà kay gibúhat samtang nagligad ang úras?</i> You did nothing as the time went by? <i>Dì mu makalígad sa Argaw kun muadtu mu sa Baríli,</i> You do not go by Argao when you go to Barili. <i>Ligárun (ligáran) ta nang buntúra,</i> We will go beyond that mountain. <form>{(&rarr;)|ligad}</form> <pos>a</pos> afternoon, the time after the sun has passed the zenith until sunset. <pos>n</pos> crops that are left over after the harvest. <i>Nanghagdaw silag mga ligad sa mais,</i> They are gleaning the few ears of corn that were missed in the harvest. <form>{(&rarr;)|ligad} sa kasarángan</form> <tr>excessively</tr>, more than normal. <i>Ligad sa kasarángan ang ímung pag-inum,</i> You drink excessively.

<p id=11180><form>ligadíra</form> <xr>= <sc>rigadíra</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11181><form>ligal</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>legal</tr>, within the law. <form>{-idad|ligalidad}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>legality</tr>, <tr>lawfulness</tr>. <i>Ang ligalidad sa ámut mauy ámung gilalísan,</i> The legality of the contribution <pb n=603>was what we were arguing about. <number>2</number> the legal point in contention. <i>Ang ligalidad nga gikagubtan nagagikan sa pagsabut sa púlung &lsquo;dupa&rsquo;,</i> The legal point that is in contention lies in the interpretation of the word &lsquo;fathom&rsquo;. &dagger;

<p id=11182><form>ligas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B256; b4(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> for s.t. to <tr>slip</tr> off of what it is placed on or for one&apos;s footing to slip. <i>Bangíla ug maáyu ang tiil sa lamísa arun dílì muligas (maligas),</i> Wedge the table leg carefully so it won&apos;t slip off. <i>Naligas ang ákung tiil sa hakhak,</i> My foot slipped out of the notch in the coconut tree. <number>2</number> commit a mistake. <i>Muligas (maligas) ka lang ug kas-a, itsapuyra dáyun ka,</i> If you make a single mistake, you will be fired at once. <i>Naligas ang ákung bàbà pagtug-an,</i> The truth slipped out of my mouth. <number>3</number> <tr>fail</tr>, be <tr>unsuccessful</tr>. <i>Sáyang, miligas ang átung plánu,</i> Too bad. Our plan failed. <number>4</number> be past the high noon mark. <i>Musúgud ta pagtrabáhu sa dílì pa muligas (maligas) ang adlaw,</i> We will start work before the sun gets past high noon. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> be past the zenith. <i>Ligas na ang bulan. Kay daktul, saylu na sa tungang gabíi,</i> The moon is past the zenith, and since it is full moon, it must be past midnight. <number>2</number> for a pig to be below the accepted standard weight (forty kilos) for wholesale shipment. <form>{(&larr;)|lígas}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; b]</itype> miss a number or proportion by a small amount. <i>Ug maglígas ang ímung timpla sa abúnu mamatay ang tanum,</i> If your fertilizer is not mixed in the right proportions, the plant will die. <i>Ang madaúgun nga tíkit ug ang ákù naglígas ug duha ka numiru,</i> My ticket was only two numbers off of the winning number. <number>2</number> <itype>[b3(1)]</itype> have differences over s.t. <i>Gamay ra gud nang inyung gikaligásan, sultíhun lang gud nà,</i> You are having a quarrel over such a small thing. You should talk it out. <form>{pa-|paligas}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> look for errors s.o. has made to justify harsh action against him. <i>Gipaligas ka lang sa ímung manidy&icaron;r arun maháwà ka,</i> The manager is just waiting for you to slip so he can fire you. <form>{pa-(&larr;)|palígas}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> provoke s.o. to provide the excuse to beat him up. <form>{-an(&larr;)|ligásan}</form> <pos>n</pos> the amount or extent to which one thing differs from another.

<p id=11183><form>lígas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>garter</tr> to hold the stockings up.

<p id=11184><form>ligásun</form> <pos>n</pos> ribs in a boat frame to which the boards or steelplates which form the hull covering are attached.

<p id=11185><form>ligaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> do s.t. right by accident. <i>Nakaligaw ku ug bungat sa hustung tubag,</i> I happened to hit on the correct answer. <i>Nakaligaw ku sa hustung timpla,</i> I hit on the right mixture.

<p id=11186><form>ligay</form> <pos>n</pos> swollen lymph node. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; b4]</itype> get swollen lymph nodes. <i>Giligayan ku kay giansúyan ang ákung tunuk,</i> I have swollen lymph glands because my wound got infected.

<p id=11187><form>ligdas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> <number>1</number> lie any old place to sleep. <i>Nagligdas sa dálan ang hubug,</i> The drunk was lying in the road. <number>2</number> <tr>die</tr>. <i>Muligdas mug way tawutáwug ikakuntra ninyu ang taga Pásil,</i> You&apos;ll be killed without even anybody knowing who did it if you make enemies with people from Pasil.

<p id=11188><form>ligdung</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>upright</tr>. <i>Ligdung kaáyu siya sa íyang trabáhu. Dì manáwat ug suburnu,</i> He is very upright in his work. He won&apos;t accept bribes. <number>2</number> keeping in one&apos;s place, proper and refined in deportment. <i>Usa siya ka táwu nga ligdung ug dílì maakuakuhun,</i> He keeps in his place and is not presumptuous. <number>3</number> serene in demeanor, but dignified and reserved. <i>Ligdung kaáyu siyang manubagtubag,</i> She answers with very dignified reserve. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a12]</itype> be <tr>upright</tr>, <tr>refined</tr>, and stay in one&apos;s place. <form>{ka-|kaligdung}</form> <pos>n</pos> doing what is proper to one&apos;s station. <i>Ipakítang ímung kaligdung; pangáyug katahúran, ayaw ipabundak ang ngálan sa ímung isigkatáwu, ayawg tubagtubag sa mga tigúlang,</i> Show you know how to behave: greet people, don&apos;t address people without using a title, don&apos;t talk back to old people.

<p id=11189><form>lighut</form> (from <ix>lihut</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> <tr>sneak out</tr>, leave surreptitiously. <i>Mulighut ta sa klási,</i> Let&apos;s sneak out of the class. <i>Milighut siya ug sakay sa ayruplánu,</i> He boarded the plane surreptitiously. <i>Mag-ábut nyà ta ug makalighut ku sa ámù,</i> I&apos;ll see you later if I can sneak out of the house.

<p id=11190><form>lígid</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB2S6; c1]</itype> <tr>roll</tr>, roll s.t. <i>Si Pidru mauy mulígid (mupalígid) sa búla,</i> Pedro will roll the ball. <i>Lígid dáyun ug masúnug ang sinínà,</i> Roll (on the ground) if your clothes are afire. <i>Ligírun (ligdun, ilígid) ku kanà kay nakaáli sa ákung agiánan,</i> I will roll it out of the way. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> for days, years, etc. to roll by (literary). <i>Túling milígid ang katuígan,</i> Years rolled by swiftly. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A]</itype> throw a tantrum by rolling on the floor. <i>Ngánung milígid ang bátà? Unsa na puy íyang gustu?</i> Why is the child throwing a tantrum? What does he want now? <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>lie down</tr>. <i>Mulígid siya dáyun igkahumag káun,</i> He lies down as soon as he finishes eating. <number>2a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lígid} sa banig</formx> be <tr>bedridden</tr>. <i>Tulu na ka túig siya nga naglígid sa banig,</i> She has been bedridden for three years. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>wallow</tr>. <i>Ang kábaw sa panahun sa ting-init mulígid sa tunaan,</i> On hot days the carabao wallows <pb n=604>in the pond. <i>Kanang daginutána naglígid sa bahandì,</i> That miser is wallowing in riches. <i>Naglígid siya sa kasal-ánan,</i> She is sinking deep in sin. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> do s.t. to s.o. mercilessly without letup. <i>Gilígid kug pangutána sa abugádu,</i> The lawyer cross-examined me. <i>Ang asáwa gilígid ug hawuk sa íyang bána,</i> The husband smothered his wife with kisses. <form>{(&rarr;)|ligid}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wheel</tr>. <form>kaligiray</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>roll around</tr>. <i>Nagkaligiray si Duman sa túmang kasakit,</i> Duman rolled around in intense pain. <form>kaligiran</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> roll head over heels. <i>Nagkaligiran ang táwung nadakin-as sa bakilid,</i> The man slipped on the slope and tumbled down head over heels. <form>{pa-|palígid}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hoop</tr> to play with.

<p id=11191><form>ligingliging</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> be bulging all over from obesity. <i>Si Áyik Lusáda nagligingliging sa katambuk,</i> Ike Lozada is bulging all over from obesity.

<p id=11192><form>lígings</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>leggings</tr> worn with riding pants. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <number>1</number> wear leggings. <number>2</number> wear stockings (humorous).

<p id=11193><form>ligis</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> flatten or <tr>mash</tr> s.t. into powder by pressing s.t. heavy on it. <i>Ligisa (ligsa) ang asin ug kutsára,</i> Pulverize the rock salt with a tablespoon. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b2]</itype> for a vehicle to run over s.t. <i>Dariyut ku maligsi sa taksi,</i> The taxi nearly ran me over. <pos>n</pos> <tr>pestle</tr>, <tr>rolling pin</tr>, or anything else used for crushing things into fine particles. <form>ligsanan</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. on which s.t. is crushed.

<p id=11194><form>ligitlígit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <tr>knead</tr>, roll into a ball with the thumb and forefinger. <i>Naghunàhúnà siya samtang nagligitlígit sa íyang búngut,</i> As he was thinking, he twisted his beard with his fingers.

<p id=11195><form>ligngin</form> <xr>= <sc>língin</sc></xr> (plural).

<p id=11196><form>ligpit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> fasten s.t. temporarily by pressing it down with s.t. that holds it in place. <i>Bungbung amákang giligpítag dus pur dus,</i> Sawali walling that was held in place by two-by-two&apos;s. <i>Ligpíti ug kumpit ang mga hinayhay,</i> Clip the wash with clothespins. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b2]</itype> press down on s.t. <i>Hiligpitan ang ákung tudlù sa sira,</i> My finger was caught in the door shutter. <i>Bug-at nga batu ang iligpit sa binanggud balanghuy,</i> Use a heavy stone to press out the juice of the grated cassava. <number>3</number> put pressure on s.o. <i>Gitug-an níya kay giligpítan siya sa pulis,</i> He revealed the truth because the police pressured him. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> clip to fasten s.t. <number>2</number> s.t. used to press s.t. in place.

<p id=11197><form>ligsì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; a12]</itype> for bamboo to crack along the grain under pressure. <i>Ayaw ug ibundak ang sag-ub kay muligsì (maligsì),</i> Set the bamboo tube water container down gently so it doesn&apos;t crack.

<p id=11198><form>ligsik</form> (from <ix>lisik</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B23(1)46]</itype> <tr>expel</tr> s.t. solid from within with a sudden force. <i>Muligsik ang lísu sa nangkà ug hugtun paggúnit,</i> The seed of the jackfruit will jump out if you grab the meat. <number>2</number> <itype>[B246]</itype> be wide-eyed with fear, amazement, surprise, etc. <i>Miligsik ang mga mata sa táwu sa kahibúlung,</i> The man&apos;s eyes became wide with amazement.

<p id=11199><form>ligtak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26C; a12P]</itype> for the skull to crack. <i>Miligtak ang íyang úlu pagkabunsù sa simintu,</i> He cracked his skull when he fell, striking his head on the cement. <i>Ligtákun ku nang úlu mu,</i> I&apos;ll crack your skull wide open.

<p id=11200><form>ligtì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> for brittle things to crack due to sudden change of temperature. <i>Ang básu muligtì ug butangan ug pinabúkal nga túbig,</i> The tumbler will crack if you put boiling water in it. <i>Miligtì ang sundang kay dì maáyung pagkasubu,</i> The sword cracked because it was not well tempered. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26; a12]</itype> <tr>crack</tr> s.t. <i>Ligtíun ku nang bagulbágul mu,</i> I&apos;ll crack your skull.

<p id=11201><form>ligtik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; a12]</itype> for s.t. to crack under pressure or sudden change of temperature. <i>Muligtik nang ímung tiyan ug magpalábi kag káun,</i> Your stomach will burst if you eat too much. <i>Muligtik (maligtik) ang sag-ub ug ímung ipusdak,</i> The bamboo water container will crack if you slam it down hard on the ground.

<p id=11202><form>ligtiw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2346; b8]</itype> <tr>fly off</tr> to a distance. <i>Naligtiwan ku sa aligatu sa nag-ismiril,</i> The sparks flew off from the sharpening stone and hit me.

<p id=11203><form>lígù</form> (from <ix>dígù</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>bathe</tr> s.o. <i>Ang inahan naglígù sa bátà,</i> The mother is bathing the baby. <i>Ligúa ang irù.</i> Bathe the dog. <number>2</number> <itype>[B123S56]</itype> take a <tr>bath</tr>, <tr>go swimming</tr>. <i>Malígù (mukalígù) ta sa Talísay,</i> We&apos;ll go swimming at Talisay Beach. <i>Dì ta makaligù kay way túbig,</i> We cannot take a bath because there is no water. <number>2a</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> (in proverbs) do s.t. to a certain extent. <i>Puslan mang malígù, manlúgud na lang giyud,</i> Since we took it on, we might as well go through with it. (We&apos;re bathing so we might as well rub the dirt off.) <i>Puslan mang mahumud, malígù na lang,</i> Since you took it on, you might as well go the whole hog. (Lit. You got wet, so you might as well bathe.) <form>walay {(&rarr;)|ligù}</form> <pos>a</pos> not having had a bath. <i>Húgaw batáa. Way ligù,</i> What a dirty child. He didn&apos;t take a bath. <form>{ka-|kalígù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>take a bath</tr>. <i>Ayawg kaligúi ang banyu kay naistak-ap,</i> Do not take a bath in the bathroom because it is plugged up. <i>Ínit túbig ang ikalígù,</i> Bathe with hot water. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A123S]</itype> take a bath after being bedridden, and therefore be cured. <i>Makabalik ka na sa trabáhu kay nakaligù <pb n=605>(nakakaligù) na ka,</i> You may go back to work because you are all better now. <number>2</number> <itype>[A123S]</itype> be wet all over, as in taking a bath. <i>Nakaligù (nakakaligù) ang nangharánag íhì,</i> The serenaders were bathed with urine. <pos>n</pos> action of taking a bath, going swimming. <form>{ka-an(&rarr;)|kaliguan}, {ka-anan|kaliguanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> place one bathes or goes swimming. &dagger;

<p id=11204><form>lig-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>strong</tr>, <tr>sturdy</tr>, <tr>durable</tr>. <i>Lig-un kaáyu ning baláya kay walà matumba sa bagyu,</i> This is a strong house because it was not blown down in the storm. <i>Lig-un ning panaptúna,</i> This is durable cloth. <number>2</number> firm in will or endurance. <i>Dílì ni makapahílak níya kay lig-un siya ug balatían,</i> You cannot make him cry with that because he is a strong child. <i>Nagsáad siya sa lig-un nga dì na muusab,</i> He firmly resolved never to do it again. <number>2a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lig-un} ug kasingkásing</formx> <pos>a</pos> <tr>stouthearted</tr>. <i>Ang táwung lig-un ug kasingkásing dílì daling mahadluk ug mawad-ag pagláum,</i> A stouthearted man is not easily frightened nor easily discouraged. <number>3</number> strong, difficult to defeat. <i>Lig-un nga tím sa baskitbul,</i> A strong basketball team. <form>way {&mdash;|lig-un}</form> <pos>a</pos> weak, not strong. <i>Way lig-un ning báya kay gabuk na ug halígi,</i> This house is not strong because it has weak posts. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; a12]</itype> be, become strong, durable, sturdy; cause s.t. to become so. <i>Lig-úna ang ímung kaugalíngun. Ayaw paghílak,</i> Brace yourself. Don&apos;t cry. <form>{ka-|kalig-un}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>strength</tr>, <tr>durability</tr>, <tr>firmness</tr>. <form>{ka-an|kalig-únan}</form> <pos>n</pos> documents as evidence of a contract, agreement, and the like. <i>Dúna kay kalig-únan báhin sa íyang útang?</i> Do you have any evidence of her debt? <i>Kining singsing kalig-únan sa ákung gugma nímu,</i> This ring is a token of my love for you.

<p id=11205><form>ligung</form> <xr>= <sc>binga</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11206><form>ligutgut</form> <xr>= <sc>aligutgut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11207><form>liguy</form> <pos>a</pos> trying to get out of work. <i>Ang maistrang liguy muatúbang ug klási nga way lísun plan,</i> The lazy teacher comes to class with no lesson plan. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> get out of work by being absent or simply not tending to it. <i>Ug dúnay mga bug-at nga buluhatun, muliguy siya,</i> When there are unpleasant things to do, he bugs out. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> play hooky. <i>Muliguy ku sa klási kay mutan-aw kug sini,</i> I will skip class to go to the movies. <form>liguylíguy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> loaf on the job. <i>Mauwaw kung muliguylíguy sa ákung trabáhu ug náa ang ákung ámu,</i> I am ashamed to loaf on the job when my boss is around. <number>2</number> be absent from school every once in a while. <form>{ka-|kaliguy}</form> <pos>n</pos> being a bug-out.

<p id=11208><form>ligwa</form> <pos>n</pos> measurement of distance: a league.

<p id=11209><form>ligwan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small wild honeybee, having black and light orange stripes, nesting inside trees or walls.

<p id=11210><form>ligwat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> pry s.t. off or open. <i>Ligwáti lang ang kaban kay nasúd ang yáwi,</i> Just pry the trunk open because the key is inside. <i>Náay lansang sa bungbung muy iligwat sa pipsi,</i> There&apos;s a nail on the wall to open the Pepsi. <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to pry s.t. open. <form>{pa-|paligwat} ug sulti</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> make nasty allusions about s.o. <i>Pirmi siyang kakitag áway kay kusug mupaligwat ug sulti,</i> She tends to pick quarrels because she tends to make nasty allusions.

<p id=11211><form>líha</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> rub or smooth down s.t. with sandpaper or s.t. similar. <i>Ikay mulíha sa tabla ug akuy mupintal,</i> You sand the board, and I will paint it. <pos>n</pos> <tr>sandpaper</tr> or s.t. used like sandpaper. <form>papil {di-|dilíha}</form> <xr>= <sc>líha</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11212><form>lihang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> vertical space made when two long things are not placed closely. <i>Ang tayùtù nakalusut sa lihang sa bungbung,</i> The lizard went through the space between the parts of the walling. <number>2</number> the space between teeth that are set somewhat apart.

<p id=11213><form>lihat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> do s.t. <tr>inadvertently</tr>. <i>Ang kadaghan sa pumapálit mauy makalihat (makapalihat) nákù sa pagpanuklì,</i> I made mistakes in making change because there were so many customers. <i>Nalihat ang pulis patrul sa kutsi nga ílang gisunud,</i> The police patrol inadvertently lost track of the car they were following.

<p id=11214><form>lihay, líhay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> <tr>dodge</tr>, <tr>evade</tr> a blow. <i>Ilihay ang ímung nawung, ayawg atras,</i> Pull your face away, but don&apos;t back off. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> evade a question, wriggle out of s.t. <i>Maáyu siyang mulihay ug pangutána kay abugádu man,</i> He is good in evading questions because he is a lawyer. <i>Dì ka na giyud makalihay ánang mga pruyba,</i> There is no way you can wriggle out of it in the face of this evidence. <number>2a</number> escape one&apos;s obligations. <i>Buluhatun nga íyang gilihayan,</i> A job that he wriggled out of.

<p id=11215><form>lihi</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>inaugurate</tr> s.t. with the proper ceremonies or magical ingredients. <i>Maglihi sila sa iskuylahan,</i> They will have the school blessed. <i>Kámay mauy ilihi sa mag-anak,</i> When a woman is in labor, give her brown sugar to insure that she will recover quickly. <number>1a</number> bury s.t. with plants to insure a good harvest. <i>Lihian ug tablíya ang tabákù arun lugum ug kulur ang dáhun,</i> They plant chocolate together with tobacco seeds to assure that it will have dark-colored leaves. <number>1b</number> begin the new year with a certain action which is believed will then endure for the rest of the year. <i>Gilihian níla ang bag-ung túig ug áway,</i> They began the new year with a <pb n=606>quarrel. <number>1c</number> use s.t. for the first time following the proper prohibitions or injunctions. <i>Lihian nátug simba ang bag-u nátung sapátus arun mulungtad,</i> Let&apos;s wear our new shoes to church so they will last. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; b6(1)]</itype> crave s.t. in the first few months of pregnancy such that the appearance of the thing desired appears as a birthmark in the offspring. <i>Kun maglihi kag asin, putì kunu ang ímung bátà,</i> If you crave salt in your early months of pregnancy, your child will be white. <number>2a</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> for a child to get the appearance of a certain thing his mother craved while she was conceiving him. <i>Náay pula nga tap-ing sa íyang nawung kay gilihian siyag kundíman,</i> He has a purple splotch on his cheek because his mother craved red cloth in her pregnancy. <number>2b</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> get to have a certain characteristic by starting out in a certain way. <i>Bag-ung túig gánì, sayug mata arun dì ka lìhan pagkahingatulug,</i> Get up early on New Year&apos;s day so you won&apos;t get the characteristic of being a sleepyhead for the whole year. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> injunctions or prohibitions observed upon inaugurating s.t.; anything used as a magical means to insure success of s.t. inaugurated. <i>Ang lihi sa pagtanum ug mangga, asúkar,</i> They use sugar to plant with mangoes to insure sweet fruit. <number>2</number> birthmark which is thought invariably to be due to a mother&apos;s cravings in her early stages of pregnancy. <form>pistang {ig-l-(&larr;)|iglilihi}</form> <pos>n</pos> holiday of obligation in the Catholic Church.

<p id=11216><form>lihíru</form> <number>1</number> doing things with <tr>agility</tr> and <tr>rapidity</tr>. <i>Lihíru siyang sugúun,</i> When you tell him to do s.t. he does it quickly and without hesitation. <i>Lihíru siyang mulálag banig,</i> She&apos;s quick in weaving mats. <number>2</number> ready to do s.t. <i>Lihíru nga mangusì ning batáa sa íyang kadúlà,</i> This child is quick to pinch his playmates. <number>3</number> skillful. <i>Lihíru siyang mudúwag ahidris,</i> He&apos;s good in playing chess. <number>4</number> bright. <i>Dakù siyag grádu kay lihíru man,</i> He got high marks because he is intelligent. <number>4a</number> smart, resourcefully shrewd. <i>Dì kang kaliput ánang kumirsiyantíha kay lihíru nà,</i> You can&apos;t put one over on that shrewd businessman. <number>5</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lihíri} ug kamut</formx> <pos>a</pos> light-fingered. <i>Kinahanglang magbantay ang mga tindíra sa mga lihíru ug kamut,</i> The salesgirls had better watch out for light-fingered customers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125]</itype> get to be expeditious, skillful. <i>Malihíru man lang ni si Puduy ug náay diyis,</i> Podoy will move if he knows he can get a dime out of it.

<p id=11217><form>lihisladur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>legislator</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> be, become a legislator.

<p id=11218><form>lihislatíbu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>legislative</tr>.

<p id=11219><form>lihislatúra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>legislature</tr>.

<p id=11220><form>lihiya, lihíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lye</tr>: caustic soda or lye obtained from wood ashes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make lye.

<p id=11221><form>líhù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> guide s.o. while he urinates or defecates. <i>Ang míd mauy mulíhù sa bátà sa bangkíyu,</i> The maid makes the child sit on the potty. <i>Ilíhù ang masakitun sa inudúru,</i> Guide the patient while he goes to the toilet.

<p id=11222><form>*lihug</form> <form>{pa-|palíhug}</form> <number>1</number> <tr>please</tr>. <i>Palíhug, ikúhà akug túbig,</i> Please, get me some water. <number>2</number> work bee in which people are not paid for their labor. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> ask s.o. to do s.t. as a favor without pay. <i>Palihúgun ku siyag húlug ug suwat,</i> I will ask him to do me the favor of mailing a letter. <i>Dúna kuy ipalíhug nímu,</i> I have a favor to ask of you. <i>Ipalíhug kug kúhà ánà bisag wà kuy iháwun,</i> Please do me the favor of getting it, even though I have no pig to roast (from the notion that people who are asked to do a big job without pay are generally given a good meal). <number>2</number> <itype>[AN]</itype> hold a work bee in which people work for free except for food and drinks. <i>Mupalíhug (mamalíhug) kug paalsa sa ákung balay,</i> I&apos;m having a work bee to move my house. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>{-in-|linihug}</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <tr>favor</tr> asked. <form>{pina-|pinalihug}</form> <pos>n</pos> persons requested to help.

<p id=11223><form>líhuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S]</itype> <tr>move</tr>. <i>Búhì pa diay ang isdà kay naglihuk,</i> The fish is still alive because it is moving. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> cause s.t. to move. <i>Kinsay naglíhuk sa hárì áring damahan?</i> Who moved the king here on the checkerboard? <number>1b</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> betake oneself to do s.t. <i>Dì mulíhuk ug dílì suburnúhan,</i> They won&apos;t make a move unless you bribe them. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> for a characteristic to make its appearance. <i>Ug mukatursi anyus na ang láki, mulíhuk na ang gána,</i> When a boy reaches fourteen years or so, he begins to feel his sexual drives. <i>Milíhuk na pud ang túlis,</i> Robbery cases are on the rise. <i>Gilihúkan na pud siya sa íyang kabúang,</i> His insanity is making its appearance again. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> action, deed. <i>Katahápan ang íyang líhuk,</i> His actions are arousing suspicion. <number>2</number> one&apos;s turn to move a piece in a game. <form>hínay ug {&mdash;|líhuk}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> timid, lacking aggressiveness. <i>Hínay nímug líhuk! Musugut na untà tu ug ímu pang giapríta,</i> You sure don&apos;t move! She would have accepted you had you pressed her. <number>2</number> slowpoke. <i>Hínay bayà nímug líhuk, wà man nímu mahuman nga udtu na man,</i> You sure are slow! You haven&apos;t finished and it&apos;s already noon! <form>{(&rarr;)|lihuk}</form> <pos>n</pos> movement, stirring. <i>Basta way irpákit, wà giyuy lihuk ang ayruplánu,</i> As long as there are no air pockets the airplane will fly smoothly. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> always moving, <pb n=607>unstable. <i>Lihuk kaáyung tabanúga,</i> An unstable kite. <i>Lihuk nga bátà,</i> A restless child. <number>2</number> for women to have excessive sexual desire. <i>Ang mga babáying lihuk bísag minyù na, manguríbut pa giyud,</i> Women who have excessive sexual desire fool around with men, even if they are married. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become s.t. that moves around too much or a woman of excessive desires. <form>{pa-|palíhuk}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; a12]</itype> set s.t. into motion. <i>Ubang pulitiku mupalíhuk dáyun sa ubras publikas sa panahun sa piliay,</i> Some politicians will set public works projects into motion during elections. <form>{hag-|haglihuk}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be able to move. <i>Pwirti nákung lisánga. Wà ku mahaglihuk,</i> I was so frightened I couldn&apos;t move. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|lihukan}</form> <pos>a</pos> given to moving around, restless. <i>Lihukan siyag kamut sa sinihan,</i> He has wandering hands in the movie house. <form>{-in-an(&rarr;)|linihukan}</form> <pos>n</pos> way one acts. <form>{ka-an|kalihúkan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> activities. <i>Unsay kalihúkan sa iskuylahan rung gabíi?</i> What is going on in school this evening? <i>Kalihúkang langyaw,</i> Foreign affairs. <number>2</number> movement, organized activities to gain a certain objective. <i>Kalihúkan sa pausbaw sa swildu,</i> Movement to increase wages. <form>{ma-(&rarr;)|malihuk}</form> <xr>= <sc>lihuk</sc>, <i>a</i>.</xr> <form>{pa&N;-|panglíhuk}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the way one carries himself. <i>Mga babáying artipisyal ang panlíhuk,</i> Women with artificial ways about them. <number>2</number> things to be done, chores to attend to. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|lihukun}</form> <xr>= <sc>{pa&N;-|panglíhuk}</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr>

<p id=11224><form>lihut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> take time out to do s.t. for a moment. <i>Bisag daghang trabáhu, mulihut giyud siyag dúaw dinhi,</i> In spite of all the things he has to attend to he still takes out time to come here. <i>Makalihut pa giyud siyag suwat bísan ug bísi,</i> She still found time to write to me even if she was busy. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> do s.t. secretly. <i>Kun maúlaw kang hidunggan, lihuta (ilihut) lang pagsulti,</i> If you are ashamed to let anyone hear it, just tell it secretly.

<p id=11225><form>likag</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ray.

<p id=11226><form>likat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b8]</itype> overlook or miss s.t. <i>Nalikatan (hilikatan) níyag ihap ang usa ka libru,</i> He overlooked one book in counting them.

<p id=11227><form>likay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>avoid</tr> s.t., s.o.&apos;s company. <i>Mulikay siya sa buluhatun,</i> He tries to avoid work. <i>Maglikay ka sa sámuk, ha?</i> You must keep away from trouble, understand? <i>Likayi nang tawhána kay palaaway siya,</i> Keep away from that man because he is quarrelsome. <i>Dílì kalikayan ang sayup,</i> You can&apos;t avoid making some mistakes. <number>1a</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> be delivered, safe from actual or feared evil. <i>Mag-ampù ta básin ug malikay siya sa kadaútan,</i> Let us pray and hope that he be kept safe from evil. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> dodge s.t., duck out of the way. <i>Walà ku makalikay sa íyang suntuk,</i> I was not able to dodge his blows. <i>Naglikay sa bága, nahasugba sa síga,</i> Out of the frying pan, into the fire (lit. avoiding the coals, he got broiled in the fire).

<p id=11228><form>likbung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> put s.t. in the way to prevent passage. <i>Ikaw bay naglikbung ug síya sa pultahan?</i> Were you the one who placed a chair across the doorway? <pos>n</pos> anything placed across an opening or passageway to prevent passage.

<p id=11229><form>likhad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); b(1)]</itype> for the brim of s.t. stiff and woven to open out. <i>Mulikhad (malikhad) ang daplin sa nígu ug wà pay liskug,</i> The sides of a winnowing tray will come out open if there&apos;s no ring to keep it in place.

<p id=11230><form>likì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> <tr>crack</tr>. <i>Mulikì ang yútà ug dúgay nga ulanun,</i> The earth cracks if there is no rain for a long time. <i>Ang ínit makalikì (makapalikì) sa tabla,</i> Heat can make boards crack. <i>Ang lapalapa mulikì ug dílì sapatúsan,</i> Your soles will crack if you don&apos;t wear shoes. <pos>n</pos> <tr>crack</tr>. <form>bibingka nga usa ray {&mdash;|likì}</form> female genitalia (humorous&mdash;lit. rice cake with a single crack). <form>{&mdash;|likì} sa kawáyan</form> <pos>n</pos> of unknown origin. <number>a</number> illegitimate children. <i>Kanang mga anak mung gíkan sa likì sa kawáyan,</i> Those illegitimate children of yours (lit. who come from the cracks in bamboos). <number>b</number> appearing from nowhere. <i>Mu ra mag gíkan sa likì sa kawáyan nang tawhána. Nikalit lag tunga dinhi,</i> That man seems to have appeared out of nowhere. He just appeared in this place. a having a crack. <i>Sugung nga likì,</i> A bamboo container with a crack. <form>{(&larr;)|líkì}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> do s.t. to s.o. intensely. <i>Likíun (likiyun) kag búnal ni Pápa mu ug sakpan ka,</i> Your father will beat you mercilessly if he catches you. <form>{pa-|palikì}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cause a crack or s.t. like a crack to appear s.w. <i>Palikiun ku ang ákung hinápay,</i> I&apos;ll do my hair with a part (lit. cause my hairdo to have a crack). &dagger;

<p id=11231><form>likì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> take a liking to s.o. (humorous slang). <i>Nakalikì siya sa íyang bag-ung silíngan,</i> She took a liking to her new neighbor.

<p id=11232><form>líkid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> go around a winding path or road. <i>Kun milíkid na gánì sila dílì na nímu sila makit-an,</i> If they have already gone around the bend you won&apos;t see them any more. <i>Dúgay silang miabut sa ibabaw kay milíkid man sila,</i> It took them long to reach the top because they took the winding path up.

<p id=11233><form>likida, likidar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>liquidate</tr>, <tr>kill</tr>. <i>Sinuhúlan ang milikidar sa kunggrisman,</i> The congressman was killed by a hired goon.

<p id=11234><form>líkids</form> <pos>n</pos> leakage in a government examination, <pb n=608>where the answers are given to buyers. <i>May líkids matag iksámin sa Síbil Sirbis,</i> There is always a leakage every Civil Service exam. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain the answers in advance through leakage. <i>Nakalíkids man maung nakapasar,</i> He got the answers ahead, and that&apos;s why he passed.

<p id=11235><form>likidu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>liquid</tr>, not solid.

<p id=11236><form>líkin</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> cigar made of finely crushed, roasted tobacco rolled in the <ix>lungbuy</ix> leaf or some other material formed into a tube. <number>2</number> the wrapper for this sort of cigar. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make, make into this sort of cigar. <form>{(&rarr;)|likin}, {-an|likínan}, {-an(&rarr;)|likinan}</form> <xr>= <sc>líkin</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr> <form>{-in-|liníkin}</form> <xr>= <sc>líkin</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr>

<p id=11237><form>líkis</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13B; c]</itype> be wound around, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Didtuy dakung sawa nga naglíkis sa sanga,</i> There was a big snake wound around the branch. <i>Ilíkis ug hugut ang písì sa halígi,</i> Wind the rope tightly around the post. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put s.t. all around s.t. <i>Akuy mulíkis aring mga batu líbut sa punúan sa tanum,</i> I&apos;ll put these stones around the base of the plants. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|likisan}</form> <pos>n</pos> the beam at the far end of the loom around which the warp threads are wound.

<p id=11238><form>líkit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> roll s.t. flat into a tight tube, or turn a tube to wind s.t. around it. <i>Maglíkit kug mga papil pára sa rípa,</i> I will roll pieces of paper up for the raffle. <i>Likta ug maáyu ang ímung tinustus arun dílì muhungaw,</i> Roll your cigar tightly so it will draw in air well. <pos>n</pos> tight roll. <i>Usa ka líkit nga kwarta,</i> A roll of paper bills. <form>{-in-|liníkit}</form> <xr>= <sc>líkit</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=11239><form>liklik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2N]</itype> go along the edges of s.t. or round about, not straight across or in the center. <i>Nangliklik ku sa asíras kay nag-ulan,</i> I walked along the sidewalk (rather than in the street) because it was raining. <i>Mangliklik lang ta kay náay daghang buguy dihà sa agiánan,</i> Let&apos;s go around because there are lots of toughs on the road.

<p id=11240><form>likmù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> conceal s.t. so others will not know it. <i>Ilikmù nákù ang ákung daug,</i> I&apos;ll conceal the fact that I won. <i>Likmúi ang inahan nga namatay ang íyang anak,</i> Keep it hidden from the mother that her son died. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> cheat s.o. by withholding part of the amount or number to be handed in. <i>Likmúun nákù ang katungà sa hálin,</i> I&apos;ll keep half of the proceeds to myself.

<p id=11241><form>liksi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> jump up or aside, usually by reflex action in fright or to avoid danger. <i>Miliksi siya sa kakurat,</i> He jumped back with fright. <form>liksiliksi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> jump about violently. <i>Paknga ang isdà arun dílì muliksiliksi sulud sa baskit,</i> Knock the fish on the head so they won&apos;t thrash around in the basket.

<p id=11242><form>liksiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lesson in school</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>object lesson</tr>, an event or experience that should teach one to do s.t. differently. <i>Kadtung baháa liksiyun nátù báhin sa pagpanagag káhuy,</i> That flood should be a lesson to us with regards to deforestation. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> assign, study a lesson. <i>Akuy muliksiyun ninyu run báhin sa paghúbad,</i> I will give you a translation exercise today. <i>Nagliksiyun mi báhin sa birbu,</i> We were having our lesson on verbs. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> make s.o. know the disagreeable consequence of an act. <i>Liksiyunun ta ka sa ímung binúang,</i> I will discipline you because of your foolishness.

<p id=11243><form>liktyur</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lecture</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>scolding</tr> (humorous slang). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> give a lecture. <number>2</number> <tr>scold</tr>. <i>Sa sayu sa buntag nagliktyur na siya sa íyang mga suluguun,</i> It&apos;s early in the morning, but she is already reading her servants a lecture.

<p id=11244><form>likù, líkù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> <tr>turn</tr>, <tr>change directions</tr>. <i>Mulikù ka sa wala padúlung sa pantalan,</i> Turn left towards the wharf. <i>Ilíkù ang dyíp dihang iskináha,</i> Turn the jeep at the corner. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB6; c1]</itype> bend, be wound around. <i>Nakalikù siya sa bakus sa líug sa irù,</i> She managed to get the belt around the dog&apos;s neck. <i>Kining karsadáha naglikù sa bungtud,</i> This road encircles the hill. <form>{(&larr;)|líkù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> for a way to be, become round about. <i>Mulíkù ang átung pagkaági ug manúbay ta sa karsáda,</i> Our way will be round about if we follow the road. <pos>a</pos> round about way. <form>{(&rarr;)|likù}</form> <pos>n</pos> a bent pipe for channelling gas in a lantern. <form>likùlíkù</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>zigzagging</tr>. <number>2</number> not direct to the point, beating around the bush. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B456]</itype> be, become zigzagging. <i>Mupahínay ka ug mulikùlíkù ang karsáda,</i> Slow down if the road starts to zigzag. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> beat around the bush. <i>Sultíhi ku sa inyung túyù. Ay na lag ilikùlíkù (likùlikúa),</i> Tell me what it is you want. Don&apos;t hem and haw. <pos>n</pos> action of beating around the bush. <i>Sa way daghang likùlíkù mipadayag siya sa íyang túyù,</i> Without beating around the bush, he disclosed his intentions. <form>likùlikuan</form> <pos>a</pos> one who is inconsistent in what he says, unreliable. <i>Dílì kasalígan ang táwung likùlikuan,</i> A person who doesn&apos;t say the same thing twice can&apos;t be trusted. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become inconsistent and unreliable. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|likuan}, {-anan|likuánan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> curve, bend of a road. <i>Náa ang íla sa may likúan,</i> Their place is near where the bend is. <number>2</number> place one turns off.

<p id=11245><form>likub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> place or put s.t. in the middle or across a path to prevent or obstruct passage. <i>Akuy mulikub ug batu áning agianána, bir ug kinsay muyawyaw,</i> I will <pb n=609>put a rock in the middle of this pathway. Let&apos;s see who dares complain. <i>Ang kanal nalikban ug sagbut,</i> The ditch was blocked with trash. <pos>n</pos> anything in the way to obstruct passage.

<p id=11246><form>likud</form> <number>1</number> <tr>behind</tr>, at the <tr>back of</tr>. <i>Ang ámung balay náa sa likud sa simbahan,</i> Our house is behind the church. <i>Didtu siya maglingkud sa likud sa trák,</i> He sat in the back of the bus. <number>1a</number> one&apos;s back. <i>Palíhug kalúta ang ákung likud,</i> Please scratch my back. <number>2</number> coming after. <i>Likud sa íyang mga pag-antus miabut ang kalampúsan,</i> On the heels of his sufferings came success. <number>3</number> coexistent with but not readily apparent. <i>Likud sa íyang pahiyum nag-umidu ang kayugut,</i> There is a seething rancor behind her smile. <i>Didtuy mistiryu nga nahitágù sa likud sa kangitngit,</i> There was s.t. mysterious hidden in the midst of the darkness. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> <tr>betray</tr>, turn one over to his enemies. <i>Gilikud si Taruk sa íyang sákup ngadtu sa Písi,</i> Taruc&apos;s men betrayed him to the P.C. <form>likuran</form> <pos>n</pos> place in back of s.t. <form>likudlíkud</form> <pos>n</pos> eve before a wedding. <i>Mikalit lang siyag kahánaw sa likudlíkud sa íyang kasal,</i> He suddenly disappeared on the eve of his wedding.

<p id=11247><form>likug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> for s.t. long and thin to get crooked or curled. <i>Gilikug níla ang alambri sa punúan sa káhuy,</i> They tied the wire around the trunk of the tree. <pos>a</pos> <tr>crooked</tr>, not straight. <i>Dì na magámit ang rúlir, kay likug na,</i> We can&apos;t use the ruler because it is bent.

<p id=11248><form>likulikuhan</form> <xr>= <sc>likùlikuan</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>likù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11249><form>likung, líkung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make into a circle, coil. <i>Likúngun (ilíkung) ku ning alambri,</i> I will coil up the wire into a circular loop. <pos>n</pos> s.t. fashioned into a coil, loop. <i>Dúnay líkung nga gipátung níya sa íyang úlu silbing hapin sa íyang lukdúun,</i> She has a piece of cloth rolled into a coil which she placed on her head to cushion what she is going to carry. <i>Kuháang likung kay maghulahup ku,</i> Get me a hoop. I&apos;m going to play hulahoop.

<p id=11250><form>likup, líkup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; a]</itype> <tr>surround</tr>, <tr>enclose</tr>. <i>Ang mga kaáway milíkup sa ílang kampu,</i> The enemies surrounded their camp. <i>Daghang mistiryu ang naglikup niíning hitabúa,</i> The event is shrouded in mystery. <i>Likpa (likupa, palikpi) ug kural ang balay,</i> Build a fence around the house. <form>{(&rarr;)|likup}</form> <pos>n</pos> distance or measurement around s.t. <form>{ka-an|kaliúpan}, {pa-|palikup}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>surroundings</tr>, <tr>environs</tr>.

<p id=11251><form>lik-up</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> close, cover a passage. <i>Dì mu makalik-up ning dalána kay agiánan man ni sa publiku,</i> You can&apos;t block this road because this is a public thoroughfare. <i>Ákung gilik-úpan ang sapà arun muhubas ang ubus,</i> I&apos;m damming up the brook so that the area below will dry up.

<p id=11252><form>likuplikup</form> <pos>n</pos> a climbing vine with whitish-yellow flowers and round, smooth leaves, belonging to the family <bio>Dischidia</bio>.

<p id=11253><form>líkus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> be <tr>coiled around</tr> s.t. <i>Sawa nga nagalíkus sa sanga,</i> A snake coiled around the branch. <i>Milíkus sa payag ang mga sundálu,</i> The soldiers surrounded the hut. <i>Dúnay paril nga naglíkus sa simbahan,</i> There is a stone wall that is surrounding the church. <i>Ílang giliksan sa púkut ang dakung duut sa isdà,</i> They encircled the big school of fish with the net. <pos>n</pos> measurement around s.t., perimeter. <form>{(&rarr;)|likus}, likuslikus</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. itchy skin infection where eruptions of watery pustules appear in splotches around the body and later burst.

<p id=11254><form>likut</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>slit-eyed</tr>. <i>Likut siya kay kalíwat ug Insik,</i> He has narrow eyes. He is of Chinese extraction. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B15]</itype> be, become slit-eyed.

<p id=11255><form>likuy, líkuy</form> <pos>a</pos> going in a curve. <i>Líkuy ang dágan sa búla kay walà man manibil ang mísa,</i> The ball is rolling crooked because the billiard table is not level. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S]</itype> for a ball to curve or swerve. <i>Lisud saw-un ang búla nga naglikuy,</i> It is hard to catch a curve ball.

<p id=11256><form>likwa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> buy stock with the proceeds of a day&apos;s sale. <i>Ígù rang ilikwa ang halin karung adláwa,</i> Today&apos;s sales are just enough to buy new stock. <form>likwalikwa</form> <pos>n</pos> the system of small-time buying and selling in which the entire capital is tied up in a single day&apos;s sales and the proceeds go for buying new goods. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; c]</itype> operate a business on this method.

<p id=11257><form>likwad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> cleverly deny s.t. or conceal a truth when accused. <i>Dì ka makalikwad kay nasáyud na ku,</i> Don&apos;t try to be clever and hide anything because I already know. <i>Ayawg ilikwad nákù ang hustung kítà,</i> Don&apos;t try to conceal exactly what the proceeds are. <pos>a</pos> cleverly denying or concealing s.t. when accused. <form>likwadlikwad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> investigate, cross-examine thoroughly, turning questions inside out. <i>Ug likwadlikwárun (ilikwadlikwad) ang mga pangutána, tingálig maluba ang giakusar,</i> If the questions are turned inside out in the course of the cross-examination, the accused will probably give in.

<p id=11258><form>likwála</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ornamental palm with wide, round, accordion-like leaves and long, slender stalks lined with thorns at the sides: <bio>Licuala spp</bio>.

<p id=11259><form>likwang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b2c1]</itype> tilt or turn s.t. heavy over. <i>Likwángun (ilikwang) ku ang batu ug <pb n=610>náa bay kinhasun sa iláwum,</i> I&apos;ll turn the stone over to see whether there are any shells under it. <i>Ilikwang (likwánga) ang baril arun mayabu ang súd,</i> Turn the barrel over to pour the water out.

<p id=11260><form>likyad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B23(1); c6]</itype> curl up at the edges. <i>Milikyad ang playwud nga giparka sa sakayan,</i> The plywood they used to wall the boat curled at the edges. <i>Milikyad ang papil nga gipapilit sa bungbung kay natangtang ang ngilit,</i> The paper that had been pasted to the walls curled up because the edges got loose.

<p id=11261><form>líla</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>violet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> color s.t. violet.

<p id=11262><form>lílang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. herring.

<p id=11263><form>lílas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> long strip, usually of young buri palm leaves, used in weaving mats or bags. <number>2</number> film on which movies are recorded. <number>2a</number> the motion picture industry or art form. <i>Sa kalibútan sa lílas,</i> In the world of film. <number>2b</number> <tr>movie</tr>. <i>Lílas nga aksiyun,</i> An action film. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make s.t. into strips for weaving. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make a movie out of a story. <form>{-an|lilasan}</form> <pos>n</pos> device for cutting s.t. into strips.

<p id=11264><form>lìlì</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> peep at s.t. while hidden. <i>Ug malígù ka dihà, lìlíun kang Piduy,</i> If you bathe there, Pidoy will peep at you. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> take a look to see how things are. <i>Lìlía ang kan-un ug nahubsan na ba,</i> Take a look at the rice to see if the water has evaporated. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|lìliun}</form> <pos>n</pos> small variety of eggplant, so called because one has to look under the leaves to see it.

<p id=11265><form>lilígan</form> <pos>n</pos> in a bamboo house, thin bamboo slats to which flooring slats (<ix>salug</ix>) or walling slats which hold the walling material (<ix>lugpit</ix>) are tied and which serve to hold them in place.

<p id=11266><form>lilinglíling</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> circle around looking for s.t. <i>Mulilinglíling ang ayruplánu úsà mamumba,</i> An airplane circles over a target first before it begins dropping bombs. <i>Lilinglilínga ang ákung singsing nga nahúlug sa sílung,</i> Look around for my ring that fell under the house.

<p id=11267><form>lílit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S]</itype> for s.t. to bulge out through an opening. <i>Mililit ang tinái sa samad,</i> His guts were sticking out through the wound. <i>Naglilit ang íyang tiyan sa guut nga karsunsilyu,</i> His stomach is bulging through his tight shorts.

<p id=11268><form>lilítik</form> <xr>= <sc>handilítik</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11269><form>lílù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>whirlpool</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> form a whirlpool. <i>Mulílù ang túbig ug ang duha ka sulug magbanggà,</i> A whirlpool forms if two currents meet. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> be agitated as if swirled in a whirlpool. <i>Naglílù ang ákung pagbátì tungud sa kalíbug,</i> My feelings are all awhirl with confusion. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> for a dimple to form a whirlpool-like depression. <i>Mulílù ang íyang kandíis ug mupahíyum siya,</i> Her dimples form whirlpool-like depressions when she smiles. <form>{-an|lilúan}</form> <pos>n</pos> place where there is a whirlpool.

<p id=11270><form>líluk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>carve</tr>. <i>Maáyung mulíluk ug istatúwa ang manlilíluk,</i> A sculptor carves statues well. <i>Maanindut nga dibúhu ang íyang gilíluk,</i> He carved a beautiful design in the wood. <form>{pa&N;-|panglíluk}</form> <pos>n</pos> occupation of carving.

<p id=11271><form>lílung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> conceal, hide a true state of affairs. <i>Ayaw kug lilúngi, dukt&ucaron;r,</i> Do not conceal the truth from me, Doctor. <i>Ilílung nátù níya ang nahitabù,</i> We&apos;ll keep what happened from him.

<p id=11272><form>lílung<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>making dizzy</tr>. <i>Lílung sakyan ang tyubíbu,</i> It makes you dizzy to ride a merry-go-round. <pos>n</pos> <tr>dizziness</tr>. <i>Ang táwung makaagwanta sa lílung puyding maastrunut,</i> A man who can stand dizziness can qualify as an astronaut. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be, become dizzy. <form>{pa&N;-(&rarr;)|panglilung}</form> <pos>n</pos> dizzy spell, occasional feeling of dizziness. <i>Kasagáran sa magsabak batíug panglilung,</i> Most women experience dizzy spells in their early months of pregnancy. <form>{panga-|pangalilung}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be in a state of slight dizziness. <i>Nagpangalilung ku sa kagútum,</i> I&apos;m somewhat dizzy from hunger.

<p id=11273><form>lima</form> <ix>numeral</ix> <tr>five</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>tulu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11274><form>limangkà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; c1]</itype> having the legs crossed at the ankles. <i>Milimangkà siya sa salug,</i> He sat on the floor with his legs crossed in front. <i>Niambak siya sa túbig nga naglimangkà arun pagtimpasaw,</i> He jumped into the water with his ankles crossed to make a big splash.

<p id=11275><form>límas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>bail water</tr> out. <i>Ug dílì ka mulímas malúnud ta,</i> If you do not bail, we will sink. <number>2</number> empty a pool or a big container by bailing the water out. <form>{(&rarr;)|limas}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. used for bailing. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|limasun}</form> <pos>n</pos> water in the bottom of a boat, <tr>bilge water</tr>.

<p id=11276><form>limátuk</form> <xr>= <sc>alimátuk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11277><form>lim-aw</form> <pos>n</pos> small, shallow pool of water. <i>Mga lim-aw nga mahibilin inighunas,</i> Pools left after the tide has gone out. <i>Lim-aw human sa ulan,</i> Pools of water after the rain. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> form a small pool.

<p id=11278><form>limba</form> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>limbalimba</sc>.</xr> <form>limbalimba</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> toss, roll around. <i>Ug muinum kug kapi maglimbalimba lang ku tibuuk gabíi,</i> If I drink coffee, I toss and turn the whole night.

<p id=11279><form>limbag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>writhe</tr>, <tr>wriggle</tr>, esp. from stomach pain. <i>Bisag giunsa níya paglimbag, wà makabuhì,</i> No matter how he wriggled, he couldn&apos;t free himself. <i>Naglimbag siya kay <pb n=611>gisirulan,</i> He was writhing in pain from his stomach cramps.

<p id=11280><form>limbáhun</form> <pos>a</pos> having a yellow color with a reddish cast. <i>Ang limbáhung bidlísiw sa nagsalup nga adlaw,</i> The pink rays of the setting sun. <pos>n</pos> fruits that have this color. <number>a</number> coconuts that have red or yellow-orange husks. <number>b</number> variety of shaddock (<ix>buluungun</ix>) with pinkish meat.

<p id=11281><form>limbákug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B456; c1]</itype> twist and squirm vigorously. <i>Naglimbákug sa kasakit ang táwu nga gisul-an sa tiyan,</i> The man was writhing in pain because of his stomach pains. <i>Naglimbákug ang bitin nga naputlan sa úlu,</i> The snake was writhing because his head was cut off.

<p id=11282><form>limbaruk</form> strong curse word expressing exasperation or irritation. <i>Limbaruk, dimálas baraháa,</i> Damn! What an unlucky card. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be cursed. <i>Mu rag gilimbaruk kining ámung kahimtang,</i> It looks as though we&apos;re completely out of luck.

<p id=11283><form>limbáruk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> fall headlong. <i>Nalimbáruk ang bátà sa bintánà,</i> The child fell headlong out of the window.

<p id=11284><form>limbárut</form> <xr>= <sc>*limbáwut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11285><form>limbas</form> <xr>= <sc>lingbas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11286><form>*limbásug</form> <form>{pa&N;-|panglimbásug}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>strive hard</tr>, exert effort to accomplish s.t. <i>Nanglimbásug siya nga makabuhì,</i> She struggled to free herself. <i>Panlimbasúgan (panlimbasúgun) ku nga makapasar,</i> I will try my best to pass the course. <pos>n</pos> act of striving hard or exerting effort. <i>Ang panglimbásug dílì laksut basta dílì lang palabihan,</i> It is not a bad thing to strive hard as long as you don&apos;t overdo it. <form>{mapa&N;-un|mapanglimbasúgun}</form> <pos>a</pos> characterized with assiduous work or effort. <i>Nagpúlaw siya sa mapanglimbasúgun nga tingúhà sa paglampus,</i> He works till late at night in his ardent desire for success.

<p id=11287><form>limbatiánun</form> (from <ix>bátì<sub>1</sub></ix>) <pos>a</pos> <tr>heartfelt</tr>, <tr>with feeling</tr> (literary). <i>Gugmang limbatiánun,</i> Deeply-felt love.

<p id=11288><form>limbáun</form> <xr>= <sc>limbáhun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11289><form>*limbáwut</form> <form>{pa&N;-|panglimbáwut}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b4]</itype> for hair to stand on end, get goose bumps. <i>Nanglimbáwut ákung balhíbu pagkadungug nákù sa isturya,</i> My hair stood on end when I heard the story.

<p id=11290><form>limbu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> whirling current of wind. <i>Nadala sa limbu ang mga dáhung layà,</i> The dry leaves were whirled about in the wind. <number>2</number> place between heaven and hell to which unbaptized children are consigned. <number>3</number> <formx>sa {&mdash;|limbu}</formx> be up on the air, not certain. <i>Túa pa sa limbu ang ámung plánu,</i> Our plans are still up in the air. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P]</itype> for the wind to whirl around. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> be blown about in the air. <i>Mulimbu ang asu ug huypun sa hángin,</i> Smoke moves rapidly through the air when the wind blows it. <i>Milimbu ang tabánug nga nakabugtù sa tugut,</i> The kite soared when its string broke.

<p id=11291><form>limbúkad</form> <xr>= <sc>alimbúkad</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11292><form>limbung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> <tr>cheat</tr>, <tr>deceive</tr>. <i>Ása gud nà siya mulimbung (manglimbung) nákù!</i> He would never cheat me! <i>Dílì ku makalimbung (makapanglimbung) sa paghigugma nímu,</i> I cannot commit deception by pretending to love you. <i>Gilimbúngan mu aku sa pag-undang mu ug iskuyla,</i> You deceived me when you stopped attending school. <pos>n</pos> action of cheating, deceiving. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|limbungan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> inclined to cheat or defraud. <i>Dílì ku makigdúlà nímu kay limbungan kaáyu ka,</i> I will not play with you because you cheat. <number>2</number> giving the illusion of being taller than it really is. <i>Limbungan ang babáyi nga naghayhil,</i> The woman gives the impression of being taller than she is because she is wearing high heels. <form>{ma-un|malimbúngun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>deceptive</tr>. <i>Dílì ku mamátì sa íyang malimbúngun nga mga sáad,</i> I will not listen to his deceptive promises. <form>{pa&N;-|panglimbung}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>deception</tr>.

<p id=11293><form>limbu rak</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. dance, the limbo rock. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> dance the limbo rock.

<p id=11294><form>limbuwad, limbúwad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB26; c]</itype> fall headlong, topple over; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Milimbúwad (nalimbúwad) ang kaang paghángin,</i> The flower pot toppled over in the wind. <i>Gilimbúwad ni Buy ang lamísa sa íyang kasukù,</i> Boy toppled the table over in his anger.

<p id=11295><form>limbúyuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be in chaotic confusion. <i>Nalimbúyuk ning ákung kaisípan sa túmang kalíbug,</i> My mind is whirling in confusion.

<p id=11296><form>límin</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; b]</itype> wrap cloth around the body, <tr>swaddle</tr>. <i>Lanahi ang pinútì unyà limíni ug lampin,</i> Put oil on the bolo then wrap it up in a diaper. <i>Dinhay masúsu nga gilimínan ug mga nuug,</i> There was an infant that was swaddled in rags. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> pervade, envelop as if to cover entirely. <i>Kangitngit nga milímin sa kasilingánan,</i> Darkness that enveloped the neighborhood. <i>Ang íyang pagbátì nákù gilimínan sa mga duhadúha,</i> Doubt pervades her feelings toward me.

<p id=11297><form>liminlimin</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> be all jumbled, thrown together without order. <i>Muliminlimin (maliminlimin) nang búla sa hílu ug dì nímu baátan,</i> Those pieces of string will get all tangled up if you don&apos;t tie them together. <i>Ákung liminliminun (iliminlimin) ang mga bulingun,</i> I&apos;ll throw the dirty clothes in a bunch.

<p id=11298><form>límis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>wrap</tr>, <tr>envelop</tr>. <i>Nagkinahanglan kug dakung papil nga makalímis <pb n=612>(makapalímis) niíning kartun,</i> I need a large sheet of paper to wrap this box in. <i>Limísa (limísi) sa tualya ang bátà ighumag kalígù,</i> Wrap the child in a towel after his bath. <i>Duha ka makusgánung buktun ang gilímis kaníya,</i> Two strong arms embraced her. <number>2</number> envelop completely with. <i>Nangamátay ang mga tanum kay nalímis (nalimisan) sa mga sagbut,</i> The plants died when they were completely covered with weeds. <number>3</number> shower with affection. <i>Gilímis (gilimísan) ku níyag hawuk,</i> She smothered me with kisses.

<p id=11299><form>limitar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> put a limit to. <i>Gilimitahan níya ang úras sa pagbisíta,</i> She put a limit to the visiting hours. <form>limitádu</form> <pos>a</pos> given in insufficient amounts, limited. <i>Ang pagkáun limitádu kaáyu sa kasirahan,</i> They serve an insufficient amount of food in the boarding house. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be limited.

<p id=11300><form>limiti</form> <pos>n</pos> limit. <i>Way limiti ug pilay ímung gustung dad-un,</i> There is no limit to how many you may take. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> set limits. <i>Dílì ku mulimiti sa ímung pagkáun,</i> I will set no limits as to how much you may eat.

<p id=11301><form>limpangug</form> (from <ix>pangug</ix>) <pos>a</pos> silly, stupid; lacking good judgment or common sense. <i>Ayaw na lang pagsalig nga matúman ang tanan mung súgù, limpangug kaáyu nang tawhána,</i> Don&apos;t expect that man to carry out your instructions properly, he is so stupid.

<p id=11302><form>limpísa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> clean a mechanism. <i>Kamau kang mulimpísa ug karburadur sa awtu?</i> Do you know how to clean the carburator of a car? <i>Limpisáhi ang pitrumaks arun musíga,</i> Clean the pressure lantern so it will light. <pos>n</pos> cleaning of mechanical equipment.

<p id=11303><form>limpiya</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>polish</tr> shoes. <i>Nagkabítun ang ákung kamut kay naglimpiya ku sa ákung sapátus,</i> My hands have shoe polish on them because I was polishing my shoes. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> shoeshining as a business. <i>Kusug ang limpiya gikang mag-uwan,</i> After it rains we get plenty of business shining shoes. <number>2</number> materials for shining shoes. <form>way {&mdash;|limpiya}</form> badly needing a shine. <i>Way limpiya ang ímung sapátus,</i> Your shoes need a shine. <form>{pa&N;-|panglimpiya}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> polish shoes for a living. <pos>n</pos> occupation of shining shoes. <form>{&mdash;|limpiya} bútas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bootblack</tr>. <form>{mag-l-|maglilimpiya}, {ma&N;-l-|manglilimpiya}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bootblack</tr>.

<p id=11304><form>limpiyáda</form> <pos>a</pos> for a woman to be neat and clean in her ways. <i>Hinlù ílang báy kay ang inahan limpiyáda,</i> Their house is clean because the mother is a demon for cleanliness. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> be habitually neat and clean.

<p id=11305><form>limpiyu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> clean, devoid of dirt, sanitary. <i>Limpiyu kaáyu ang salug run,</i> The floor is very clean today. <i>Limpiyu ang ristawran nga ámung gikan-an,</i> The restaurant we ate in is sanitary. <number>1a</number> clean, without VD. <number>2</number> clear, unsullied. <i>Limpiyu ku ug kunsinsiya kay wà kuy salà,</i> I have a clear conscience because I am not guilty. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> action of cleaning. <i>Kahúgaw, way limpiyu,</i> How dirty it is! No one cleaned it! <number>2</number> clean clothes. <i>Wà kuy limpiyu isimba,</i> I have no clean clothes to wear to church. <number>3</number> amount gained clear. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; ab]</itype> clean, rid s.t. of dirt, become clean. <i>Hugáwan siyang mulimpiyu sa kasilyas,</i> He thinks cleaning the toilet is dirty. <i>Malimpiyu ra nang kasilyas ug nía ku,</i> The only time that toilet is clean is when I&apos;m around to watch you. <i>Limpiyúhun nátù ang átung trabáhu arun dílì ta maúlaw,</i> Let us do a clean job of our work so we won&apos;t be put to embarrassment. <i>Limpiyúhi ang kusína,</i> Clean the kitchen. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> make a net gain or income. <i>Nakalimpiyu kug kinsi sa ákung pamaráda karun,</i> I netted fifteen pesos in my driving today. <form>{ig-l-|iglilimpiyu}</form> <pos>n</pos> thing used in cleaning. <form>{mag-l-|maglilimpiyu}</form> <pos>n</pos> one who cleans.

<p id=11306><form>limu</form> <pos>n</pos> magical practices used to help a baby go through his various stages of development easily and successfully or to cure a grown person of a bad characteristic or to get rid of s.t. undesirable that is s.w. These practices may consist of having the baby or the afflicted adult perform an action analogous to the actions one wishes to develop or stop or may consist of special foods or potions together with magic words. <i>Ang limu sa bátang magngipun, ang lagus pahírag tái,</i> The ritual for a child that is teething: feces are rubbed on his gums. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> treat with <ix>limu</ix>. <i>Limuha ug sagu ang palaínum nímung bána,</i> Mix a dead man&apos;s saliva into your husband&apos;s drink to stop his vice.

<p id=11307><form>limù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> hide, keep s.t. a secret. <i>Naglimù ba ku nímu sa ákung makítà?</i> Do I hide my earnings from you? <i>Sa prubinsiya dì ka makalimù bisan gamayng sikrítu,</i> In the country you cannot keep the tiniest secret. <i>Ayaw ilimù sa ímung ginikánan ang ímung prublíma,</i> Do not keep your problems from your parents.

<p id=11308><form>limud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> deny, conceal s.t. upon being confronted. <i>Mulimud ka pa giyud nga kláru man ang pruyba!</i> You still dare to conceal it when the evidence is so clear! <i>Ayaw ug ilimud ang ímung pag-anhi,</i> Don&apos;t deny that you came here. <form>malimdánun</form> <pos>a</pos> given to denying or concealing the truth when confronted.

<p id=11309><form>limugmug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> rinse the mouth out. <i>Mulimugmug (manlimugmug) giyud ku human ug káun,</i> I rinse my mouth after I eat. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> slosh water around in the mouth <pb n=613>to warm it and spit it out on s.t. to bathe it. <i>Limugmúgi ang sunuy matag buntag,</i> Bathe the cock every morning with water you slosh around in your mouth. <number>2</number> <itype>[AP; a]</itype> take a drink of liquor, usually in a large gulp (humorous slang). <i>Mulimugmug (manlimugmug) siyag usa ka básung tubà,</i> He will gulp down a glass of toddy. <number>3</number> <itype>[c]</itype> be unconcerned about s.t. s.o. says or s.t. embarrassing that happens. <i>Way kapuslánan ang kasábà, gilimugmug lang,</i> No use scolding him. It runs off him like water off a duck&apos;s back. (Lit. He just gargles with it.) <form>{-an(&rarr;)|limugmugan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the oral cavity. <number>1a</number> by extension, the throat. <number>2</number> the outside of this area: the cheeks, including the lower part of the jaw and the base of the ear. <number>3</number> the place in a monkey&apos;s mouth where he stores food.

<p id=11310><form>*limúhag</form> <form>{ka-an|kalimuhágan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> knowledge of how to do s.t. <i>Ayaw ku ug paayúha ug makina kay wà kuy kalimuhágan ánang mga butánga,</i> Don&apos;t ask me to repair engines because I have no knowledge of that sort of thing. <number>2</number> knowledge about or of what a thing is. <i>Manukutsukut ta sa mangingisdà arun makabatun tag kalimuhágan sa mga isdà,</i> Let&apos;s ask the fishermen so we can learn s.t. about fishes.

<p id=11311><form>limúk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2N; b6]</itype> give a look of anger or disgust with pursed lips, and make a humming sound. <i>Milimúk (nanlimúk) siya nákù kay wà man nákù pakapíha,</i> She gave me a sour look because I did not allow her to copy my work. <i>Íya kung gilimúkan, mu rag nakasalà ku níya,</i> She gave me a look of disgust, as if I had offended her.

<p id=11312><form>limukun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible shellfish of the depths, finned and similar to a crab, but without claws.

<p id=11313><form>limúkun</form> <xr>= <sc>alimúkun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11314><form>limulímu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> hide, withhold s.t. from s.o. that he ought to know. <i>Kusug siyang mulimulímu sa íyang kalihúkan sa íyang bána,</i> She is fond of keeping her activities from her husband. <i>Gilimulímu níla sa ílang inahan ang kamatáyun sa ílang igsúun,</i> They concealed their brother&apos;s death from their mother.

<p id=11315><form>limun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. hard candies.

<p id=11316><form>límun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> roll and wrap s.t. up to conceal it, facilitate disposal, carrying, and the like. <i>Limúni (limúna) ang mga bulingun sa hábul,</i> Wrap the dirty clothes in the blanket.

<p id=11317><form>limunáda</form> <pos>n</pos> lemonade, usually made of calamondin juice (<ix>limunsítu</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make lemonade. <form>{&mdash;|limunáda} ruhi</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. purgative for children, prepared under physician&apos;s prescription and taken hot.

<p id=11318><form>limunglímung</form> <xr>= <sc>limulímu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11319><form>limunsítu, limunsítus</form> <pos>n</pos> calamondin, a small citrus tree bearing small, round, acid fruit, orange-colored when ripe, with an easily separable peel. It is the most widely sold sour citrus: <bio>Citrus microcarpa</bio>.

<p id=11320><form>limuruk, limúruk</form> <xr>= <sc>lamuruk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11321><form>limus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>alms</tr>. <number>2</number> a voluntary contribution to the family of a person who died. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> give alms or a voluntary contribution to the family of a person who died. <i>Mulimus giyud ta inigdúaw sa namatyan,</i> We ought to give a little s.t. when we visit the family of the deceased. <i>Limusi ang makililímus nga buta,</i> Give alms to the blind beggar. <number>2</number> give s.t. of great value to the recipient but of little value to the owner. <i>Intáwun, Kurdaping. Anus-a pa man ku nímu limsig pahíyum?</i> Have pity, Cordaping. When will you bestow a smile on me? <number>3</number> give s.t. of little value, but unwillingly. <i>Ug dì níya bayran tung dus, ilimus na lang tu,</i> If he doesn&apos;t give me my two pesos back, forget it. I&apos;ll write it off as charity. <form>{paki-|pakilimus}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> go begging for alms. <i>Magpakilimus na lang ta ug wà nay mahímù,</i> We&apos;ll have to go begging if there&apos;s no other way. <form>linimsan</form> <pos>n</pos> amount collected by begging. <form>{maka-r-(&larr;)|makalilímus}, {maki-r-(&larr;)|makililímus}, {paki-r-(&larr;)|pakililímus}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>beggar</tr>.

<p id=11322><form>límut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B123S6; b8]</itype> forget. <i>Nalímut ku sa átung sábut,</i> I forgot our appointment. <i>Uy, nakalimut ka ug butúnis sa ímung karsúnis!</i> Hey! You forgot to button your pants! <i>Nalimtan nákù <corr sic=ag>ang</corr> ákung pitáka!</i> I forgot my wallet! <i>Kalimti ang nangági kanátù,</i> Forget what happened between us. <i>Dílì ku kalimtan tung nawnga bísan ug ása,</i> I will not forget that face anywhere. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> lose consciousness. <i>Nalímut ku pagkapangkà sa ákung úlu,</i> I got unconscious when my head bumped into s.t. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>limut</sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr> <form>{(&rarr;)|limut}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> anesthetic. <number>2</number> k.o. antidote to make s.o. stop a vice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> give general anesthesia. <i>Dílì mulímut ang dukt&ucaron;r ug dúnay sakit sa kasingkásing,</i> A doctor won&apos;t administer anesthesia to s.o. with a heart disease. <i>Unsay ilimut sa bátang palaihì magabíi?</i> What antidote shall we use on a child that wets his bed? <number>2</number> hypnotize, dazzle s.o. to make him lose his sense of reason or see things in a different way. <i>Ingkantu ang milimut (naglimut) kaníya,</i> An enchanted being led him into a different world. <i>Limutun ka sa íyang katahum,</i> You will be dazzled by her beauty. <form>limutlímut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> forget s.t. at every occasion. <i>Íyang gilimutlimútan ug úlì ang bumba sa ligid,</i> He forgets to return the air pump every time. <form>{hika-|hikalimut}/{haka-(&rarr;)|hakalimut}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b8]</itype> happen to forget. <i>Nahikalimut <pb n=614>siya pagpalit ug sibúyas,</i> She forgot to buy onions. <form>{pa&N;-|panglímut}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b1]</itype> <number>1</number> lose consciousness. <number>2</number> lose control of oneself. <i>Gipanlimútan siyang misagpà sa íyang asáwa,</i> He lost control of himself and hit his wife. <form>{-a(&larr;)|limúta}</form> how very forgetful. <i>Labihan nákung limúta uy!</i> Jesus, how forgetful I am! <form>{ka-|kalímut}</form> <pos>n</pos> action of forgetting s.t. <i>Way nagtuun sa kalímut,</i> No one learns how to forget. (You&apos;re born with that knowledge.) <form>{ma-un|malimútun}, malimtánun, manggilimtánun, limtánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>forgetful</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become forgetful. <form>{pa-|palímut}</form> <xr>= <sc>limut</sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr>

<p id=11323><form>limúut</form> <xr>= <sc>alimúut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11324><form>línà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> collect toddy before the normal time to gather it, most usually take the toddy in the evening instead of the following morning. <i>Maglínà ku sa dawat kay gustu kung muinum ug tam-is nga tubà,</i> I will take the toddy this evening because I want to drink sweet palm toddy. <i>Lináa ang tubà arun tam-is,</i> Gather the palm toddy early so that it will be sweet. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> restore s.o.&apos;s health by drinking fresh unfermented coconut toddy. <i>Gilínà ang bátà kay luyahun,</i> The child was given fresh toddy as a tonic because he was so weak. <pos>n</pos> sweet palm toddy. <form>{(&rarr;)|linà}</form> <xr>= <sc>línà</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=11325><form>*línà<sub>2</sub></form> <form>{pa-|palinà}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a process of purification in folk medicine whereby some evil or bad effect is removed by exposing the victim to magical smoke, obtained from certain plants and compounds. <number>2</number> the material burned in the process of <ix>palínà</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> administer this treatment. <i>Gipalináan ug sagbut sa mintiryu ang gilubatan,</i> She became ill after attending a funeral and was treated with smoke from plants taken from the cemetery.

<p id=11326><form>línab</form> <pos>n</pos> woman born with a very narrow or no vaginal opening.

<p id=11327><form>línaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>calm</tr>, free of agitation. <i>Línaw ang dágat,</i> The sea is calm. <number>2</number> calm, free from excitement. <i>Línaw átung hunàhúnà ug walà tay mga suliran,</i> Your mind is calm if you don&apos;t have problems. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2S; b4(1)]</itype> be, become calm. <i>Naglínaw ang panahun,</i> The weather is calm. <i>Dúgay ming naabut kay nalináwan ang sakayan,</i> We arrived late because the boat was becalmed. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1; a12]</itype> be calm, undisturbed. <i>Dílì maglínaw ang ímung tanlag,</i> Your conscience will not be at peace. <i>Lináwa ang ímung kaugalíngun, ayaw ug katarantar,</i> Compose yourself. Don&apos;t panic. <pos>n</pos> peace, calm. <i>Walay línaw ning panimuyúa,</i> The way we&apos;re living, there is no peace and quiet. <form>{ma-un|malináwun}</form> <pos>a</pos> calmly, peacefully. <i>Malináwun siya nga namatay,</i> He died calmly. <form>{ka-|kalínaw}</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>línaw</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=11328><form>línaw<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pool</tr>, <tr>lake</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> form into a pool, pond, or lake. <i>Mulínaw ang túbig sa sílung ug kusug ang ulan,</i> A lake forms under our house when it rains hard.

<p id=11329><form>lindag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B456]</itype> toss about restlessly in bed. <i>Naglindag ku sa higdaánan gabíi, wà giyud kung katulug,</i> I didn&apos;t sleep the whole night last night. I just kept tossing around in bed.

<p id=11330><form>lindug</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> unbranching trunk of a tree. <i>Lindug sa lubi,</i> The trunk of a coconut tree. <number>1a</number> column in a building. <number>2</number> <tr>column</tr> in a newspaper or journal. <i>Lindug sa mga bálak,</i> Poetry section. <number>3</number> warp threads. <form>{mag-r-|maglilindug}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>columnist</tr>.

<p id=11331><form>linga, línga</form> (from <ix>alinga</ix>) <pos>a</pos> inattentive due to preoccupation with s.t. else. <i>Balikbalíka pag-isplikar kay linga kaáyu,</i> Repeat your explanation because he is very inattentive. <pos>n</pos> preoccupation that keeps one from concentrating. <i>Dì siya makatrabáhu kay daghan siyag linga,</i> He can&apos;t do work because he has lots of other things to think about. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; b3]</itype> be inattentive. <i>Wà kung kabantay pag-ági níya. Nalinga lang ku,</i> I didn&apos;t see her go by. I wasn&apos;t paying attention. <i>Subrang dúwà ang nalingahan ánang batáa,</i> The child has nothing but play on his mind and thus is inattentive. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a]</itype> hold one&apos;s attention. <i>Nalinga kug tan-aw sa lamígas nga nanag-áway,</i> I was amused watching the ants fighting each other. <i>Lingaha ang gwardiya kay muipsut ku sa píkas,</i> Keep the guard occupied because I will slip through the other side. <number>3</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be so occupied. <i>Ang tindíra nalinga ug paninsíyu,</i> The salesgirl was so busy she couldn&apos;t make change properly. <form>{maka-r-(&larr;)|makalilínga}</form> <pos>a</pos> being easily diverted, distracted. <i>Pangidad nga makalilínga,</i> Age at which one has a short attention span.

<p id=11332><form>língab</form> <pos>a</pos> having the congenital defect of a narrow or no vaginal opening.

<p id=11333><form>lingabngab</form> <pos>n</pos> yawn. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN2]</itype> yawn. <i>Mulingabngab (manglingabngab) lang ku ug katulgun na ku,</i> I yawn when I feel sleepy.

<p id=11334><form>lingag</form> <pos>a</pos> lacking concentration, preoccupied with many other things so as to make stupid mistakes. <i>Lingag man maung bisag kurik girúngan,</i> She is so careless. She marked correct answers wrong. <i>Wà siya makatúman sa túgun kay lingag man,</i> She didn&apos;t do what she was told because she was careless. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> be, become careless, preoccupied with other distracting activities. <i>Nagkalingag na ning draybir námù. Sígi na lang makabanggà,</i> Our chauffeur is getting careless. He keeps having accidents.

<p id=11335><form>lingagngag</form> <xr>= <sc>alingagngag</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=615>

<p id=11336><form>lingas</form> <pos>a</pos> unable to keep still but moving about all the time instead. <i>Lingas kaáyu ning batáa, dì mahimutang,</i> This boy is always moving about, he can&apos;t keep still. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be moving about always and not keeping still.

<p id=11337><form>língat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB24]</itype> for the eyes to rove, move the eyes. <i>Milíngat lang ang íyang mata pagsúd níya sa palasyu,</i> Her eyes popped out of her head when she went in the palace. <i>Naglíngat siya sa simbahan,</i> She looked around at the people in the church. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> behave badly, wildly when one is in a place where formal behavior is expected. <i>Mulíngat lang ning mga bátà kung túa sa láing báy,</i> My children act wild when they are in other people&apos;s houses. <i>Naglíngat lang siya didtu sa baylihan kay hubug man,</i> He acted wildly at the dance because he was drunk. <form>{(&rarr;)|lingat}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> careless, not paying attention to what one is about. <i>Hibyaan níya ang bág kay lingat man,</i> She left her bag because she was careless. <number>2</number> failing to behave modestly and composed in a place where one is expected to be on one&apos;s good behavior. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become careless. <i>Nalingat siya kay giapura,</i> She was careless because she was rushed.

<p id=11338><form>lingátung</form> <pos>n</pos> shrub or small tree having numerous stinging hairs, with magical uses to drive <ix>unglù</ix> away: <bio>Laportea brunnea</bio>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4(1)]</itype> get the stinging hairs of this plant on one.

<p id=11339><form>lingaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> attract one&apos;s interest or attention. <i>Ákung lingawun si Máma ug ikay kúhà sa dulsi,</i> I&apos;ll keep Mom&apos;s attention while you get the candy. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> entertain, amuse. <i>Ang íyang kumidiya dílì makalingaw nákù,</i> His jokes don&apos;t amuse me. <i>Nalingaw ang bátà ug panakup ug apan,</i> The child is amused, occupying himself with catching grasshoppers. <pos>n</pos> thing to keep oneself busy with. <i>Ug wà kay lingaw, pagtuun,</i> If you don&apos;t have anything to do, you could study. <form>{ka-|kalingaw}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> do s.t. in one&apos;s spare time, spend one&apos;s time doing s.t. <i>Samtang nagpaábut ku, magkalingaw kug bása,</i> While I am waiting, I will pass the time reading. <form>lingawlíngaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> amuse, divert oneself. <i>Human sa trabáhu, maglingawlíngaw mi,</i> After work we amuse ourselves. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> spend one&apos;s spare time doing s.t. <i>Human dáyun ni kay ákung lingawlingáwan ug pintal human sa trabáhu,</i> It won&apos;t take long to get done painting because I&apos;ll do it in my spare time after work. <pos>n</pos> recreation, amusement. <i>Álang kaníya ang panulat usa ka lingawlíngaw,</i> For him writing is a form of relaxation. <form>palingawlíngaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> pretend to be occupied or engrossed with s.t. to avoid confronting an embarrassing situation. <i>Nainsultuhan gud siya piru nagpalingawlíngaw lag hinábì sa uban,</i> She felt insulted but she just pretended to be engrossed in her conversation with other people. <form>{ka-an(&larr;)|kalingáwan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>amusement</tr>. <i>Sa karnabalan daghang kalingáwan,</i> In the fair grounds there are lots of amusements. <form>{maka-r-(&larr;)|makalilíngaw}</form> <pos>a</pos> affording amusement.

<p id=11340><form>lingay, língay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> for the sun to move beyond the zenith and the shadows to lengthen in the afternoon. <i>Milingay na ang adlaw ug wà pa sila makapaniudtu,</i> The sun has moved beyond the zenith and they still have not taken their lunch. <i>Nakalingay ang anínu sa lubi gíkan sa kural apan ang aláyun wà pa makasúgud,</i> The shadow of the coconut tree has moved beyond the fence, but the work bee has not yet started.

<p id=11341><form>lingbas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>file</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|lingbas} nga língin</form> rattail file. <form>{&mdash;|lingbas} nga mídiya língin</form> half-round file. <form>{&mdash;|lingbas} nga tris kantus</form> triangular file. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> file s.t. down, off. <number>2</number> make, make into a file. <form>{-in-|liningbas}</form> <pos>n</pos> filings. <form>{-in-an|lilingbásan}</form> <pos>a</pos> for the voice to be cutting and sharp. <i>Gitubag ku níya sa usa ka tíngug nga linimbásan,</i> She answered me in a sharp and cutting voice.

<p id=11342><form>lingbáhun</form> <xr>= <sc>limbáhun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11343><form>linggà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; a12]</itype> for boats to roll. <i>Pag-ági sa barku gilinggà ang sakayan,</i> The fishing boat rolled in the wake of the ship.

<p id=11344><form>linggalingga</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> rock a vessel or vehicle from side to side. <i>Ayawg linggalinggáha ang búti kay mayabu,</i> Don&apos;t rock the life boat. It might overturn.

<p id=11345><form>linggánay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> church bell. <number>2</number> ringing of church bells. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for church bells to ring. <form>{-an|lingganayan}</form> <pos>n</pos> bell tower.

<p id=11346><form>linggawas</form> <xr>= <sc>lingkawas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11347><form>linggíru</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. soldierfish.

<p id=11348><form>linggúkud</form> <pos>n</pos> the young of the <ix>agápang</ix> (k.o. mullet).

<p id=11349><form>lingguwáhi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>language</tr>.

<p id=11350><form>lingguwista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>linguist</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be, become a linguist.

<p id=11351><form>lingguwita</form> <xr>= <sc>langgíta</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11352><form>linghud</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> immature plants. <i>Aslum ang manggang linghud pa,</i> Mangoes are very sour when they are young. <i>Dílì maáyung isugnud ang linghud káhuy,</i> Green wood is no good for fuel. <number>2</number> young and immature. <i>Ang linghud níyang pangísip,</i> His immature mind. <form>{ka-|kalinghud}</form> <pos>n</pos> state or condition of being young and immature.

<p id=11353><form>língì</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3S; a2b2]</itype> turn one&apos;s head to the side to look back. <i>Milíngì siya nákù,</i> He looked back at me. <i>Ayaw siyag lingía,</i> Don&apos;t <pb n=616>turn to look at him. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2S; a12]</itype> give s.t. the attention it requires. <i>Ayawg ipanugal ímung kítà, lingía usab ang ímung mga anak,</i> Don&apos;t gamble away your earnings. You have your children to think of. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A23; a12]</itype> pay attention to s.t., recognize its existence. <i>Karun nga dátù na siya dílì na ta lingíun níya,</i> Now that he is rich, he will not take notice of us. <form>{pa&N;-(&rarr;)|panglingì}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> keep looking back. <i>Nagpanglingì ku sa pagtan-aw ug náa bay nagsunud,</i> I kept looking back to see if anyone was following us.

<p id=11354><form>lingig</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> bend the teeth of a saw alternately to the side to widen the kerf and to prevent sticking. <i>Lingigi ang gabas arun dakug ági,</i> Twist the teeth on your saw so it will have a wide kerf. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> get one&apos;s neck twisted. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> saw set, tool to give set to saw teeth. <number>2</number> set, the amount of bend imparted to saw teeth. <pos>a</pos> for the neck to be twisted to one side. <i>Mau ra nà siyag kanúnayng maglingì kay lingig man,</i> He looks like he is always looking to the side because he has a twisted neck.

<p id=11355><form>língin</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>round</tr>, <tr>circular</tr>. <i>Língin kaáyu ang singsing (búla),</i> The ring (ball) is round. <form>{&mdash;|língin} ang búla</form> still in the running, all is not lost. <i>Língin pa ang búla, puydi pag mabawì nákù sa paynals ang ákung grádu,</i> I still have a chance. Maybe I can make up for my failing grade in the finals. <pos>n</pos> money (slang). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2S; a]</itype> form a circle or sphere, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Naglíngin ku áring tabla pára ligid sa duláan,</i> I am cutting this board into a circle as a wheel for the toy. <i>Ang naglíngin níyang mata,</i> Her round eyes. <i>Lingína ang bulabúla,</i> Form the meat into little balls. <i>Lingíni sa tungà ug human, gabsa ang tungà,</i> Make a circle in the middle and then saw out the middle portion. <pos>n</pos> circle. <form>{-g-|lígngin}</form> <xr>= <sc>língin</sc>, <ix>a</ix> (plural).</xr> <form>{ma-|malíngin}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>round</tr>. <number>2</number> <formx>disgrasyang {ma-|malíngin}</formx> a most unlikely misfortune which nevertheless takes place, though the victim does not deserve it. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|linginun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>roundish</tr>.

<p id=11356><form>lingiw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> look away. <i>Mulingiw siya ug ákung tan-áwun kay sad-an man siya,</i> He looks away when I look at him because he&apos;s guilty. <i>Ígù lang ku nga nakalingiw kay dì ku kaagwanta ug tan-aw,</i> All I could do was look away because I couldn&apos;t stand to look at him.

<p id=11357><form>lingka</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> uproot vines to clear a place. <i>Lingkáhun námù ning kamutihána kay tumus na,</i> We&apos;ll uproot this sweet potato patch because the potatoes have all been gathered.

<p id=11358><form>lingkáang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B46N]</itype> for plants to spread out. <i>Milingkáang (nanglingkáang) ang lambáyung sa baybáyun,</i> The vines spread out over the beach. <i>Dákit nga naglingkáang ang mga sanga,</i> A spreading banyan tree. <number>2</number> <itype>[BN; a1]</itype> for parts of the body to spread like a plant. <i>Tiil nga nanglingkáang kay dúgay nga wà kasapatúsi,</i> Spreading feet that hadn&apos;t worn shoes in ages. <i>Lingkaángun (ilingkáang) sa pábu ang íyang balhíbu ug duúlun,</i> A turkey will puff itself up if you get near it. <number>2a</number> for the ears or hair to stand up upon feeling an emotion. <i>Nanlingkáang ang íyang dawunggan pagkadungug sa isturya,</i> Her ears stood up when she heard the story. <i>Hutwang sa irù nga makalingkáang sa balhíbu,</i> The howling of a dog that can make your hair stand on end.

<p id=11359><form>lingkag</form> <pos>a</pos> having ears that stick out sidewards. <i>Lingkag kaáyug dalunggan ang kuníhu,</i> Rabbits have ears that stick out. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> for the ears to prick up, esp. in surprise. <i>Nalingkag ang íyang dalunggan pagkadungug sa íyang ngálan,</i> His ears pricked up when he heard his name.

<p id=11360><form>lingkálang</form> <xr>= <sc>lingkáang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11361><form>lingkáng</form> <xr>= <sc>lingkáang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11362><form>lingkas</form> <xr>= <sc>lingka</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11363><form>lingkawas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB3(1); b6]</itype> <tr>escape</tr>. <i>Kinsay mulingkawas (mupalingkawas) nátù niíning kalisud?</i> Who will save us from our poverty? <i>Mulingkawas siyag dúnay buluhátun,</i> He escapes when there is work to do. <i>Dílì ka makalingkawas sa sílut sa kamatáyun,</i> You cannot escape the death penalty.

<p id=11364><form>lingkit</form> <pos>a</pos> for two things to be joined along their lengths. <i>Ang lingkit nga ságing isípung usa,</i> They count two bananas joined together as one. <i>Lingkit ang pán nga grasyúsa,</i> The <ix>graciosa</ix> bread comes linked. <form>{bátà|bátà nga lingkit}, kalúha nga {&mdash;|lingkit}</form> <tr>Siamese twins</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126C3; b6]</itype> be joined along the lengths. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> tie two or more coconuts together by joining them with a small piece of husk slashed from each of them.

<p id=11365><form>lingkúbaw</form> <xr>= <sc>lintúbaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11366><form>lingkud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>sit down</tr>. <i>Ayaw ug lingkúri nang syáha kay basà pa ang pintal,</i> Don&apos;t sit on that chair because the paint is still wet. <i>Ayaw ug ilingkud nang ímung bag-ung inutaw nga karsúnis kay malum-it,</i> Do not sit down in your newly pressed pants because they will get crumpled. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> assume, <tr>hold office</tr> or position. <i>Mulingkud siya pagkaprisidinti sa kumpaníya ugmà,</i> He will assume office as president of the company tomorrow. <number>3</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> sit to give serious, full time and attention to a piece of work. <i>Kinahanglang lingkúran ning trabahúa,</i> This work must be given full time <pb n=617>and attention. <number>4</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for a coconut to grow to the stage that its trunk shows. <i>Sa duha ka tuig dílì pa mulingkud ang lubi,</i> At two years the coconut still does not show its trunk. <form>{pa-|palingkud}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a3]</itype> fall down into a sitting position. <i>Nahisabiklan ku sa táwu ug napalingkud ku sa bangkù,</i> The man bumped into me and I fell down in a sitting position on the bench. <form>lingkuránan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>seat</tr>, <tr>chair</tr>, <tr>bench</tr>. <form>lingkurun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> for an occupation to be sedentary. <number>2</number> the bride&apos;s family and guests at a wedding party (who sit and are served as opposed to the groom&apos;s friends and relatives, the <ix>tindugun</ix>, who do the work). <form>{pina-|pinalinkud}</form> <pos>n</pos> made to sit down. <form>{pina-|pinalinkud} sa urinúla</form> toilet trained. <i>Ang bátà nga pinalingkud sa urinúla dílì mangíhì sa salug,</i> The child that is toilet trained doesn&apos;t urinate on the floor.

<p id=11367><form>lingkung</form> <pos>a</pos> for s.t. long to be bent so that the middle part is higher than either end. <i>Lingkung kaáyu ning sundánga,</i> This bolo has a good curve. <i>Lingkung ang íyang buktun. Dì matuy-ud,</i> He has a bent arm. It won&apos;t straighten out any longer. <i>Lingkung siyag tiil ug mag-untul-untul siyang maglakaw,</i> He is club-footed and he walks with a bounce. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> come out curved.

<p id=11368><form>lingkús</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for s.t. long to curl up or come out in knotted form. <i>Mulingkús ang písì ug madúgay nang gámit,</i> The rope will curl up if it is used for a long time. <i>Nagkalingkús na ang mga dáhun sa tabákù nga naláyà na,</i> The tobacco leaves are curling up now that they are withering.

<p id=11369><form>lingla</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> <tr>deceive</tr>. <i>Milingla siya nákù pag-ingun nga ulitáwu siya,</i> He deceived me by saying he was a bachelor. <i>Gilingla ku níya sa pagpasugut sa kuntrátu,</i> He deceived me into accepting the contract. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> divert one&apos;s attention to achieve one&apos;s purpose. <i>Akuy mulingla sa tindíra arun makúhà nímu ang sigarilyu,</i> I&apos;ll divert the storekeeper&apos;s attention while you filch the cigarettes. <pos>n</pos> <tr>deceit</tr>. <form>malingláhun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>deceitful</tr>.

<p id=11370><form>lingling</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a2]</itype> <tr>peep</tr>. <i>Linglíngun ta ka inigkalígù nímu,</i> I&apos;ll peep at you when you take a bath.

<p id=11371><form>lingù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> shake one&apos;s head to say no or in hopelessness or resignation. <i>Dílì tingáli siya musugut kay milingù tu siya,</i> He probably won&apos;t agree because he shook his head. <form>{pa&N;-|panglingù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> keep shaking the head in hopelessness and resignation. <i>Nagpanglingù ang párì nga nagtan-aw sa nanagparisparis didtu sa plása,</i> The priest shook his head as he looked at the people paired off in the park.

<p id=11372><form>linguglingug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b(1)P]</itype> <tr>ignore</tr> s.t. by pretending not to hear; pay no attention to s.t. <i>Gilinguglingugan man lang nímu ang ákung gipangáyù,</i> You just pretend not to hear when I ask you for s.t. <i>Bisag unsáun nákug tambag mulinguglingug (mupalinguglingug) lang,</i> No matter how much I advise her, she pays no attention.

<p id=11373><form>lingugngug</form> <xr>= <sc>alingugngug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11374><form>ling-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a <tr>small area</tr>. <i>Ling-ung gitamnag mais,</i> A parcel planted to corn. <number>2</number> mass of people in a certain area. <i>Ang ling-un sa mga katawhan sa plása,</i> The mass of people in the square. <number>2a</number> a group of people, <tr>social class</tr>. <i>Ling-un sa mga timáwà,</i> The poorest classes.

<p id=11375><form>linimintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>liniment</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> apply liniment to s.t. <i>Linimintuhi ang pamául mu,</i> Apply liniment on your sore muscles.

<p id=11376><form>línin</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>linen cloth</tr>. <number>2</number> stationery having a linen finish. <form>swis {&mdash;|línin}</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fine cloth.

<p id=11377><form>línis<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23B2; a12]</itype> <tr>melt</tr>, <tr>wear down</tr> or <tr>eat away</tr>. <i>Ang ayis krim dalì mulínis sa ínit,</i> The ice cream will melt rapidly in the sun. <i>Nagkalinis ang kutsilyu pagbináid,</i> The knife is being worn down from being sharpened so often. <i>Linísa sa túbig ang tablítas,</i> Dissolve the tablets in water. <number>2</number> <itype>[A123; a3b4(1)]</itype> <tr>digest</tr> food eaten. <i>Wà malínis ang ákung kináun, What I ate did not dissolve.</i> <form>{(&rarr;)|linis}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>worn down</tr>.

<p id=11378><form>línis<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB12; b5]</itype> make s.t. <tr>clean</tr>. <i>Ang dyanitur mauy mulínis sa mga lawak,</i> The janitor will clean the rooms. <i>Malínis na unyà ning sapatúsag kalimpyáhan,</i> These shoes will be clean once they are shined. <i>Kinahanglang linísun (linísan) nímu ang báy pirmi,</i> You should always clean the house. <number>2</number> <itype>[APB12; b5]</itype> cleanse or purify the soul, reputation, etc.; become cleansed. <i>Ang paghinulsul mauy mulínis (mupalínis) sa ímung kunsinsiya,</i> Repentance will cleanse your conscience. <i>Kinahanglang linísun (linísan) nátù ang átung banságun,</i> We must clear our family name. <form>{ma-|malínis}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>clean</tr>, <tr>pure</tr>.

<p id=11379><form>linlang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>deceive</tr>, <tr>fool</tr>. <i>Naglinlang ka sa mga táwu ánang pagparìpárì mu,</i> You are deceiving the people by posing as a priest. <number>2</number> <tr>distract</tr>, divert s.o.&apos;s attention. <i>Dì ka makalinlang níya kun magtan-aw siyag tilibisyun,</i> You cannot divert his attention when he is watching TV.

<p id=11380><form>linsa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> string a guideline in construction. <i>Akuy mulinsa sa pagpinsa arun dì maghiwì,</i> I&apos;ll string a guideline for the fence so it won&apos;t come out crooked. <pos>n</pos> string used as a guide.

<pb n=618>

<p id=11381><form>linsúwak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> fall headlong. <i>Nalinsúwak siya gíkan sa bintánà,</i> He fell headlong from the window.

<p id=11382><form>lintà</form> <pos>n</pos> leech.

<p id=11383><form>lintar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b3(1)c5]</itype> lose one&apos;s head, panic. <i>Nalintar siya maung gasulinadur hinúuy íyang gisikáran,</i> He panicked, so he stepped on the accelerator instead. <i>Wà pa gánì ka kasab-i nalintar na,</i> You haven&apos;t even got your scolding and you already panic. <form>lintádu</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to panic.

<p id=11384><form>linti</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> lens, magnifying glass. <number>2</number> searchlight. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b]</itype> use a magnifying glass on s.t. <i>Lintíhi ang mga litra arun sayun nga basáhun,</i> Use a magnifying glass on the letters so you can easily read them. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> beam with a searchlight. <i>Gilintíhan sa barku ang pantalan,</i> The ship beamed a searchlight on the wharf. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make into a magnifying glass, searchlight.

<p id=11385><form>lintì</form> <pos>n</pos> lightning, thunderbolt. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> <number>1</number> be struck with a thunderbolt. <i>Lintian (lintían) kunu ang táwung makigminyù ug paryinti,</i> They say that a man who marries a relative will be struck with a thunderbolt. <number>2</number> get severe punishment. <i>Kay ímung gidáut nà, lintían kang Pápa,</i> Since you broke it, you&apos;ll get hell from Dad. <number>2a</number> <itype>[b4(1)]</itype> be in a very unpleasant situation. <i>Nahutdan ta ug gasulína ug layù tas lungsud, nalintían na ta áni,</i> We&apos;re out of gas and we&apos;re far from town. Now we are in trouble. <pos>a</pos> incorrigible in behavior. <i>Sa piyir náay daghang mga buguy nga lintì kaáyu,</i> There are lots of incorrigible bums at the waterfront.

<p id=11386><form>lintihuylas</form> <xr>= <sc>lintuhílas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11387><form>lintúbaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> fall down headlong. <i>Nalintúbaw ang bátà ngadtu sa atábay,</i> The child toppled into the well.

<p id=11388><form>lintuhílas</form> <pos>n</pos> small sequins or spangles used as ornaments for clothing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put sequins on s.t.

<p id=11389><form>lintungánay</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> principal source of s.t. <i>Lawum ug dulut ang gamut nga lintungánay,</i> Primary roots go deep. <i>Kanang ákung sanggutan mau ang lintungánay sa ákung katigayúnan karun,</i> Palm toddy is the source of my current wealth. <number>2</number> original. <i>Nagkahanaw na karun ang pinulungan nga lintungánayng binisayà,</i> The original and native Visayan is fast disappearing.

<p id=11390><form>lintúwad</form> (from <ix>tuwad</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB16; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> fall down, topple over, usually landing wrong side or tail end up; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Didtu sa kanal malintúwad ang awtu,</i> The car fell front-end first into the ditch. <i>Kinsay naglintúwad sa bukag nga gisudlan sa mangga?</i> Who turned over the basket with the mangoes in it? <number>2</number> be in utter disorder. <form>{ka-|kalintúwad}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be in utter disorder. <i>Nagkalintúwad lang ang hugasun sa hugasan,</i> The sink is in utter disorder with all the dishes in it.

<p id=11391><form>lintuwang, lintúwang</form> (from <ix>tuwang</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> turn s.t. over. <i>Akuy naglintuwang sa mga lingkuránan pag-uwan,</i> I turned the chairs over when it rained.

<p id=11392><form>linù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> slosh liquid around inside s.t. <i>Naglinù ku ug gasulína áring butilya arun makúhà ang asíti,</i> I am sloshing gasoline around inside the bottle to get the oil out. <i>Linui ug ínit túbig ang tirmus úsà sudli ug ínit nga kapi,</i> Slosh hot water around in the thermos before you put hot coffee in it. <pos>n</pos> pieces of dough collected from the mixing bowl by sloshing water around in it. <form>{-in-an|lininúan}</form> <xr>= <sc>linú</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=11393><form>línug</form> <pos>n</pos> earthquake. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for there to be an earthquake. <i>Ug mulínug, hugnù giyud ning taytayána,</i> If there is an earthquake, this bridge will surely collapse. <i>Nangabut ang hinábang sa gilinúgan,</i> Aid arrived for the earthquake victims.

<p id=11394><form>linulyum</form> <pos>n</pos> linoleum. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> put a linoleum covering on s.t.

<p id=11395><form>linya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> lines drawn or formed by things in a row or column. <i>Ang linya sa ímung papil hiwì,</i> The lines on your paper are crooked. <i>Ang linya sa mga táwu miabut ngadtu sa iskína,</i> The queue reached to the corner. <number>2</number> electric, telephone, telegraph lines. <i>Naputul ang linya sa tilipunu,</i> The telephone line was cut. <number>3</number> transportation line. <i>Barátu ang plíti kay duha ka linya nagkumpitinsiya,</i> The fare is cheap because the two lines are in competition. <number>3a</number> the route served by a line. <i>Ang ámung dapit may linya sa pasahiruan,</i> Our neighborhood is on a public transportation line. <number>4</number> the field of one&apos;s special knowledge, interest. <i>Dílì ákung linya ang pagkamagtutudlù,</i> Teaching is just not my line. <number>5</number> line of things similar to each other. <i>Ang bansíkul ug tulíngan paríhug hitsúra kay mau ra mang linyáha,</i> Tuna and mackerel are similar in appearance because they belong to the same family. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> line s.t. <i>Naglinya ku áring tabla pára damahan,</i> I am making lines for the checkerboard on this piece of wood. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> form, put into lines. <i>Sayu nga mulinya ang mga táwu pagpalit ug tíkit sa sini,</i> The people queue up early to buy tickets to the movie. <i>Linyáha (ilinya) ang mga síya diri,</i> Put the chairs in line here.

<p id=11396><form>lipad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23P]</itype> swerve or veer while in flight or traveling at very high speed. <i>Sa kusug nga dágan, ang gaan nga awtu mulipad,</i> Light cars swerve at high speeds. <i>Ang kapii <pb n=619>sa bála mauy makapalipad sa íyang ági,</i> The bullet is deformed, so it won&apos;t go straight.

<p id=11397><form>lipaghà</form> <xr>= <sc>libaghà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11398><form>lipaghung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2N]</itype> turn red in embarrassment or pique. <i>Nanglipaghung ákung nawung pagkabatì ku sa insultu,</i> My face flushed when I heard the insult.

<p id=11399><form>lipak</form> <pos>n</pos> bamboo slats. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> cut bamboo into slats. <i>Lipaka ang kawáyan pára ikural,</i> Cut the bamboo into slats to use for fencing. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> strike with a bamboo slat. <i>Lipaka ang irù,</i> Strike the dog with a bamboo slat.

<p id=11400><form>lípak</form> <pos>n</pos> loud thunderclap. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for there to be a loud thunderclap. <i>Bantayi ang irù ug mulípak, dì ba mukúrug,</i> Watch the dog when there is a thunderclap. He&apos;ll quiver. <number>1a</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> be struck by a thunderbolt. <i>Wà lipáki nang amahan nga nag-unay sa kaugalíngun níyang anak!</i> Surely the father was struck by lightning for having relations with his own daughter! <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> get a severe scolding, severely punished. <i>Lipákan kang Dádi mu ug hibaw-an ka,</i> You will get hell from Daddy if he finds out.

<p id=11401><form>lipakà</form> <pos>n</pos> itchy red splotches on the skin from allergies or insect bites. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b4]</itype> have splotches on the skin. <i>Naglipakà (gilipakaan) ang láwas sa bátà sa tipdas,</i> The child is covered with rash from his measles.

<p id=11402><form>lípang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B6]</itype> grow well and profusely. <i>Milípang ang mais human kaabunúhi,</i> The corn grew lush after it was fertilized. <i>Nanglípang ang láwas sa bátang pinainum ug litsi,</i> The child grew robust because they fed it milk. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P]</itype> for emotions to intensify. <i>Milípang ang ílang panaghigugmaay human sa panag-úlì,</i> After they were reconciled, their love for each other grew more intense.

<p id=11403><form>lip-an rayit</form> <pos>a</pos> giving without discrimination or restraint. <i>Lip-an rayit silang naglamánu sa mga butanti,</i> They shook as many of the voters&apos; hands as they possibly could. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> give without discrimination or restraint. <i>Naglip-an rayit ug panghátag ang ahinti sa mga sampul,</i> The agent gave out samples left and right.

<p id=11404><form>lipárak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> be, become fat, pudgy. <i>Mulipárak giyud ka ug magpatúyang kag káun,</i> You&apos;ll surely get fat if you eat as much as you like. <i>Nagkaliparak ang bátà kay naayun sa litsi,</i> The baby is getting fat because the milk agrees with him.

<p id=11405><form>lípas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> not go directly over s.t., pass around. <i>Ilípas ang kutsi kay gubà ang taytáyan,</i> Take a detour because the bridge is out. <form>{(&rarr;)|lipas}</form> <pos>a</pos> gone beyond a point in time. <i>Lipas na ang úras sa pagkáun,</i> The time for eating has passed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; c1]</itype> get beyond a certain point in time. <i>Nilípas na ang búwan sa udtuhan,</i> The moon has passed the midpoint in the sky. <form>{&mdash;|lipas} ang gútum</form> for one&apos;s hunger to disappear after the time for eating has passed. <i>Ug kanúnay nímung lipasun (ilipas) ang ímung gútum ulsirun ka,</i> If you always fail to eat on time, you will develop ulcers. <form>{-an|lipasan}</form> <pos>n</pos> detour, place a route goes around s.t.

<p id=11406><form>lipat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <number>1</number> make an error through inattention: lose track or forget what one was talking about. <i>Sa pag-ihap nalipat ku ug pila na tu,</i> I was counting, but I lost track how many there were. <i>Nalipat ku ug diin ikabutang ang hunsuy,</i> It slipped my mind where I put my pipe. <number>2</number> mistake s.o.&apos;s identity. <i>Nalipat ku. Ingun ku ug si Nítuy ka,</i> I was mistaken. I thought you were Nitoy. <number>3</number> <itype>[B1256; b8]</itype> fail to notice s.t. <i>Nalipat ku ug walà ku makamatikud sa pag-ági sa bátà,</i> I failed to notice, and I was not aware of it when the child passed by. <i>Nalipatan ku ang usa ka linya ug kupya,</i> I missed a line when I was copying. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> deceive s.o., causing him to fail to notice s.t. <i>Lipatun ka lang níya sa mga púlung nga tam-is,</i> He will just deceive you with sweet words. <form>{pa-(&larr;)|palípat}, lipatlípat</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sleight of hand, esp. a thimblerig game where a seed is hidden under one of the three thimble-shaped cups and is quickly shifted from one cup to another. The players gamble as to where the seed is located. <number>2</number> deception, chicanery. <i>Ang íyang pagdaug sa kuntrátu nahímù sa palípat,</i> He won the contract through chicanery. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> have a thimblerig game. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> deceive with chicanery.

<p id=11407><form>lipáta, lipátà</form> <xr>= <sc>alipátà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11408><form>lipatpat</form> <xr>= <sc>alipatpat</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11409><form>lípay</form> <pos>a</pos> glad. <i>Lípay kaáyu kung midaug ka,</i> I&apos;m very glad that you won. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> make s.o. happy. <i>Wà nay láing mulípay nákù kun dílì ikaw,</i> No one can make me happy but you. <number>2</number> <itype>[B156; c5]</itype> be happy, glad. <i>Nalípay ku nga nía ka,</i> I am glad that you&apos;re here. <i>Maglípay ta kay milampus ang átung plánu,</i> Let&apos;s be happy because our plans succeeded. <i>Gikalípay kug dakù ang ímung kalampúsan,</i> I am very happy at your success. <form>{paha-|pahalípay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> congratulate, felicitate. <i>Usa aku sa mupahalípay nímu sa ímung kadaúgan,</i> I am one of those who will congratulate you on your victory. <pos>n</pos> congratulations. <i>Dawáta ang kinasingkásing kung pahalípay,</i> Accept my heartfelt congratulations. <form>{ma-un|malipáyun}</form> <pos>a</pos> happy. <i>Malipáyun kaáyu siya nga misugut sa ákung hangyù,</i> He was happy <pb n=620>to comply with my request. <form>{&mdash;|malipáyun} nga pasku</form> Merry Christmas. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be happy. <form>{ka-|kalípay}</form> <pos>n</pos> happiness. <i>Ang íyang pagkaasáwa walay kalípay,</i> She knows no happiness as a wife. <form>{mag-r-|maglilípay}</form> <pos>n</pos> the Holy Spirit as Comforter.

<p id=11410><form>liphuk</form> <pos>n</pos> left hook in boxing.

<p id=11411><form>lip-istik</form> <xr>= <sc>lipstik</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11412><form>lip-it</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b2]</itype> put s.t. in between two flat surfaces. <i>Ilip-it ang mamísus sa libru,</i> Stick the peso bills in the book. <i>Didtu ra malip-iti ang dukumintu sa mga inutaw,</i> The document was right there, in between the ironed clothes.

<p id=11413><form>liplip</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. matting used to wrap tobacco in bales or as walling, made of <ix>nípà</ix> or coconut leaflets laid flat side by side with some overlap and stitched together with fiber. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make into a matting of this sort.

<p id=11414><form>lipstik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lipstick</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> use a certain k.o. lipstick. <form>{pa&N;-|panglipstik}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> put lipstick on.

<p id=11415><form>lipsut</form> <xr>= <sc>ipsut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11416><form>lipti</form> <pos>n</pos> painted grunter: <bio>Plectorhinchus pictus</bio>.

<p id=11417><form>lipting</form> <pos>n</pos> the violation in dribbling a basketball where the ball is not hit, but lifted slightly before being bounced. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6(1)]</itype> commit this violation.

<p id=11418><form>liptung</form> <pos>n</pos> lake formed in a river by a dam or similar obstruction. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6, b5c1]</itype> gather into a pool, make into a dam, gather in a dam. <i>Naliptung (miliptung) ang sapà kay naalihan sa dakung káhuy nga natumba,</i> The water of the brook formed a pool because a fallen log obstructed its course. <i>Liptúngi (liptúnga, iliptung) ang sapà arun kalanguyan,</i> Make a dam in the river so we can swim in it.

<p id=11419><form>*lipu</form> <form>kalipuhan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be hard-pressed by time or quantity of work. <i>Nagkalipuhan siya didtu sa kusína kay dúnay muabut nga bisíta,</i> She was very busy in the kitchen because there were visitors coming.

<p id=11420><form>lipudlípud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> hide s.t. by circumlocution or covering up. <i>Náay ímung tinagúan kay naglipudlípud ka sa pagtug-an nákù,</i> You must be hiding s.t. because you are beating around the bush instead of telling me right out. <i>Gilipudlípud sa inahan ang mga salà sa íyang mga anak ngadtu sa íyang bána,</i> The mother covered up for her children in front of the father. <pos>n</pos> action of concealing s.t. <i>Sa walay lipudlípud nga pagkasulti tikasan ka!</i> Let&apos;s call a spade a spade. You&apos;re a cheat!

<p id=11421><form>lipulipu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> be hard-pressed to do s.t. because of the quantity of work or the lack of time. <i>Naglipulipu mi karun kay umaábut ang supirbisur,</i> We are very busy now because the supervisor is about to come. <form>{ka-|kalipulipu}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be very hard-pressed. <i>Nagkalipulipu siya pagpamatúnis pagbuthù sa mga bisíta,</i> He was in a dither trying to get his pants buttoned up when the visitors suddenly arrived.

<p id=11422><form>lípung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be, become <tr>dizzy</tr>, <tr>woozy</tr>. <i>Nalípung siya human makatimahù adtung báhù sa tambal,</i> He became woozy after he smelled the odor of the medicine. <i>Pwirting makalípung ang argulya,</i> The merry-go-round can get you real dizzy. <number>2</number> <itype>[A123P]</itype> be enormously high in price. <i>Biling makalípung,</i> A dizzyingly high price. <form>{pa&N;-(&rarr;)|panglipung}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> undergo dizzy spells. <i>Nagpanglipung siya kay masakitun pa siya,</i> He has dizzy spells because he is still sick. <pos>n</pos> recurring dizziness. <form>{ka-|kalípung}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dizziness</tr>, <tr>giddiness</tr>.

<p id=11423><form>lipun-ug</form> <xr>= <sc>tipun-ug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11424><form>liput<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> go behind s.t. <i>Ang kawatan miliput sa usang balay ug nawálà,</i> The thief ducked in back of the next house and disappeared. <i>Maigù untà ku sa batu ug wà pa ku makaliput sa baril,</i> I would have been hit with a stone if I had not ducked behind a barrel. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> catch s.t. by going the other way. <i>Lingawa siya kay muliput ku sa píkas arun ákung sakpan,</i> Hold his attention because I will go the other way around so I can catch him. <form>{(&larr;)|líput}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> doublecross, betray. <i>Ug mangispíya ka pára sa píkas, naglíput ka sa átung násud,</i> If you do espionage work for the other side, you are betraying our country. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN2; b6]</itype> fight unfairly by doing s.t. treacherous or taking unfair advantage. <i>Gilipútan siyag dugmak sa luyu,</i> S.o. treacherously stabbed him in the back. <pos>n</pos> treachery. <form>{pa-|paliput ug pusta}, {pa-(&larr;)|palíput} ug pusta</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c6]</itype> secretly place a bet on the opposing cock (instead of one&apos;s own) or simply bet on an opposing cock in addition to one&apos;s own. <form>{ma-un(&larr;)|malipútun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>treacherous</tr>, <tr>traitorous</tr>. <form>{pa&N;-|pangliput}</form> <xr>= <sc>líput</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <form>{ka-an|kalipútan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>anus</tr> (euphemism).

<p id=11425><form>liput<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ray.

<p id=11426><form>lip-ut</form> <pos>a</pos> narrow in space or width. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> for a space or width to be narrow. <i>Nalip-ut ang sayal kay gamay man ang sun-ut sa panaptun,</i> The skirt was made narrow because it was a narrow piece of cloth. <i>Ang mga butang mauy nakalip-ut (nakapalip-ut) sa lugar dinhi,</i> The space was too small because too many things were put in it.

<p id=11427><form>lipuwa</form> <form>{pa&N;-|panglipuwa}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23P]</itype> blush. <i>Nanglipuwa ang náwung ni Balúduy dihang giintrudy&ucaron;s siya sa usa ka maanyag,</i> How Balodoy blushed when he was introduced to a beauty.

<p id=11428><form>lipyà</form> <pos>n</pos> moldboard, a curved iron plate attached <pb n=621>to a plowshare (punta) which lifts, turns, and pulverizes the soil. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> attach a moldboard on a plowshare.

<p id=11429><form>líra</form> <pos>n</pos> lyre.

<p id=11430><form>líraw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6P]</itype> for the eyes to dart back and forth, roll. <i>Milíraw ang íyang mga mata sa kalamì,</i> Her eyes rolled because it was so delicious. <form>lirawliraw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B456]</itype> <number>1</number> for the eyes to roll continuously. <i>Naglirawliraw ang íyang mata mu rag dúnay gipangítà,</i> His eyes moved back and forth as if he were looking for s.t. <number>2</number> for the thoughts to move rapidly from place to place.

<p id=11431><form>lirì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4]</itype> <number>1</number> split, tear open from fullness. <i>Ayaw nag daska ang sáku kay naglirì na sa kapunù,</i> Don&apos;t fill the sack further because it&apos;s so full it&apos;s bursting. <number>2</number> get obese as if about to split. <i>Milirì siya sa katambuk humag panganak,</i> She got terribly fat after she had her baby.

<p id=11432><form>liru</form> <xr>= <sc>rilu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11433><form>liruliru</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for the eyes to roll. <i>Miliruliru (nagliruliru) lang ang íyang mga mata pagkutána nákù,</i> He just rolled his eyes when I questioned him.

<p id=11434><form>lírung</form> <pos>a</pos> circular, rounded. <i>Lírung ang pláka,</i> A record is round. <pos>n</pos> a shallow circular basket used for winnowing or as a container for vending fish or vegetables.

<p id=11435><form>liryu</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to several k.o. ornamental bulbs, some of which also occur wild: <bio>Hymenocallis <corr sic=littorale>littoralis</corr>, <corr sic=Zephyranthis>Zephyranthes</corr> rosea</bio>, et al. In poetry, this flower symbolizes beauty.

<p id=11436><form>lís<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> lace. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> wear lace. <i>Naglís siyag panti,</i> She is wearing lace panties.

<p id=11437><form>lís<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <i>kalípay, 2.</i>

<p id=11438><form>lisa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a3]</itype> sprain or dislocate a joint. <i>Nalisa ang íyang túhud pagkadagmà níya,</i> His knee was dislocated when he fell down. <pos>n</pos> sprain or dislocation.

<p id=11439><form>lísang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> terrify, frighten severely. <i>Nalísang ku pagkalintúwad sa kutsi,</i> I was terrified when the car somersaulted. <i>Ayaw kug lisánga ánà kay dílì na tinúud sawa.</i> You can&apos;t scare me with that because that&apos;s no real snake. <form>{(&rarr;)|lisang}</form> <pos>n</pos> ailment, usually fever, that results from intense fright. <form>{ka-|kalísang}</form> <pos>n</pos> terror. <form>{maka-r-|makalilísang}</form> <pos>a</pos> terrifying. <i>Makalilísang kaáyu tung bagyúha kay hasta ang mga awtu nakulub,</i> That was a terrifying storm because it even turned cars over. 

<p id=11440><form>lisay</form> <pos>n</pos> lymph node. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b4]</itype> have swollen lymph nodes. <i>Naglisay (gilisayan) ang ákung íluk kay náay hubag ang ákung kamut,</i> I have swollen lymph glands in the armpits because I have a swollen hand.

<p id=11441><form>lisik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> stick out from a hidden or partly hidden position. <i>Milisik ang íyang mata sa kalágut,</i> His eyes bulged in anger. <i>Ang itlug sa tigúwang naglisik,</i> The old man&apos;s testicles are hanging out in view. <pos>n</pos> <tr>testicles</tr>. <form>putì ug {&mdash;|lisik}</form> <tr>cowardly</tr>.

<p id=11442><form>lisinsiya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>license</tr>, a document evidencing permission to engage in s.t. <number>2</number> <tr>permission</tr> to do s.t. <i>Ayaw ug uban námù kay wà kay lisinsiya ni Pápa,</i> Don&apos;t go with us because you don&apos;t have Daddy&apos;s permission. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN2; b6]</itype> ask permission. <i>Walà ku lisinsiyáhi ug táwu nga magbayli áning baláya,</i> Nobody asked me permission to hold a dance here in this house. <form>{pa&N;-|panglisinsiya}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. said or used to obtain permission. <form>{-du(&larr;)|lisinsiyádu}</form> <pos>n</pos> having a license. <i>Ribulbir nga lisinsiyádu,</i> Licensed revolver.

<p id=11443><form>lísis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shoelace</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> tie the shoes. <form>{pa&N;-|panglísis}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> tie one&apos;s shoes.

<p id=11444><form>liskad</form> <xr>= <sc>liskag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11445><form>liskag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2; c1]</itype> for s.t. that wraps s.t. to come open. <i>Miliskag ang dáhun sa ságing nga gipustan sa bulad,</i> The banana leaves which the dried fish were wrapped in came undone. <i>Nagkaliskag ang sáku kay labihang dasúka,</i> The sack is coming apart because it was filled too full. <i>Liskága (iliskag) ang baat,</i> Untie the string. <number>1a</number> for s.t. woven to get undone. <i>Naliskag ang banig kay wà masapay,</i> The mat came undone because the edges weren&apos;t closed up. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2N]</itype> <tr>spread out</tr>, <tr>stick out</tr>. <i>Maliskag ang balhíbu sa pábung duúlun,</i> The turkey puffs up its feathers if you get near it. <i>Naliskag ang íyang dunggan pagkadungug sa íyang ng&amacracu;n,</i> Her ears perked up when she heard her name. <pos>a</pos> <tr>spread out</tr>, <tr>undone</tr>. <i>Liskag ug tiil,</i> Spreading feet.

<p id=11446><form>liskug</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>coil</tr> of rattan, wire, or anything stiff. <number>2</number> stiff band attached to the rim of a basket, tray, and the like to strengthen the rim. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>coil up</tr> s.t. stiff. <number>2</number> make, attach a reinforcing band on the rim of a basket or tray. <number>3</number> <itype>[B]</itype> for s.t. long to curl up at the ends. <i>Naliskug ang lipak kay nainitan,</i> The bamboo slats curled up because they were exposed to the sun.

<p id=11447><form>liskúhag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> <tr>move</tr>, be stirred from an inactive or suppressed state. <i>Miliskúhag ang mga lútì sa baskit nga wà kalugpíti,</i> The bamboo strips on the rim of the basket came open because it wasn&apos;t clipped. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> for a feeling or emotion to spring forth in one&apos;s inner self (literary). <i>Miliskúhag pagkalit sa ákung kasingkásing ang usa ka tawhánung pagbátì,</i> Some sort of human emotion emerged within me.

<p id=11448><form>lisngag</form> <pos>a</pos> having nostrils larger than would be ordinary for a given size of nose. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c16]</itype> for the nostrils to be unusually large. <i>Naglisngag lang nang ilung mu mu rag kabáyung <pb n=622>nasukù,</i> You have nostrils that are drawn up like the nose of an angry horse.

<p id=11449><form>lisngig</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> turn the face away in scorn, disgust, and the like. <i>Milisngig dáyun ang kasíra sa pagkakità sa sud-an,</i> The boarder turned her face away in disgust when she saw the food. <number>2</number> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> look, turn the face sideways, usually due to a defect. <i>Nalisngig ang íyang tinan-awan tungud sa íyang hubag sa líug,</i> She has to keep looking sideways because of the big boil on her neck.

<p id=11450><form>lispu</form> <xr>= <sc>pulis</sc></xr> (slang).

<p id=11451><form>lista<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>list</tr>. <i>Wà maapil ang ímung ngálan sa lista,</i> Your name is not on the list. <number>2</number> list of debts. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> list, enumerate in writing, <i>Ilista ang palitúnun arun way makalimtan,</i> List the things to buy so we don&apos;t forget anything. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> charge s.t. to one&apos;s account in a store, add to one&apos;s list of debts. <i>Hápit tanang pamilya sa sundáwu naglista sa kantína,</i> Almost all the soldiers&apos; families charge all the goods they get from the canteen. <i>Listahun (ilista) lang ni, ha?</i> Just charge this, O.K.? <form>{pa-|palista}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>enroll</tr> s.o. or oneself in a course. <i>Dílì ku makapalista kay wà kuy kwarta,</i> I cannot enroll because I don&apos;t have any money. <form>listahan</form> <xr>= <sc>lista</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr> <form>{pa&N;-|panglista}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>enrollment</tr>.

<p id=11452><form>lista<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>alistu</sc></xr> (female).

<p id=11453><form>listu</form> <xr>= <sc>alistu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11454><form>listun<sub>1</sub>, list&ucaron;n</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shoelace</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> put, tie s.o.&apos;s shoelaces. <form>{pa&N;-|panglistun}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> tie one&apos;s own shoelaces. <i>Huwat úsà kay nanglistun pa ku,</i> Just a second, I&apos;m still tying my shoelaces.

<p id=11455><form>listun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>molding</tr>, a strip of wooden material for edging in a building or boat. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put a molding s.w. <i>Ikaw bay mulistun sa mga daplin sa bungbung?</i> Will you be the one to attach the molding at the edges of the walling? <i>Íyang gilistúnan ang mga piktiyur prim,</i> He attached the mouldings (around the sides) of the picture frame. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a wooden moulding. <i>Listúnun ku ning kahúya,</i> I&apos;ll make a moulding out of this piece of wood.

<p id=11456><form>lísu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>seed</tr>. <form>makaagpas sa {&mdash;|lísu}</form> get the implication of s.t. spoken by indirection. <i>Wà ku makaagpas sa lísu adtung íyang pasumbíngay,</i> I did not get what he was driving at. <form>lisulisu, lisuhan</form> <pos>a</pos> for corn or rice to be half cooked, as if there were seeds in the center. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> for rice or corn to come out half-cooked. <form>lisúhan</form> <pos>a</pos> having seeds. <i>Kadaghánan sa mga prútas lisúhan,</i> Most fruits have seeds.

<p id=11457><form>lísù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> <tr>turn</tr>, cause s.t. to rotate on its axis. <i>Pugngi ang twirka samtang maglísù ku sa pirnu,</i> Hold the nut in place while I turn the bolt. <i>Lisúa ang ímung síya ug atúbang diri,</i> Turn your chair around and face this way. <number>1a</number> <formx>{ma-|malísù} pay buku sa kawáyan</formx> impossible to change (lit. it would be easier to twist a bamboo node). <i>Malísù pay buku sa kawáyan kay sa ákung hukum,</i> I&apos;ll stick to my decision come hell or high water. <number>1b</number> <itype>[b4(1)]</itype> <formx>{&mdash;|lísù} sa buut, kwirdas, pangísip, twirka, útuk</formx> go off one&apos;s rocker. <i>Ang pubring inahan nalisúan sa pangísip pagkamatay sa íyang mga bátà,</i> The poor mother went crazy after her children died. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> twist one&apos;s body as if on an axis. <i>Milísù siya ug mitan-aw nákù,</i> He turned around and looked at me. <i>Ilísù ímung láwas ngadtu arun makaagi ku,</i> Turn your body that way so I can pass by. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> turn one&apos;s body over. <i>Ug pukáwun siya mulísù lang ug mubálik ug katúlug,</i> If you wake him, he just turns over and goes back to sleep. <form>{(&rarr;)|lisù}</form> <pos>n</pos> turning pegs of musical instrument. <form>{-anan|lisuanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>lísù</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> knob or switch one turns to turn s.t. on. <form>lisùlísù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>turn around</tr>. <i>Naglisùlísù siya sa silya nga nangítà nákù,</i> He was turning around in the chair looking for me. <number>2</number> <tr>toss</tr> and turn. <i>Naglisùlísù siya tibuuk gabíi ug walà makatulug,</i> He was tossing all night and was not able to sleep. <form>{-ay(&rarr;)|lisuay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146]</itype> be very busy. <i>Naglisuay (nagkalisuay) ku íning trabáhu kay wà kuy katábang,</i> I&apos;m up to my neck with work because I don&apos;t have anybody to help me.

<p id=11458><form>lisud</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>difficult</tr>. <i>Lisud kaáyu ning liksiyúna,</i> This lesson is very difficult. <number>2</number> in short supply, requiring effort. <i>Lisud ang túbig sa ámù,</i> Water is hard to come by at our place. <i>Lisud ang dálan sa Tulídu,</i> The road in Toledo is difficult. <number>3</number> for a situation to be hard to save or remedy<corr sic=",">.</corr> <i>Lisud na ang kahimtang sa masakitun<corr sic=.>,</corr></i> The patient is in critical condition. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2; a2]</itype> be, become <tr>difficult</tr>. <i>Dílì nákù lisdun ang mga pangutána,</i> I won&apos;t make the questions difficult. <number>2</number> <itype>[B145; b6]</itype> have, encounter difficulty in doing s.t. <i>Naglisud ku ug paandar sa makina,</i> I am having difficulty starting the engine. <i>Wà ka ba lisuri (lisdi) sa pag-ílis ug ligid?</i> Did you have difficulty in changing the tire? <number>2a</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> put s.o. to great inconvenience. <i>Ug ímu kung lisdun, muundang ku sa trabáhu,</i> If you make things hard for me, I will quit this job. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> be in bad shape financially or in health. <i>Naglisud si Lúlu mu,</i> Your grandfather is gravely ill. <i>Naglisud mi run kay wà kuy trabáhu,</i> We&apos;re hard up because I have no work. <pos>n</pos> thing that constitutes the hardship or difficulty. <i>Ang lisud mau nga dílì siya muadmitir nga utángan siya nímu,</i> <pb n=623>The difficult thing is that he won&apos;t admit that he is indebted to you. <form>{(&larr;)|lísud}, ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> have a hard time doing s.t. <i>Naglísud (nagkalísud) kug báyad,</i> I&apos;m having a hard time paying. <form>ug {magka-(&larr;)|makalísud}</form> if need be, if things get bad enough. <i>Ug magkalísud mubáyad na lang ku arun maariglu ang kásu,</i> If there is no other way, I&apos;ll just pay up so as to get rid of the case. <form>lisudlisud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. the hard way. <i>Lisudlisurun man nímu ug limbas. Gabsa!</i> You are doing it the hard way with a file. Use a saw! <number>2</number> impose unnecessary work or difficulty on s.o. <i>Naglisudlisud ka lang nákù pagpatubig sa tanum nga muulan man run,</i> You are making me water the plants for nothing when it is going to rain. <form>kalisudlisud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be hard up financially. <i>Nagkalisudlisud sila kay walay trabáhu ang amahan,</i> They are hard up because the father has no work. <form>{ka-|kalisud}</form> <pos>n</pos> hardship. <i>Ang kalisud nga ímung masagubang,</i> The hardships you will encounter. <form>kalisdánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hardships</tr>.

<p id=11459><form>lisuglisug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; b4]</itype> for the body to have cysts or cyst-like protrusions. <i>Mulisuglisug ang ákung íluk ug pamlúgan ku,</i> I get swollen glands in my armpit whenever I get a lymphatic infection.

<p id=11460><form>lísun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>filled out</tr>, <tr>well-built</tr> in body. <i>Ang himsug nga bátà lísun kaáyug láwas,</i> The healthy child has a well-filled-out body. <i>Ságad sa mga trabahadur lísun kaáyug láwas,</i> Most workers have good bodies. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> for a body to be well-built, rounded. <form>{ka-|kalísun}</form> <pos>n</pos> state of being well-built.

<p id=11461><form>lísun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> name given to various fleshy carangoid fish.

<p id=11462><form>lisun plan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lesson plan</tr> for schools. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> make a lesson plan.

<p id=11463><form>liswi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>habasan</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> blood-mouthed conch.

<p id=11464><form>lisyinsiya</form> <xr>= <sc>lisinsiya</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11465><form>lít</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>late</tr>, not on time. <i>Diin gud ka! Lít kaáyu ka,</i> Where have you been? You are very late. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be <tr>late</tr>. <i>Ug malít ka sa klási, ay na lang ug sulud,</i> If you are late for class, don&apos;t attend.

<p id=11466><form>lit-ad</form> <pos>a</pos> bent or twisted from warping, <tr>warped</tr>. <i>Lit-ad kaáyu ning tabláha kay dúgay nga nabulad sa ínit,</i> This piece of wood is all warped because it was left under the sun. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> get warped. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> bend the body backwards or writhe. <i>Ayúhag kúgus ang bátà kay mukalit ug lit-ad,</i> Hold the child firmly because he&apos;ll just suddenly throw himself backward. <form>lit-adlit-ad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>writhe</tr>, <tr>wriggle</tr>. <i>Naglit-adlit-ad siya sa kalamì,</i> She writhed in ecstasy.

<p id=11467><form>lit-ag</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>snare</tr> with a running noose, actuated by a spring pole which is released when the quarry steps on the cross piece that holds it down. <form>{&mdash;|lit-ag} nga mubutu</form> <tr>booby trap</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> catch with this sort of snare. <i>Manglit-ag mi sa lasang ug ihálas manuk,</i> We will snare wild chickens in the forest. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make into a snare.

<p id=11468><form>litaníya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>litany</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>enumeration</tr> of things in a series. <i>Túa na, gibungat ang litaníya sa ímung mga sayup,</i> There he goes, reciting the litany of all your faults. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> say the <tr>litany</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a]</itype> say s.t. in an enumeration. <i>Wà ku katíngug dihang gilitanyáhan ku níya sa ákung mga salà,</i> I could not say a word when he enumerated my faults to me.

<p id=11469><form>litì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>thunderbolt</tr>. <i>Usa ka makabungul nga litì milánug sa kagabhíun,</i> A deafening thunderbolt echoed in the night. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> for a thunderbolt to crash. <form>{&mdash;|litì} sa udtung tútuk</form> sudden and unexpected happening (like a bolt of lightning at high noon, a rare occurrence). <i>Ang pagbali sa sinalígan sa partídu ngadtu sa píkas mauy usa ka litì sa udtung tútuk,</i> The party leader&apos;s defection to the other side was a most unexpected move.

<p id=11470><form>litik</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> <tr>snap</tr> one&apos;s finger. <i>Nagpanglitik siya sa íyang tudlù sa higayun nga nalipatan,</i> He snapped his fingers in annoyance that he missed the opportunity. <i>Litki (litiki) ang irù arun mudúul,</i> Snap your fingers at the dog so it will come near. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>flick</tr> s.t. with the fingers. <i>Litkan (liktan) ku nang dunggan mu ug dì ka mamínaw,</i> I&apos;ll flick your ears if you don&apos;t listen. <form>{(&larr;)|lítik}</form> <xr>= <sc>litiklitik</sc>, <i>n2,</i> <i>v</i>.</xr> <form>litiklítik, litikay, litikánay, litkanay, liktanay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a game of flicking each other&apos;s knuckles to see who will surrender in pain. <number>2</number> game of detaching or scattering a bunch of knotted rubber bands by flicking with the thumb and middle finger. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> play a finger-flicking game or game scattering rubber bands.

<p id=11471><form>litiliti</form> <pos>a</pos> for s.t. in a container to be used up, very close to the bottom. <i>Litiliti na kaáyu ang túbig sa bangà,</i> The water in the jar is falling pretty close to the bottom. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B36]</itype> <number>1</number> for s.t. to be used up, usually to the bottom of the container. <i>Nagkalitiliti ang átung bugas,</i> Our rice is getting close to the bottom of the bin. <number>2</number> be reduced to a very small amount. <i>Naglitiliti ang nanan-aw sa prugráma kay taligsik,</i> Only a small sparse crowd saw the program because it was drizzling.

<p id=11472><form>litíra</form> <xr>= <sc>ritíra</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11473><form>litiral</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>literal</tr>. <i>Litiral nga intirpritasiyun sa Biblíya,</i> A literal interpretation of the Bible. <pb n=624><pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> do s.t. literally.

<p id=11474><form>litiratúra</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> literature. <number>2</number> literature carrying advertising or information.

<p id=11475><form>lítis</form> <xr>= <sc>litsúgas</sc>, <ix>1.</ix></xr>

<p id=11476><form>litra</form> <pos>n</pos> letter of the alphabet. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> mark with a letter. <i>Litráhan ku ning ákung mga punda,</i> I will mark my pillowcases with my initials.

<p id=11477><form>litrátu</form> <xr>= <sc>ritrátu</sc>.</xr> <form>litratista</form> <xr>= <sc>ritratista</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ritrátu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11478><form>litru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> liter. <number>2</number> dry measure for grains and other items equal to one-third of a ganta. <i>Ipalit ku ug usa ka litru nga asin,</i> Buy me a liter of salt. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> measure s.t. by the liter. <form>litruhan</form> <pos>n</pos> a container used as a liter measure.

<p id=11479><form>litsi<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>milk</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> put or add milk to s.t. <i>Gilitsihan ba nímu ang ákung kapi?</i> Did you put milk in my coffee? <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> raise s.t. or s.o. on milk other than the mother&apos;s. <i>Litsíhun ku ning itúya kay namatay ang inahan,</i> I will raise this puppy on canned milk because the mother died. <form>{&mdash;|litsi} plan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. custard baked or steamed in syrup. <form>kulur {dí-|dílitsi}</form> <pos>a</pos> cream-colored. <form>litsihan, litsíhan</form> <pos>n</pos> a unit of dry or liquid measure the size of a milk can.

<p id=11480><form>litsi<sub>2</sub></form> <number>1</number> mild cuss word uttered in annoyance or anger (euphemism for <ix>pisti</ix>). <i>Litsi! Gibálì na pud nà nímu,</i> Darn! You broke it again. <number>2</number> reference to s.o. one is annoyed at. <i>Giindiyan ku sa litsing dakù,</i> The son of a gun stood me up. <form>{-ng|litsing} yáwà</form> expression of strong anger. <i>Litsing yáwà! Aku pay hulaman ug libru ug aku pay pahatdun didtu sa íla!</i> Shit! He borrows a book from me and then I&apos;m supposed to bring it to his house as well! <form>litsilitsi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> say <ix>litsi</ix> to s.o. <i>Ayaw kug litsilitsíha,</i> Don&apos;t you say <ix>litsi</ix> to me!

<p id=11481><form>litsúgas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lettuce</tr>: <bio>Lactuca sativa</bio>. <number>2</number> mild cuss word uttered upon being annoyed (euphemism for <ix>litsi</ix>). <i>Litsúgas ning batáa, kanúnay rang mangáyù ug singku!</i> This darn child! He always asks for a nickel.

<p id=11482><form>litsun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> pig roasted whole over coals. <number>2</number> by extension, fowl so roasted. <form>{&mdash;|litsun} dilitsi</form> roast suckling pig. <number>3</number> euphemism for <ix>litsi,</ix> a mild curse said when one is annoyed with s.o. <i>Litsun ning batáa samukan kaáyu,</i> Darn this child. He&apos;s such a nuisance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> roast a pig, have a roast pig or, by extension, a fowl. <form>{-in-|linitsun}</form> <pos>n</pos> animal so roasted whole over coals. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|litsunun}</form> <pos>n</pos> a pig in the stage of growth considered ideal for roasting.

<p id=11483><form>litu, lítu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> buy rice or corn for home consumption. <i>Lisud kaáyug hasta bugas litúhun pa,</i> It&apos;s very difficult if we have to buy rice, too. <form>{pa-(&larr;)|palítu}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> sell corn grits or rice. <number>2</number> sell corn grits or rice on a rationed basis. <i>Magpalítug bugas mais ang arsii,</i> The RCA will sell corn meal on a rationed basis.

<p id=11484><form>litù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; a12]</itype> for joints to crack, crack the joints. <i>Kamau ka nga mulitù sa ímung tudlù?</i> Do you know how to crack your knuckles? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> rub a leaf over an angle to make the leaf pliant. <i>Lituun nímu ang dáhun sa lumbuy sa ngilit sa lamísa arun sayun nga lukútun,</i> Rub the <ix>lumbuy</ix> leaf over the edge of the table so it will be easy to roll. <form>{-anan(&larr;)|lituánan}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. one can rub a leaf over to make it pliant.

<p id=11485><form>lítub</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible arc shell. <form>{&mdash;|lítub} sa amù</form> k.o. small arc shell (<measure reg="1.3 cm">&frac12;&Prime;</measure>) which clings to cliffs along the seashore. It is not eaten.

<p id=11486><form>lituglítug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> hide, refuse to tell the truth when asked. <i>Ayawg lituglítug, tug-an sa tinúud,</i> Don&apos;t try to hide s.t. Tell the truth. <i>Ayaw kug lituglitúgi. Háin ang kwarta?</i> Don&apos;t try to hide anything from me. Where&apos;s the money? <number>2</number> withhold s.t. which one is supposed to turn over. <i>Gilituglítug sa pyádu ang abut sa humay,</i> The man who was in charge didn&apos;t turn over all of the rice crop.

<p id=11487><form>lituk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> pronounce. <i>Kamau nang mulituk si Bíbut sa púlung &lsquo;Máma&rsquo;,</i> Bebot already knows how to say &lsquo;Mama&rsquo; distinctly. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> express, convey s.t. by speaking. <i>Naglituk siya sa íyang gugma ngadtu sa dalága,</i> He was expressing his love to the maiden. <i>Litukan ta ka sa prisyu nga walay makaparíhu,</i> I will quote you a price no one can match.

<p id=11488><form>lituk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> flick with the fingers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> hit s.t. by flicking the fingers at it. <i>Ang tabian gilitukan sa maistru sa &umacracu;,</i> The teacher flicked the pupil on the head for talking in class.

<p id=11489><form>lítuk</form> <pos>a</pos> for rice plants to sprout fresh, lush leaves. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> for rice transplants to get lush new leaves. <i>Naglítuk ang íyang humay kay dinisibi man,</i> His rice plants are sprouting lush leaves because they are well cared for.

<p id=11490><form>litundan</form> <xr>= <sc>alitundan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11491><form>líu</form> <xr>= <sc>líhù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11492><form>líug</form> <pos>n</pos> neck. <i>Butilyang taas ug líug,</i> A bottle with a long neck. <form>{(&rarr;)|liug}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A123S; a12]</itype> hit in the neck. <i>Liugun níya ug pusil ang liyun,</i> He will shoot the lion in the neck. <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;|liug} sa bitik ni San Markus</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a3]</itype> be hooked into marriage (lit. be caught in the neck by the noose of St. Mark). <i>Ígù lang kung migraduwar, <pb n=625>naliug dáyun ku sa bitik ni San Markus,</i> As soon as I graduated I got married. <form>{pa&N;-|panglíug}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> get thick at the neck. <i>Nanglíug siyag maáyu, mu rag bábuy,</i> He&apos;s got lots of fat around the neck like a pig. <form>{panghi-(&rarr;)|panghiliug}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2456]</itype> for a young bull to become fully mature, as shown by an enlargement of the neck. <i>Manungag ra ba nang turíyu nga manghiliug,</i> That young bull will gore you now that he&apos;s getting mature. <form>{pa&N;-(&rarr;)|pangliug}</form> <pos>n</pos> in plowing with a water buffalo, a rope tied from one end of the yoke to the other, passing under the animal&apos;s neck, the purpose of which is to prevent the yoke from slipping off. <form>{taga-(&rarr;)|tagaliug}</form> <pos>a</pos> up to the neck. <i>Tagaliug ku sa mga útang,</i> I&apos;m up to my neck in debt. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> get to be up to the neck.

<p id=11493><form>liunduk</form> <xr>= <sc>taliunduk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11494><form>lius</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> pass by s.t. unnoticed. <i>Sa luyung pultahan siya mulius,</i> He passed thru the back door unnoticed. <number>1a</number> <itype>[C3; b5]</itype> fail to see s.t., skip over s.t. <i>Naglíus lang sila ug wà magkítà,</i> They passed each other without seeing each other and they failed to meet. <i>Giliusan (gilius) námù siya pagsilbi,</i> We skipped her when we were serving. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3B; a12]</itype> distract s.o.&apos;s attention from s.t. <i>Akuy naglius sa irù; siya usab nangáwat,</i> I distracted the dog&apos;s attention, while he broke into the house. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> for s.t. to come and go without being given adequate or passing attention. <i>Pila na ka Sabadu ang milius?</i> How many Saturdays have come and gone? <form>{(&larr;)|líus}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> keep coming in succession. <i>Naglíus na man lang tung mga maáyung tanyag,</i> Those good offers have just been coming to you one after the other. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b5]</itype> wriggle through a tight opening. <i>Liúsa (liúsi) ang mga táwu arun maabut ka sa altar,</i> Wriggle through the throng so you can reach the altar. <form>liuslíus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> avoid being caught by changing direction and speed constantly. <i>Lisud siyang dakpun kay maáyung muliuslíus,</i> He is hard to catch because he is good in dodging. <number>2</number> manage to get through an argument or interrogation by evasive means. <i>Maáyu siyang muliuslíus sa katarúngan,</i> He is good at giving evasive reasons.

<p id=11495><form>líut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> squeeze one&apos;s way through. <i>Milíut siya sa daghang táwu,</i> He squeezed his way through the crowd. <i>Nasámad siya sa alambring íyang giliútan,</i> He sustained cuts from the barbed wire he squeezed through. <number>2</number> get out of a difficult spot by verbal cunning. <i>Bísag pit-un siya, makalíut pa giyug pangatarúngan,</i> Even if you push him against the wall, he will manage to come up with an answer that will somehow get him out of it.

<p id=11496><form>líwa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> destroy mankind and rid the world of evils. <i>Ang lúnup mauy milíwa sa kalibútan,</i> The great deluge destroyed mankind and rid the world of evils.

<p id=11497><form>líwag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> move s.t. at one end to get it out of the way or make it change position. <i>Liwágun nátù ngadtu ning tabla arun dílì magbalabag sa dálan,</i> Let&apos;s push this board to one side so it won&apos;t be in the way. <number>2</number> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> face a different direction. <i>Pastilan ug mulíwag nang kanyun,</i> If that cannon turns in this direction, we&apos;re in for it. <number>2a</number> shift one&apos;s direction in squatting without taking the soles off the ground. <i>Milíwag siya arun maduul sa íyang tiráhan nga dyúlin,</i> He pivoted around to get nearer to the target he was shooting his marble at.

<p id=11498><form>líwas</form> <pos>n</pos> period after a holiday or big occasion. <i>Sa líwas sa pyista,</i> After the fiesta. <i>Líwas sa gíra,</i> The post-war period. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B256; b]</itype> for it to get to be the time after some period. <i>Mulíwas na lang ang pasku wà giyud kuy pinaskúhan,</i> Christmas will soon be over and I still haven&apos;t received a single Christmas gift. <i>Giliwásan giyud mi sa ting-ani didtu sa búkid,</i> We stayed in the mountains until after the harvest season.

<p id=11499><form>liwat</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>taking after</tr>. <i>Liwat siya sa amahan nga taas ug ilung,</i> He got his father&apos;s long nose. <form>{&mdash;|liwat} sa giliwatan</form> being exactly like the parents, a chip off the old block. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B256N; b6]</itype> <tr>take after</tr> s.o. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain or produce an offspring or young. <i>Maáyu na lang ug makaliwat (makapaliwat) ning sunúya kay dì na ikatárì,</i> This rooster is no good for fighting any more, but we can still use him as breeder. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>species</tr>, <tr>breed</tr> of. <i>Ang dumánu liwat sa lubi nga inánu, Dumánu</i> is a species of dwarf coconut. <number>2</number> one&apos;s <tr>children</tr>. <i>Pila nay ímung liwat karun?</i> How many children do you have now? <form>{pa-|paliwat}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c]</itype> <tr>breed</tr> s.t. <i>Paliwatan (paliwatun) nákù ning ákung alumnus,</i> I will use this boar for breeding purposes. <i>Ug gustu kag maáyung nati, anhà ipaliwat sa ílang túru,</i> If you want to have a good calf, breed it from their bull. <form>{pa&N;-|pangliwat}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> have an <tr>offspring</tr>. <i>Ug mangliwat ímung bábuy, paambíta ta ug usa,</i> If your pig has a litter, let me have one. <form>{ka-(&larr;)|kalíwat}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>descendant</tr>. <i>Ang kalíwat ni Busyu mau ang mga adunáhan sa Karkar,</i> The wealthy families in Carcar are the descendants of Bosio. <number>2</number> <tr>breed</tr>, <tr>race</tr>, <tr>species</tr>. <i>Kining mungaána kalíwat ug hingitlug,</i> This hen is an egg-laying breed. <i>Lubus nga kalíwat,</i> Purebred. <i>Mau ni ang kalíwat sa úhung nga <pb n=626>gagmayun apan pinangità,</i> This species of mushroom is small but highly prized. <i>Tabúnung kalíwat,</i> The brown race. &dagger;

<p id=11500><form>liwayway</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> name of a Tagalog weekly. <number>2</number> brand of cheap cigarettes.

<p id=11501><form>liwit</form> <xr>= <sc>diwit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11502><form>liyalíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rocking chair</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> sit or be rocking in a chair. <i>Midiskansu siya, nagliyalíya,</i> He is sitting in his rocking chair, relaxing.

<p id=11503><form>liyinda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>legend</tr>, a story handed down from early times by tradition and popularly regarded as historical.

<p id=11504><form>líyu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>circle</tr> around. <i>Milíyu ug katulu ang ayruplánu únà mutugpa,</i> The airplane circled three times before it landed. <pos>n</pos> things located in a circle around an area. <i>Mga balay nga líyu sa simbahan,</i> The houses surrounding the church.

<p id=11505><form>líyug</form> <pos>a</pos> for s.t. long and slender to be <tr>bent</tr> or <tr>crooked</tr>, <tr>warped</tr>. <i>Dílì magsirbi nà pára pálu kay líyug kaáyu,</i> This would not do for a mast because it is crooked. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> be <tr>crooked</tr> or <tr>bent</tr>. <i>Unsang klási sa mitrusána ni nga naglíyug man?</i> What kind of meter stick is this that it is so crooked? <number>2</number> <itype>[B246]</itype> for a missile to go crooked. <i>Mulíyug ang lapad nga batu ug ilábay,</i> A flat stone curves when you throw it. <form>liyuglíyug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> bend back and forth. <i>Ug muliyuglíyug ang lubi, bagyu na nà,</i> If the coconut sways back and forth, it&apos;s a typhoon.

<p id=11506><form>líyuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; c]</itype> be, go around s.t. <i>Mga bátang naglíyuk (nagliyuk) sa nag-ásuy,</i> Children sitting around the storyteller. <i>Makalíyuk ba ning písì sa paldu?</i> Will this rope go all around the bale? <i>Wà mi makasíbug dihang giliyúkan mi sa mga Hapun,</i> We were not able to retreat when the Japanese surrounded us. a being around. <i>Líyuk sa ílang balay may káhuy nga namúnga,</i> There are trees covered with fruit all around their house.

<p id=11507><form>liyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lion</tr>.

<p id=11508><form>lú<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>law course</tr>. <i>Lú ang íyang giistudiyúhan,</i> He is taking up law.

<p id=11509><form>lú<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>feel weak</tr> and with no energy. <i>Mulú lang nang tawhána ug magdaut,</i> That man feels weak and lazy only if he is ill. <i>Ug ilú nímu ang plú, musamut,</i> Your flu will get worse if you give in to it.

<p id=11510><form>lúad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB126; a12]</itype> be <tr>uprooted</tr> and fall on its side, <tr>uproot</tr> s.t. <i>Bagyu Ámi ang naglúad ánang kasya,</i> Typhoon Amy felled that acacia tree. <i>Nalúad ang pusti nga naagian sa bahà,</i> The post was uprooted when the flood went through it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> for brothers to marry sisters. <i>Gilúad sa mga Plánas ang mga Bakalan,</i> The Planas brothers married the Bacalan sisters.

<p id=11511><form>luag</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> loose, not tightly attached or wound around. <i>Luag kaáyu pagkabaáta ang písì,</i> The rope is loosely tied. <i>Luag nga sapátus,</i> Shoes that are too big. <number>2</number> having ample space. <i>Ang bangkù luag pára lingkúran sa lima ka táwu,</i> The bench is big enough for five persons to sit on it. <i>Luag nga kalubinhan.</i> Large tracts of coconut land. <number>2a</number> for s.t. not to occupy a whole area. <i>Ípun diri ug lingkud kay luag pa mi kaáyu,</i> Sit with us because there&apos;s plenty of room here. <number>3</number> being in a comfortable situation. <i>Luag na ang átung panimuyù kay may trabáhu na silas Pápa ug Máma,</i> We have a comfortable life now that Dad and Mom both have jobs. <number>4</number> for emotions or a sickness to be relieved. <i>Luag na ang ákung ginháwa dihang naulì na ang bátà,</i> My anxiety has been relieved now that my daughter came home. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB; a2]</itype> be loose, loosen. <i>Bi, akuy muluag (mupaluag) sa ímung kurbáta,</i> Here, I will loosen your necktie. <i>Hugti ug maáyu ang twirka arun dílì muluag,</i> Tighten the nut very well so it will not loosen. <i>Luagi ug báat ang ákung kamut,</i> Tie my hands loosely. <number>2</number> <itype>[B5; b6]</itype> be, become wide in area. <i>Nagkaluag ang ílang kahumayan kay nanáwat silag prinda,</i> They are getting more and more rice lands because they accept mortgages. <number>3</number> for one&apos;s financial or emotional situation to ease up. <form>{ha-|haluag}</form> <xr>= <sc>luag</sc>, <i>a2.</i></xr> <form>luaglúag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; b(1)]</itype> for there to be a slackening of pressure, treat leniently. <i>Apikíha siya. Ayawg luagluági ang ímung paghangyù,</i> Pressure him. Don&apos;t ease up in your pleading. <i>Ug luagluágan nímu ang ímung mga anak, mangabusar nà,</i> If you are too lenient with your children, they will become abusive.

<p id=11512><form>luaryang, luaryung</form> (from <ix>luag</ix>) <pos>a</pos> for a woman to have a large vagina, no longer a virgin (coarse). <i>Mangasáwa ka ánang luaryang?</i> Are you going to marry that fallen woman? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be a fallen woman.

<p id=11513><form>lúas</form> <pos>n</pos> tiny sore in the gums or inside of the mouth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> have tiny sores in the mouth.

<p id=11514><form>luátan</form> <pos>n</pos> joints, a place of union between two separate bones.

<p id=11515><form>luay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> leader in fishing with a line. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> attach a leader to a line.

<p id=11516><form>luay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become weak and limp. <i>Muluay (maluay) ang láwas sa táwung kuyapan,</i> The body of a person who faints becomes limp. <i>Nagluay ang úlu sa bátà nga nakatúlug sa silya,</i> The child&apos;s head was hanging limply after he fell asleep in the chair. <pos>a</pos> flexible, limp. <i>Luay ang alambri,</i> <pb n=627>Wire is flexible.

<p id=11517><form>luay<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>dul-ay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11518><form>luba</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> <tr>give way</tr> under pressure, persecution, public opinion. <i>Dì muluba (maluba) ning ákung pagbátì bísan taliw&amacrgra; sa pagtámay,</i> My love will not give way no matter how much scorn they may heap on me. <i>Ang lúhà sa íyang asáwa mauy nakapaluba (nakaluba) sa íyang hugut nga hukum,</i> His wife&apos;s tears moved him to back down from his firm decision.

<p id=11519><form>lúbà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3S; a1]</itype> <tr>stab</tr>. <i>Naprísu siya kay nakalúbà,</i> He was put in jail because he stabbed s.o.

<p id=11520><form>lubad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> <tr>fade</tr>. <i>Milubad (nalubad) ang púlu kay gibakhan,</i> The shirt faded because it was bleached in the sun. <i>Nagkalubad ang singsing pansi,</i> The imitation ring is fading. <number>2</number> <itype>[B246; b4]</itype> for colors to run. <i>Gilubdan ang putì nga giságul sa dikulur,</i> When the white and the colored clothing were washed together, the colors ran onto the white cloth. <number>3</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> for feelings, traits, etc. to <tr>fade</tr>. <i>Ang panahun makapalubad (makalubad) sa panaghigalaay,</i> Time can make a friendship fade. <number>3a</number> <itype>[AB]</itype> change one&apos;s mind, cause s.o. to do so. <i>Dì giyud siya maglubad sa íyang hukum,</i> He never changes his decisions. <i>Milubad (nalubad) ang íyang hunàhúnà pagkabuntag,</i> She changed her mind the following morning. <number>4</number> for the voice to break. <i>Ulitáwu ka na kay milubad nag ímung tíngug,</i> You are an adolescent now because your voice has started to break. a faded. <i>Sinínang lubad,</i> A faded shirt. <form>{pa-|palubad}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> shift the topic of conversation. <i>Mipalubad dáyun siya dihang ákù na untang sukmátan,</i> He changed the subject right away when I was about to confront him. <form>lubarun</form> <pos>a</pos> of a <tr>faded</tr> sort. <i>Lubarun na ning pulúha, dáan na man gud,</i> This sport shirt is faded because it is already old.

<p id=11521><form>*lubag<sub>1</sub></form> <form>{pa-|palubag}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> <tr>change the topic</tr> of conversation, take s.t. back. <i>Mangumidiya siya, apan kun masukù na ang íyang kumidiyáhan, mupalubag (magpalubag) dáyun siya,</i> He teases, but when the fellow he is teasing gets angry, he immediately takes it back. <i>Báhin sa gugma ang íyang gipalubag,</i> He changed the topic of conversation to love.

<p id=11522><form>lúbag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB6; ab]</itype> <tr>twist</tr> s.t., <tr>wring</tr> s.t. out. <i>Lubágun ku nang líug mu, animála ka,</i> I will wring your neck, you beast. <i>Lubági ang linabhan arun daling mauga,</i> Wring out the clothes so they will dry quickly. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for flat boards to be <tr>warped</tr>. <i>Naglúbag ang tabla kay dúgayng nabulad sa ínit,</i> The board is warped because it was left in the sun for a long time. <form>{(&rarr;)|lubag}<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> liquid obtained by squeezing plants for their sap. <i>Maáyung bubhu ang lubag sa bawnus,</i> The squeezings from the gogo vine make good shampoo. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> <number>1</number> exude a juice, taste, color when soaked in water. <i>Pula ang ilubag sa tungug,</i> Mangrove bark gives off a red color. <number>2</number> for the results of bad behavior to come out. <i>Milubag na ang íyang pangarmin. Napaangkan siya,</i> Her habit of always making herself up has borne fruit. Now she got pregnant. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2N]</itype> for dirt to loosen so that it comes out easily. <i>Ihúmul únà sa sabun nang mga bulingun bwáhan makalubag ang buling,</i> Soak the dirty clothes in soapy water so that the dirt can come loose. <form>lubaglúbag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> writhe. <i>Naglubaglúbag siya sa katri sa kasakit,</i> He is writhing in pain on the bed. <form>{-in-|linúbag}</form> <pos>n</pos> liquid or juice squeezed out of s.t. <i>Waswási pag linabhan kay lubug pag linúbag,</i> Rinse the clothes once more because the water you are wringing out is still dirty. <form>{pa-|palúbag}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> cause s.t. to exude its juice or dirt to come out. <pos>n</pos> s.t. which can loosen dirt.

<p id=11523><form>lubak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> pound, beat heavily with s.t. <i>Tulu ka táwu ang mulubak (maglubak) sa humay,</i> Three persons will pound the rice. <i>Lubakun ku sa kúmù ang ímung nawung,</i> I will beat your face with my fists.

<p id=11524><form>lubakan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a coconut palm with the defect that its nuts and fronds easily break or fall off. <number>2</number> the way certain coconuts develop with a husk so thick that the nut looks very much bigger than the ordinary, but with an ordinary amount of meat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> for a coconut tree to get to be so that the nuts and fronds break off easily.

<p id=11525><form>lubang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> transplant seedlings. <i>Kamiy mulubang sa mga lubi,</i> We will transplant the coconut seedlings. <pos>n</pos> seedling.

<p id=11526><form>lubang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B246]</itype> for pimples or rash to come out. <i>Mulubang ang mga butuybutuy ug mukáun siyag pasáyan,</i> She breaks out in rash if she eats shrimps.

<p id=11527><form>lúbang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. upland rice with big, round, reddish grains that ripen in five months.

<p id=11528><form>lub-ang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put all of s.t. in one container. <i>Kinsa may naglub-ang íning tanang ságing sa kúlun?</i> Who put all the bananas in the pot? <i>Ilub-ang ang tanang linabhan sa duwang,</i> Put all of the laundry in the basin.

<p id=11529><form>lub-ang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> pothole. <number>2</number> hole to plant seedlings in. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> for potholes to develop. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|lub-angun}</form> <pos>n</pos> seedling ready for transplanting to holes dug for the purpose.

<p id=11530><form>lúbas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> heartwood of timber. <number>2</number> maturity, enough years to become seasoned (literary). <pb n=628><pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> have well-developed heartwood. <form>{-an|lubásan}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having well-developed heartwood. <number>2</number> <tr>seasoned</tr>, <tr>experienced</tr>. <i>Lubásan nga magbabalaud,</i> Seasoned lawmaker.

<p id=11531><form>lubat</form> <pos>n</pos> illness caused by a frightening experience, esp. contact with the dead. The cure is <ix>palínà</ix>. (<ix>see</ix> <sc>*línà<sub>2</sub></sc>) <i>Kanang íyang gibátì lubat nà niadtung kalit nga pagdawugdug,</i> Her sickness is due to the intense fright she suffered from hearing the thunder. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B246; b4]</itype> for an illness to develop or for s.t. that one has to get worse because of intense fright. <i>Mulubat ang kabahung basta iadtug mintiryu,</i> Sores get worse if you go to a cemetery when you have them. <i>Gilubatan ang bátà kay gidúul sa minatay,</i> The child got ill from fright because he was made to go near the corpse. <form>{pa-|palubat}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> startle s.o. by s.t. sudden&mdash;a shout or a sudden spring from a concealed position. <i>Palubatan nákù si Náti inigsúd sa kwartu,</i> I&apos;ll frighten Natie when she enters the room.

<p id=11532><form>lubaung</form><xr>= <sc>libaung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11533><form>lubay, lúbay</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>pliant</tr>, easily bent. <i>Lúbay ang kawáyan,</i> Bamboo bends. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> become <tr>supple</tr>. <i>Mulúbay (malúbay) ímung láwas ug mukúhà kag bali,</i> Your body becomes supple if you take ballet lessons. <form>{(&rarr;)|lubay}</form> <pos>n</pos> tender string beans. <form>lubaylúbay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1P; c16]</itype> move or do s.t. slowly with a wiggly body. <i>Maglubaylúbay (magpalubaylúbay) giyud nà siyang maglakaw, mu rag báyut,</i> He walks slowly wiggling his body like a fairy. <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>wrasse</tr>.

<p id=11534><form>lubi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>coconut</tr>: <bio>Cocos nucifera</bio>. <form>mugbù pa ang {&mdash;|lubi}</form> <tr>long ago</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|lubi} nga lupísan</form> <pos>n</pos> variety with green husks. <form>{&mdash;|lubi} nga ugis</form> <pos>n</pos> variety with whitish nuts, used in making coconut oil for medicinal purposes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> mix milk extracted from coconut meat with s.t. <i>Nindut ang sabaw sa kinhasun ug lubihan,</i> A chowder of seashells tastes good if coconut milk is added to it. <form>lubilúbi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab]</itype> weed or clean the area around each coconut plant. <i>Ug dì nátù matibuuk paglimpiyu, lubilubíhun lang,</i> If we can&apos;t clean the whole area, just clean under each tree. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> name given to various plants commonly found in coconut groves. <number>1a</number> k.o. shrub with no branches and reddish leaves growing at the tops. <number>1b</number> k.o. <tr>ground orchids</tr>, e.g. the ornamental <tr>orchid</tr>: <bio>Spathoglottis plicata</bio>. <number>2</number> name given to k.o. palm. <form>palubilúbi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> play hard to get (from the notion that coconut meat is hard to extract from its shell). <i>Nagpalubilúbi siya ábig ákung lugítun,</i> She is playing hard to get. She thinks I&apos;m going to try to extract her from the shell. <form>kalubihan, kalubian, kalubinhan</form> <pos>n</pos> coconut grove. <form>{taga-|tagalubi}</form> <pos>n</pos> a system of trading in which the merchandise, esp. home-made food preparations as cakes, etc., are bartered for mature coconuts. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> barter goods for coconuts. <i>Itagalubi ni nákung bibingka,</i> I&apos;ll barter these rice cakes for coconuts.

<p id=11535><form>lúbid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; a]</itype> twist together, twine. <i>Nagkalúbid íyang dílà pagsinultig ininglis,</i> His tongue gets all twisted up in trying to speak English. <i>Lubíra ang duha ka wáyir arun lig-un giyud,</i> Twist the two wires together to make them really strong. <pos>n</pos> abaca twine. <form>lubiran</form> <pos>n</pos> device for twining rope. <form>lubidlúbid, {-in-|linúbid}</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. hard, crunchy pastry, fashioned like twine, sprinkled with flakes of sugar.

<p id=11536><form>lubing</form> <pos>n</pos> loop or noose of a lasso which tightens when pulled. <i>Dakua ang lubing kay dakù ug líug ang báka,</i> Make the loop large because the neck of the cow is large. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> catch or ensnare using a lasso or noose which tightens when pulled. <i>Akuy mulubing (maglubing) sa mga báka,</i> I&apos;ll lasso the cows. <number>2</number> win s.o. through deceit or by fast talk. <i>Gilubing sa pulitiku ang publiku,</i> The politician had won the public support through his glib words.

<p id=11537><form>lubintadur</form> <xr>= <sc>libintadur</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11538><form>lubítus</form> <pos>n</pos> very small beads sewn on s.t. for decoration. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> decorate s.t. with <ix>lubítus.</ix>

<p id=11539><form>lublub</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A;b(1)]</itype> bury oneself. <i>Kuykúya ang gilublúban sa hanlilítik,</i> Dig down to where the scorpion shrimp buried itself. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> stay long in a place without much activity. <i>Naglublub lang siya sa íla kay way kwarta,</i> He just stays home because he doesn&apos;t have any money. <form>{-anan|lublubanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> place where s.o. buries himself or stays long in. &dagger;

<p id=11540><form>lúbu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; c1P]</itype> for s.t. to be projected upwards at a sharp angle. <i>Ayawg ilúbu (lubúha ipalúbu, palubúha) inigsirbi kay sayun nang sagngun,</i> Don&apos;t serve it high because it will be easy to spike it. <pos>a</pos> projected at a sharp angle. <i>Lúbu ra nga pagkasirbi<corr>,</corr></i> Served too high. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> balloon. <number>2</number> hot-air balloon. <i>Misáka ang lúbu human kadagkuti ang pabílu,</i> The hot-air balloon rose after the wick was lit.

<p id=11541><form>lúbu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> wolf.

<p id=11542><form>lúbù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> remove grains of corn from the cob. <i>Lubúa nang mais arun ipagaling,</i> Remove the kernels so we can mill them. <number>2</number> remove teeth, serrations, or anything protruding in a series, like the grains of corn. <i>Malúbù run nang ngípun mug musúpak ka,</i> You&apos;ll be minus your teeth if you don&apos;t <pb n=629>cooperate. <form>hangyù {&mdash;|lúbù}</form> request made in such a way it cannot be turned down (so called from the notion that as one is asking for corn he is at the same time picking at the grains).

<p id=11543><form>lubug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> for a person to sit with the rump smack on the ground or for an animal to sit or lie with its limbs flat on the ground. <i>Milubug sa sawug ang irù,</i> The dog was stretched out on the floor. <number>1a</number> for the sun to be about to set. <i>Milubug na ang adlaw sa kasadpan,</i> The sun was about to set (lit. sitting on its rump in the west). <number>2</number> stay in a place for some time, but temporarily. <i>Duha na ku ka simánang lubug dinhi kay way kasakyan,</i> I have been stuck here for two weeks because there has been no transportation. <number>2a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lubug} sa banig</formx> <itype>[A13]</itype> stay in bed due to illness. <i>Mutúig na siyang galubug sa banig,</i> He has been bedridden for almost a year. <form>lubganan</form> <pos>n</pos> place where animals habitually lie down.

<p id=11544><form>lúbug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB2; a]</itype> for liquid to get or be made murky with sediment. <i>Mulúbug (malúbug) ang subà ug mubahà,</i> The river becomes muddy during floods. <i>Ang nangaligúay mauy naglúbug sa subà,</i> The bathers made the river all muddy. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB12]</itype> for one&apos;s sight to become, be made blurry. <i>Bulug sa lúhà nga milúbug sa íyang mata,</i> A torrent of tears that blurred her sight. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make a wild disturbance so as to disrupt an activity. <i>Tagagawas ang naglúbug sa ámung parti,</i> Some outsiders disrupted our party. <pos>a</pos> murky, blurred. <form>{(&rarr;)|lubug}</form> <xr>= <sc>lúbug</sc>, <i>a</i>.</xr> <form>{-un(&rarr;)|lubugun}</form> <pos>a</pos> of a muddy, murky sort.

<p id=11545><form>lubuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> pound with a pestle. <i>Lubka (lukba) lang ang tipasì. Ayawg ipagaling,</i> Just pound the rice. Don&apos;t have it milled. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> rain blows on the body. <i>Lubkun únà sa buksidur ang tiyan sa íyang kuntra,</i> The boxer pounds his opponent&apos;s stomach first. <form>lubkanan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> place where pounding is done. <number>2</number> mortar.

<p id=11546><form>lubulúbu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a bitter, inedible powdery material from buri palm flour, which is separated from the edible portion (<ix>natuk</ix>) and disposed of. <number>2</number> thin, white membranous covering on the inside surface of bamboo stems.

<p id=11547><form>lubun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B23(1)]</itype> sink into s.t. soft. <i>Nalubun ang trák sa lápuk ug dì na makadúwal,</i> The truck is stuck in the mud and cannot move any further. <i>Nagkalubun na ning ákung singsing kay nagkadakù man ning ákung tudlù,</i> My ring is getting embedded more and more deeply in my finger because my finger is getting fatter. <i>Ilubun (lubunun) pag-áyu ang batu sa aláhas arun dílì daling mulagput,</i> The stones are set deeply so that they can&apos;t fall out. <pos>a</pos> for stones to be set deep. <form>{pa-|palubun}</form> <pos>n</pos> meat or fish inserted into the boiled rice one carries s.w. as his lunch (<ix>malutù</ix>). <form>{pa-(&larr;)|palúbun}</form> <pos>n</pos> in weaving, a rod stuck into a groove made in the cloth beam (<ix>likisan</ix>), the purpose of which is to hold the woven cloth wound around the cloth beam in place and maintain tension on the warp.

<p id=11548><form>lubung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>bury</tr>. <i>Naglubung silag bahandì sa sílung,</i> They buried a treasure under the house. <i>Gipamisáhan ang háyà únà ilubung,</i> A mass was said for the dead man before he was buried. <number>1a</number> be beaten by an overwhelming victory in an election, contest, game. <i>Gilubung ang Libiral sa Nasyunalista,</i> The Nationalists defeated the Liberals by a landslide. <number>1b</number> bury fish in the sand to make them look fresh. <number>1c</number> embed a charm inside a part of the body. <i>Gilubung níya ang mutyà sa íyang brásu arun mahímu siyang kublan,</i> He embedded the magical pearl in his biceps to make himself invulnerable. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB6; cP]</itype> sink, drive s.t. into the ground; for s.t. to sink into the ground. <i>Milubung ákung tiil pagtámak nákù sa lápuk,</i> My foot sank when I stepped in the mud. <i>Naglubung silag mga trúsu sa pundasiyun,</i> They drove logs into the foundations. <form>{&mdash;|lubung} sa kalímut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> forget s.t. completely. <i>Ilubung sa kalímut ang ímung makauúlawng kaági,</i> Forget your shameful past. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> grave. <number>2</number> interment. <form>lubngánan</form> <pos>n</pos> place of interment. <i>Bawnun ku sa lubngánan ang ákung pagmáhay,</i> I will regret it to my dying day (lit. carry my regret to my grave). <form>lubnganan, kalubngan</form> <pos>n</pos> cemetery. <form>lubnganánun</form> <pos>a</pos> appropriate to the cemetery. <i>Lubnganánung kahílum,</i> A cemetery-like silence. <form>{-in-|linubung}</form> <pos>n</pos> fish buried in the sand near the shore so that they would look fresh.

<p id=11549><form>lubus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> acquire a supernatural ability by means of undergoing a series of difficult tasks (<ix>táhas</ix>) in preparation for it. <i>Ug mulubus (manlubus) kag kaláki kinahanglang makatúman ka sa táhas,</i> If you want to acquire supernatural ability, you must be able to accomplish the series of difficult tasks. <i>Gilubus sa ákung apuhan ang kaláki ni Dun Liyun Kílat,</i> My grandfather acquired Don Leon Kilat&apos;s supernatural ability.

<p id=11550><form>lúbus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> entirely of one color and texture. <i>Ang ákung irù lúbus nga putì,</i> My dog is entirely white. <i>Ang kulur sa bistídu lúbus kaáyung pula,</i> My dress is colored a very pure red. <i>Lúbus pánit ákung bág,</i> My purse <pb n=630>is all leather. <number>1a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lúbus} kalíwat</formx> <tr>purebred</tr>. <i>Lúbus kalíwat Tiksas kining manúka,</i> This cock is a purebred Texas. <number>2</number> for a decision to be final. <i>Lúbus na ang ákung hukum,</i> My decision is final. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2; c1]</itype> be, become purely one color. <i>Ug usban nímug pintal, mulúbus (malúbus) ang kulur,</i> If you paint it once more, the color will be pure and even. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26; c1]</itype> be, become <tr>decided</tr>.

<p id=11551><form>lúbus<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>tied</tr>, wound around tight. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> <tr>tie</tr> s.t. tight. <i>Ayaw lubúsa pagbáat arun sayun badbárun,</i> Don&apos;t tie it tight so it will be easy to untie. <form>{ka-|kalúbus}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tightness</tr> of a knot or the way s.t. was tied up.

<p id=11552><form>lubut</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>anus</tr>, <tr>rump</tr>. <i>Lúpig pay lubut sa himungáan sa katabian níya,</i> She&apos;s more talkative than a hen&apos;s behind (which keeps opening and closing). <form>walay {&mdash;|lubut}</form> having hips and buttocks far too forward. <i>Ayg tak-in kay wà kay lubut,</i> Don&apos;t tuck in your shirt because you have flat buttocks. <number>2</number> <tr>vagina</tr> (euphemism). <i>Ang bátà anhà mulusut sa lubut sa babáyi,</i> A baby comes out through the mother&apos;s bottom. <number>3</number> bottom part of a container or receptacle. <i>Lubut sa baskit,</i> Bottom of the basket. <number>3a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lubut} sa básu</formx> costume jewelry (lit. made from the bottom of a glass). <i>Daling mulubad ang singsing nga lubut sa básu,</i> A dimestore ring soon fades. <number>4</number> rear end of vehicles. <i>Ikarga sa lubut sa trák,</i> Load it at the back part of the truck. <number>5</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lubut} mu</formx> <number>5a</number> expression of disbelief. <i>Lubut nímu! Kinsay mutúu,</i> My foot! Who&apos;d believe that! <number>5b</number> expression of disgust. <i>&lsquo;Tagai kug dus ipamúwang.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Dus sa ímung lubut. Hái kwartáhun?&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Let me have two pesos to go to the cockfights.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Two pesos. You must be nuts. We don&apos;t have any money!&rsquo; <number>6</number> <formx>nakahikap sa {&mdash;|lubut}</formx> s.t. must have happened to [subject] that he did s.t. nice since he doesn&apos;t usually do that. <i>Nanghátag mag kwarta ang tihik. Nakahikap sa lubut,</i> Suddenly the miser is giving out money. S.t. must have happened to him. (Lit. He must have gotten his hand on s.o.&apos;s rear end.) <number>7</number> <formx>mabaw ug {&mdash;|lubut}</formx> easily angered. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[ANC; c1]</itype> do s.t. at s.o.&apos;s rear end. <i>Nanglubut siya ug suntuk,</i> He hit him on the buttocks. <i>Nagkalúbut mig higdà,</i> We lay with our buttocks touching each other. <i>Lubuta siya pagtindak,</i> Kick her in the arse. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; c]</itype> get to be at the rear or bottom. <i>Nagkalubut na man ku sa ámung klási,</i> I am gradually slipping to the bottom of my class. <i>Inay kay nag-una kug sakay, nalubut na hinúun,</i> I was the first to get on the bus, but I wound up in the rear end anyway. <i>Ilubut lang ning ákung karga,</i> Just place my baggage at the rear. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12N; a12]</itype> enter through the back way. <i>Lubtun lang nátug súd ang báy arung dì ta makit-an,</i> Let&apos;s go in through the back door so that nobody will see us. <form>{&mdash;|lubut} ug anay</form> <pos>n</pos> nutmeg shells (lit. sow&apos;s anus) so called because of the similarity of the lips of this shell to the anal lips of a sow. <form>lubutlubut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4]</itype> have more work to do than one can handle. <i>Nagkalubutlubut kug laba,</i> I&apos;m going crazy trying to do all this laundry. <i>Dílì man ka mutuktuk, magkalubutlubut man lang tag panábun sa átung láwas,</i> Why didn&apos;t you knock? I went wild trying to cover myself. <form>lubutlúbut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; c]</itype> <tr>follow</tr> s.o. around. <i>Ayaw kug lubutlubúti,</i> Don&apos;t follow me around all the time.

<p id=11553><form>lubyuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be, become <tr>hollow</tr>, <tr>sunken</tr>. <i>Kandíis nga naglubyuk sa íyang isig ka áping,</i> Dimples that are deeply set on each cheek. <i>Ang húmuk nga yútà malubyuk kun tumban,</i> Soft earth caves in when you step on it.

<p id=11554><form>lúd</form> <pos>n</pos> load of courses given to a teacher. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> have a certain teaching load. <i>Gamay ra kug makítà kay naglúd lang kug duha,</i> I don&apos;t earn much because I have only two courses. <i>Pilay ilúd nímu káda simistir?</i> How many courses are given you per semester?

<p id=11555><form>ludà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> <tr>spit</tr>, <tr>spit out</tr>. <i>Giludà níya ang íyang giúsap,</i> He spat out what he was chewing. <pos>n</pos> <tr>spittle</tr>, <tr>saliva</tr>.

<p id=11556><form>ludábi</form> <pos>n</pos> name of Cebuano writers&apos; organization, abbreviation of <ix>Lúbas sa Dágang Bisayà</ix>, &lsquo;The elite (lit. heartwood) of Visayan literature&rsquo;.

<p id=11557><form>lud-an</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>luwà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11558><form>ludhan</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>luhud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11559><form>lúgà</form> <xr>= <sc>lugàlúgà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11560><form>lugabu, lugábu</form> <pos>n</pos> dull hollow sound of impact. <i>Lugábu sa mga táwung nagsáyaw sa táas,</i> The thumping sound of the people dancing upstairs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S3]</itype> produce a dull hollow sound of impact. <i>Milugábu ang likud nga gisumbag,</i> His back resounded with a thump when I slapped him. <i>Naglugabu ang bawud sa lapyahan,</i> The waves pounded against the shore. <form>{-in-|linugabu}</form> <xr>= <sc>lugábu</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=11561><form>lugabung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> make a thumping sound. <i>Naglugabung ang mga lamísa ug síya nga gipatíran sa mga hubug,</i> The chairs and tables made a thumping sound as the drunken men kicked them.

<p id=11562><form>lugak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; ab7]</itype> for s.t. which grips or is tied round s.t. to loosen. <i>Wà siya mulugak ug gakus nákù sa kahadluk nga byáan,</i> She did not let go of her embrace for fear of being left behind. <i>Lugaka ang ímung sinínà arun hayáhay,</i> Loosen your dress so it will <pb n=631>be comfortable. <i>Lugaki ang turniki káda singku minútus,</i> Loosen the tourniquet every five minutes. <number>2</number> <itype>[B4; b(1)]</itype> <tr>abate</tr>, <tr>slow down</tr> from doing s.t. with energy. <i>Ang bag-ung dálan makalugak (makapalugak) sa trapiku dinhi,</i> The new street can relieve the traffic here. <i>Ayawg lugaki ang pagpanguyab níya,</i> Keep courting her for all you&apos;re worth. Don&apos;t let off. <number>3</number> <itype>[B2456N]</itype> for the knees to give way, for a person to budge from his convictions. <i>Dì siya mulugak sa íyang barugánan bísag hulgáun,</i> He won&apos;t budge from his stand even if you threaten him. <i>Nanglugak ang íyang mga túhud,</i> His knees gave way. <number>4</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> loosen one&apos;s control or discipline over. <i>Ug ímung lugakan ang ímung anak muabusar nà,</i> If you rear your child leniently he will become abusive.

<p id=11563><form>lugàlúgà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> move s.t. in a hole back and forth. <i>Naglugàlúgà siya ug lipak sa nabúlit nga túbu,</i> He worked a stick back and forth in the tube that was stopped up.

<p id=11564><form>lugamak, lugámak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B456; c1P]</itype> fall with a crash, be thrown down with force. <i>Mulugamak ka giyud ug mahugnù nang ímung gitungtúngan,</i> You will fall with a crash if that thing you are standing on collapses. <i>Gilugamakan (gipalugamakan) ang mga búlak sa mga inibut nga sagbut,</i> They threw the uprooted weeds with force on top of the flowers. <i>Nalugamakan (nalugmakan) ku sa íyang kasábà,</i> I received the brunt of his scoldings. <i>Ímu man nang ilugamak (ipalugamak) ang ímung láwas bísag ása,</i> You throw yourself down anywhere. <pos>n</pos> sounds of s.t. falling with a crash. <form>{(&rarr;)|lugamak}</form> <itype>[B126; b8]</itype> rush headlong into s.t. <i>Nalugamak siya sa usa ka byúda nga way kwarta,</i> He rushed into marriage with a penniless widow. <form>{-in-|linugamak}</form> <xr>= <sc>lugámak</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=11565><form>lugan-ub</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>thundering</tr>, <tr>reverberating</tr> sound. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> produce a thunderous or loud reverberating sound. <i>Milugan-ub ang kabukíran nga gipabuthan ug dinamíta,</i> A deafening sound echoed through the mountains when the dynamite was exploded. <pos>n</pos> a thundering, reverberating sound. <form>{-in-|linugan-ub}</form> <xr>= <sc>lugan-ub</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11566><form>lugapak, lugápak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>banging</tr>, <tr>slapping</tr>, <tr>cracking</tr> sound. <i>Ang lugapak sa kawáyan,</i> The cracking of the bamboo. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; ac]</itype> make a cracking, slapping, banging sound. <i>Milugapak ang pultahan nga gikalit pagsira,</i> The door was slammed with a bang. <i>Naglugapak ang samput sa íyang anak sa bakus,</i> The leather belt cracked over his son&apos;s buttocks. <form>{-in-|linugapak}</form> <xr>= <sc>lugápak</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=11567><form>lugar<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> geographical place. <i>Nakaadtu na ku sa lainláing lugar sa kalibútan,</i> I have been to various places in the world. <number>1a</number> situation one is in. <i>Ikaw sa ákung lugar ug lalim ba,</i> You try being in my place and see if it is nice. <number>2</number> proper place, occasion for s.t. <i>Ibutang sa lugar ang ímung pagpangmik-ap,</i> Use make-up at the proper occasion. <i>Walà sa lugar tung ímung pagsaway níya kay daghang namínaw,</i> It was not the right time for you to criticise him because there were lots of people listening. <number>2a</number> proper place of vehicles in the flow of traffic. <i>Patuu. Wà ka sa lugar,</i> Move to the right. You&apos;re not in your lane. <number>3</number> vacant place. <i><corr sic="Dùna">Dúna</corr> pa bay lugar sa dyíp?</i> Is there room in the jeep? <number>4</number> available time for s.t. <i>Wà kuy lugar pagsúruy run,</i> I don&apos;t have time to go around now. <number>5</number> <tr>chance</tr> or <tr>opportunity</tr> to do s.t. <i>Way lugar pagdúul níya kay gwardiyádu,</i> There is no chance to get near him because he is guarded. <number>6</number> <formx>primíru <r>(</r>ikaduha, <r>etc.)</r> {&mdash;|lugar}</formx> in the first (second, etc.) <tr>place</tr>. <i>Ayawg adtu. Primíru lugar istranyu ka,</i> Don&apos;t go there. In the first place, you are a stranger. <form>lugráha, lugaráha</form> <pos>n</pos> particular place, time, chance. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>give way</tr> or space to. <i>Milugar siya arun makalingkud ang babáyi,</i> He gave his place so the lady could sit. <i>Lugari ang Prisidinti inigsúut níya sa nanambung,</i> Give way to the President when he goes through the crowd. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; b(1)]</itype> give the chance to do s.t. <i>Musabut giyug íyang pápa kay mulugar man inigpamisíta nákù,</i> Her father is sure understanding because he leaves us alone (lit. gives a chance) when I go visiting. <i>Ayaw siyag lugari nga muantug,</i> Don&apos;t give him the chance to shoot the ball. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> <number>3a</number> get a chance to do s.t. <i>Hagki dáyun siya ug makalugar ka,</i> Kiss her as soon as you get the chance. <number>3b</number> have the time to. <i>Buháta ni ug makalugar ka,</i> Do this if you have the time to. <number>4</number> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> pull over in a place proper for stopping a vehicle. <i>Ilugar ang dyip ug muhúnung ka,</i> Pull over to the side of the road when you stop. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having available space. <i>Kargáhi pa kay lugar pa kaáyu,</i> Put in more passengers because there&apos;s still plenty of space. <number>2</number> for there to be a chance. <i>Dì ku mangupya bísag lugar kaáyu,</i> I won&apos;t cheat even if I have a good chance to do so. <form>{pa-|palugar}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> give s.o. a chance to come near or touch one. <i><corr sic=Di>Dì</corr> nà siya magbinúang bísag palugaran,</i> He won&apos;t do anything foolish even if given the chance. <form>{tag-|taglugar}</form> <pos>n</pos> spirit inhabiting a particular place. <i>Gidaútan nà siya sa taglugar kay íyang giputul ang káhuy,</i> The spirit of the place made him ill when he cut the tree down.

<pb n=632>

<p id=11568><form>lugar<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>kinta<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=11569><form>lugas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>grain</tr>. <i>Usa ka lugas humay,</i> A grain of rice. <i>Maáyu ang lugas sa igtalánum nga binhì,</i> The seeds for planting have well-formed grains. <number>1a</number> <tr>drops</tr> (figurative). <i>Pipila ka lugas nga lúhà,</i> A few teardrops. <number>2</number> strand. <i>Usa ka lugas buhuk,</i> A strand of hair. <number>2a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lugas} lánut</formx> a hair&apos;s breadth (lit. strand of abaca fiber) by which one is kept from death. <i>Usa ka lugas lánut ang nakauwang nákù sa kamatáyun,</i> I came within a hair&apos;s breadth of meeting my death. <number>3</number> word counter for people. <i>Pipila ka lugas táwu ang didtu sa sinihan,</i> There were only a few people in the movies. <number>4</number> word counter for things which can be counted but not concrete. <i>Pipila ka lugas púlung,</i> A few words. <i>Pipila ka lugas kanta,</i> A few songs. <i>Pipila ka lugas idíya,</i> A few ideas.

<p id=11570><form>lug-as</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> remove husk from rice or other grains. <i>Ang ímung linubkan dì makalug-as (makapalug-as) sa dáwa,</i> The way you are doing it won&apos;t get the husks off the millet. <pos>a</pos> already unhusked. <i>Taphi ang linubuk kay lug-as na,</i> Winnow the pounded rice because the husks are off now.

<p id=11571><form>lugátub</form> <pos>n</pos> deep, loud, hollow sound. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> resound with a deep loud, hollow sound. <i>Milugátub ang baril nga gilábayg batu,</i> The barrel went bonk when a stone was thrown at it. <form>{-in-|linugátub}</form> <xr>= <sc>lugátub</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11572><form>lúgaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>porridge</tr> from rice or corn grits. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make porridge. <i>Bag-ung humay ang lugáwa,</i> Make porridge from the new rice. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> turn to, become a mud puddle or mire. <i>Malúgaw ang dálan ug mag-úlan,</i> The path becomes slush during rainy days. <form>{-in-|linúgaw}, {ni-|nilúgaw}</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>lúgaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11573><form>*lugay</form> <form>{-nan|lugaynan}, {-nun|lugaynun}</form> <pos>n</pos> pertaining to politics and elections. <i>Bugnù nga lugaynun (lugaynan) diin napárut si Kirínu,</i> The political fight where Quirino lost.

<p id=11574><form>lugbak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> for organic matter to decay. <i>Malugbak ang prútas nga may tatsa,</i> The fruit will <tr>rot</tr> if it has been damaged. <i>Bisan malugbak ang ímung bukug, dílì ka kabalus sa ímung ginikánan,</i> You can never repay your parents no matter how much time goes by (lit. even after your bones have rotted). <i>Mauy nakalugbak (nakapalugbak) sa káhuyng halígi ang kanúnayng paghúmul níini sa túbig,</i> The wooden post rotted because it was immersed too long in water.

<p id=11575><form>lugbáti</form> <xr>= <sc>alugbáti</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11576><form>lugda</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> start, originate some foolishness or mild misbehavior. <i>Kinsa ninyuy naglugda ug kuriskuris sa bungbung?</i> Which one of you started making scratches on the wall?

<p id=11577><form>lugdang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> settle to the bottom of a liquid. <i>Wà makalugdang ang húgaw kay pirming gikútaw,</i> The dirt would not settle because s.o. kept stirring the water. <i>Dúgayng milugdang ang íyang paun kay súg man,</i> It took his bait a long time to reach the bottom because there was a current. <number>2</number> for results of bad action to make themselves felt. <i>Milugdang ang íyang tinuntu. Nakalabus,</i> That is the fruit of his foolishness. He was sent to prison. <number>3</number> <itype>[B3(1)4]</itype> for tender rice grains to solidify. <i>Wà pa gánì makalugdang ang humay aníhun na nímu,</i> Are you going to harvest the rice when the grains haven&apos;t solidified yet? <form>{-in-|linugdang}, {ni-|nilugdang}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. that settled. <number>2</number> results of bad action. <i>Kanang batáa linugdang sa ímung tinuntu,</i> The child is the fruit of your stupidity. <number>3</number> one&apos;s youngest child (humorous). <form>{-in-an|linugdángan}</form> <xr>= <sc>{-in-|linugdang}</sc>, <ix>1</ix>.</xr>

<p id=11578><form>lugdat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> for the eyes to bulge. <i>Milugdat ang íyang mata sa katingála,</i> Her eyes bulged with surprise. <i>Gwápa untà apan naglugdat lang ang mata,</i> She looks pretty but she has bulging eyes.

<p id=11579><form>lugdum, lugdung</form> <pos>a</pos> heavily <tr>overcast</tr>, particularly with rain clouds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> be heavily overcast. <i>Dúnay taliábut nga unus kay naglugdung ang lángit,</i> A rainstorm is coming because the sky is heavily overcast.

<p id=11580><form>lúgì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> extract dried coconut meat from shell. <i>Hustu nang lugíun ang gihudnu nga lubi,</i> The coconuts are dried and the meat can be extracted. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> process coconut into copra, from harvesting to drying. <i>Maglúgì mi káda trimistri,</i> We make copra every three months. <pos>n</pos> <tr>copra</tr>. <i>Isulud sa sáku ang lúgì,</i> Put the copra in the sack. <form>{(&rarr;)|lugì}</form> <pos>n</pos> instrument for extracting coconut meat from the shell.

<p id=11581><form>lúgì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> being outsmarted, fooled (slang). <i>Lúgì ka kay mitúu kang mubáyad siyag útang,</i> You have been fooled for believing that he pays his debts. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be tricked into s.t. (slang). <i>Nalúgì ku sa Múrus pagpalit sa imitasyung rúliks,</i> I was tricked by the Moro into buying a fake Rolex watch. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> for a business to fail, fold up. <i>Ang kalit nga pagbahar sa prisyu mauy nakalúgì (nakapalúgì) sa íyang nigusyu,</i> The sudden drop in prices caused his business to fail. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a2b3(1)]</itype> defeat in a game or fight. <i>Ang manghud ra nákuy maglúgí níya sa ahidris,</i> Even my little brother could defeat him in chess. <i>Ang liphuk ni Prasyir mauy nalugian ni Klí,</i> It was Frazier&apos;s left hook that defeated Clay.

<p id=11582><form>lúging</form> <pos>n</pos> logging company, industry. <i>Náa ku <pb n=633>sa lúging,</i> I work for a logging firm.

<p id=11583><form>lug-is</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB6; a1]</itype> <tr>split</tr> or <tr>break</tr> into smaller sizes. <i>Maglug-is kug kawáyan pára ikural,</i> I will split some bamboo for fencing. <i>Naglug-is ang pintal,</i> The paint is cracking.

<p id=11584><form>lúgit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>extract</tr> s.t. buried or fastened hard to a surface with s.t. pointed or sharp. <i>Gilúgit ang bála gíkan sa íyang páa,</i> The slug was extracted from his thigh. <number>2</number> extract coconut meat from the shell in making copra. <i>Ang láhing ray lugítun,</i> Extract copra only from mature nuts. <number>3</number> force oneself or s.o. to dig deep for money when he is financially hard up. <i>Napugus ang pubri paglúgit sa íyang tinagúan,</i> The poor man was forced to dig into his savings. <number>4</number> ask for s.t. in a forceful way. <i>Milúgit siyag hangyù sa íyang bánang mulakaw siya,</i> She twisted her husband&apos;s arm to let her go out. <form>{(&rarr;)|lugit}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to extract s.t. buried or fastened hard to a surface, esp. an instrument to separate coconut meat from the shell. <form>{pa-|palúgit}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> act unwilling to make s.o. trouble himself or plead. <i>Gustu túud siya, piru nagmagáhì kay magpalúgit giyud,</i> She actually wanted to, but she put up resistance because she wanted him to implore her.

<p id=11585><form>lugituk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; b6]</itype> for cereals to be <tr>half-cooked</tr> but moist. <i>Naglugituk ang linung-ag kay wà ayúhag síga,</i> The rice is half-cooked because the fire wasn&apos;t hot enough.

<p id=11586><form>lugitum</form> (from <ix>itum</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4]</itype> be dark, gloomy because of denseness. <i>Milugitum ang lángit sa kabagà sa dag-um,</i> The sky got dark with thick clouds. <i>Ang naglugitum nga kamaisan,</i> The dense and dark cornfields.

<p id=11587><form>lugkab</form> <xr>= <sc>lungkab</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11588><form>lugkat</form> (from <ix>lukat</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> pry off things that are nailed or stuck into s.t. <i>Nakalugkat siya sa dakung lansang nga nagtaup sa káhuy,</i> He managed to pull the large nail out of the wood. <i>Gilugkat ang mga dáang baldúsa,</i> They removed the old tiles. <number>2</number> <tr>uproot</tr>, <tr>fell</tr>, including roots and all. <i>Nalugkat ang pusti nga nadasmagan sa trák,</i> The truck rammed into the post and it knocked it over.

<p id=11589><form>luglug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> thrust s.t. long repeatedly into a narrow opening. <i>Luglúga ang kasilyas kay nasampúngan,</i> Thrust a stick into the toilet pipe because it is stopped up. <pos>n</pos> stick or the like used to thrust into a narrow opening.

<p id=11590><form>luglug<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>slaughter</tr> an animal by slicing the neck. <i>Way sud-an, magluglug tag manuk,</i> We have nothing for dinner. Let&apos;s slaughter a chicken.

<p id=11591><form>*luglug<sub>3</sub></form> <form>pansit {&mdash;|luglug}</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>pansit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11592><form>lugmak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2; a1]</itype> give way or break in the middle due to force or weight. <i>Mulugmak (malugmak) nang salúga kun tungtúngan ug daghan,</i> That floor will collapse if lots of people stand on it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>trample</tr> on plants and destroy them. <i>Gilugmak sa bábuy ang mga buwak,</i> The pig trampled over the flowers.

<p id=11593><form>lugmaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>show up</tr> or <tr>appear</tr>. <i>Ingug musultis Prisidinti Markus. Hái Markúsang milugmaw?</i> They said President Marcos would give a talk. But no Marcos appeared. <i>Gilugmáwan siyag dílì ingun nátù,</i> A supernatural being appeared to him. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> for part of s.t. buried to be sticking out. <i>Giunsa man ninyu paglubung ang irù nga milugmaw man ang tiil?</i> How did you bury the dog when its feet are sticking out? <number>3</number> <itype>[A2N; b6]</itype> for tears to well up in the eyes. <i>Nalúbug ang ákung mata nga gilugmáwan sa lúhà,</i> My eyes were blurred with the tears that started to form.

<p id=11594><form>lugmay</form> <xr>= <sc>lukmay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11595><form>lugmuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB26; a2b2]</itype> for structures or people to <tr>collapse</tr>. <i>Ang línug mauy naglugmuk sa Rúbi Táwir,</i> The earthquake destroyed the Ruby Tower. <i>Nalugmuk sa simbahan ang táwung nakuyapan,</i> The man who fainted in church suddenly collapsed. <form>{pa-|palugmuk}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>tear down</tr> structures. <i>Ipalugmuk sa gubyirnu ang mga bawungbáwung,</i> The government will tear the shacks down.

<p id=11596><form>lugmuy</form> <xr>= <sc>lukmuy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11597><form>lugnas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23P]</itype> for plants to die from disease or from being past the fruit-bearing age. <i>Gagmay nag búnga ang tamátis kay hápit na malugnas,</i> My tomato plants are bearing few fruits now because they will soon wither and die. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be brought to utter ruin. <i>Nalugnas ang íyang nigusyu kay miintra siya sa súgal,</i> His business was brought to utter ruin because he took to gambling. <number>3</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> for structures to <tr>fall apart</tr>. <i>Dílì na madúgay nga malugnas ang balay kay dáan na kaáyu,</i> It won&apos;t be long for the house to fall apart because it is very old.

<p id=11598><form>lugnut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> struggle to free oneself from s.t. that holds one. <i>Ayawg ilugnut ímung buktun ug gunítan ka paglabang,</i> Do not pull your arm away when I&apos;m holding on to you to cross the street. <form>{pa&N;-|panglugnut}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> struggle vigorously to get free. <i>Nagpanglugnut ang babáying gikidnap,</i> The girl struggled vigorously to get loose from her abductors.

<p id=11599><form>lugpad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>lupad</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>fly up</tr>. <i>Milugpad ang abug paglabay sa trák,</i> Dust flew up <pb n=634>when the truck passed by. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> send s.o. reeling as though flying. <i>Mulugpad ka run ug suntúkun ta ka,</i> I&apos;ll send you reeling if I strike you.

<p id=11600><form>lugpit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> pin s.t. down tightly or between two things. <i>Tabángi kug lugpit sa kúgun íring duha ka lipak,</i> Help me fasten the grass thatch down with those two pieces of bamboo. <i>Lugpíti (lugpiti) ang libru sa íluk,</i> Hold your book tightly under your arm. <i>Hilugpitan ákung tudlù pagsira nákù sa húnus,</i> I caught my finger when I closed the drawer. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. used to clip or pin s.t. tightly down or against s.t. <number>2</number> chord on a guitar formed by pressing the finger straight across the strings. <form>{pa-|palugpit}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab]</itype> cause s.t. to be pinned down. <i>Puting kamisadintru nga íyang gipalugpítan (gipalugpitan),</i> A white shirt which he had tucked in.

<p id=11601><form>lugput</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B246; b6]</itype> <tr>pop up</tr> like a jack-in-the-box. <i>Milugput ku sa silya sa kakurat,</i> I shot up from my seat in my fright. <i>Layù siyag gilugpútan pagkalingkud níyag dágum,</i> He jumped a mile when he sat on a pin.

<p id=11602><form>lugru</form> <pos>n</pos> advantage given in betting where the odds are not even. <i>Ang lugru tris kuntra sa ímung dus,</i> The advantage is three to your two. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> give advantage in betting, not said of tossing coins. <i>Lugrúhan ta sila ug singku tris arun mudáwat sila sa pusta,</i> We will give them an advantage of five to three so that they will take the bet.

<p id=11603><form>lugsad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> get to the ground or bottom. <i>Milugsad na ang ayruplánu sa tugpahánan,</i> The airplane has landed at the airport. <i>Naglugsad sila samtang kami nagtungas,</i> They were coming down the hill while we were going up. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> bring s.t. down. <i>Adúnay mulugsad (maglugsad) sa mga abut ngadtu sa lungsud,</i> S.o. will bring the produce down to the town.

<p id=11604><form>lugsung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB36; ac]</itype> go, bring downhill, to town. <i>Mantinir lang únà tag manuk kay wà mi makalugsung,</i> Let&apos;s just put up with chicken because we haven&apos;t had a chance to go down to town (to buy anything better). <i>Maglugsung sila sa ílang mga pruduktu ngadtu sa lungsud,</i> They bring their products down to the city. <i>Unsay ímung lugsúngun maduminggu?</i> What do you go to town for on Sundays? <number>2</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> eat canned fish (humorous). <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lugsung} sa</formx> <tr>down to</tr>. <i>Kining kasagingan gíkan dinhi lugsung sa subà ákù,</i> This banana plantation from here down to the river is mine. <number>2</number> <tr>canned fish</tr> (so called from the joke that mountaineers consider canned fish better than chicken because they have to go down to get it&mdash;see the first sentence under <ix>v</ix>). <form>{-un|lugsúngun}, {-un(&rarr;)|lugsungun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>downhill</tr>.

<p id=11605><form>lugsut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b8]</itype> <tr>eject</tr> s.t. with force. <i>Milugsut ang lísu dihang naligsan sa ligid,</i> The seed was ejected when the wheel ran over the fruit. <i>Milugsut ang ákù sa tantu níyang hamilhámil,</i> I ejaculated because she kept rubbing and rubbing it. <i>Nalugsutan ku sa asíti paghasù sa bumba,</i> Oil spurted onto me when he worked the pump.

<p id=11606><form>lugtab</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> force a door open. <i>Wà nay kawatang makalugtab áning pultahána,</i> No thief can break this door open. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> cut a string or rope with a long slashing stroke of the blade. <i>Naglugtab siya sa tahì sa sinínang usbunun,</i> She is cutting the stitches of the dress she has to alter. <i>Lugtaba ang hukut arun malibri ang kabáyù,</i> Cut the tether rope to free the horse. <i>Hinglugtaban nákù ang halayhayan,</i> I accidentally cut the clothesline. <number>3</number> <itype>[A3P; a12]</itype> deprive s.o. of his power. <i>Unsay íyang pagabuhátun arun malugtab ang gahum sa ingkantu?</i> What shall he do to overcome the power of the spirit?

<p id=11607><form>lugtas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> break a rope, thread, string, etc. by pulling on it with force. <i>Naglugtas pa ku sa tahì sa ákung sinínà,</i> I am ripping out the stitches in my dress. <i>Kun dì mahúbad, lugtása lang,</i> If you can&apos;t untie it, just break it off. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b4c1]</itype> <tr>terminate</tr>, put an end to s.t. <i>Kaguul nga mulugtas sa ímung kinabúhì,</i> Sorrows that can terminate your life. <i>Lugtásun (ilugtas) ba lang nímu ang ímung mga damgu tungud lang sa usa ka babáyi?</i> Will you destroy your hopes and dreams all because of a woman? <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> <tr>finish</tr> a task or job. <i>Kanang labhanan na lang ímung lugtásun karun.</i> All you have to finish is that laundry.

<p id=11608><form>lugtì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> for s.t. crisp or brittle to break, cause it to do so. <i>Milugtì ang básu nga gibùbúan sa túbig nga nagbukal,</i> The glass cracked when boiling water was poured into it. <i>Dì ku makalugtì niíning bukúga. Gáhì kaáyu,</i> I cannot break this bone. It&apos;s too hard. <i>Lugtía nang mitrusan,</i> Break that meter stick.

<p id=11609><form>lùgù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> shake a vessel with liquid in it to slosh the liquid around. <i>Lùgúi nang butilya kay namilit ang húgaw sa sulud,</i> Slosh water around in the bottle because there&apos;s dirt sticking to the sides.

<p id=11610><form>lúgud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; a1]</itype> <tr>rub</tr> the eyes. <i>Ayawg lugda ímung mata ug mapúling ka,</i> Don&apos;t rub your eyes when you get dirt in them. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>rub</tr> the skin with a stone to remove dirt. <i>Lugdi ímung líug kay daghang buling,</i> Rub your neck because there&apos;s lots of dirt on it. <pb n=635><form>{pa&N;-|panglúgud}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> rub oneself with a stone to remove dirt. <i>Panlúgud, unyà human, panabun,</i> Scrub yourself, and after that, soap yourself. <i>Puslan pa mang malígù manlúgud gayud,</i> Since I&apos;ve started, I might as well go the whole hog. (Lit. Since I am bathing I might as well scrub myself.) <form>{(&rarr;)|lugud}</form> <pos>n</pos> stone used for scrubbing oneself to remove dirt.

<p id=11611><form>luguk, lúguk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2456; b6]</itype> <tr>well up</tr>. <i>Milúguk ang dugù sa tudlung nadukdukan sa martilyu,</i> The blood welled up in his fingers when the hammer struck them. <i>Lúgus siyang kakità kay gilugúkan íyang mata sa lúhà,</i> She could hardly see because of the tears which welled up in her eyes.

<p id=11612><form>lugum</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; ab7]</itype> make, become dark or deep in hue. <i>Mulugum ang kulur ug putì ang ipaluyu,</i> A color becomes deeper in hue if it is set off against a white background. <i>Luguma pagpintal arun matabunan ang suwatsúwat,</i> Paint it dark to cover the writing. a dark or deep in hue. <i>Hanap dì lugum ang ági sa drúwing pinsil,</i> Your pencil made light lines, not dark ones.

<p id=11613><form>lúgum</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)6]</itype> for water to collect and form into a pool. <i>Maglúgum giyud ang túbig kay wà nay kaagásan,</i> The water will form a pool because there is no way for it to get out.

<p id=11614><form>lúgus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>force</tr>, force oneself. <i>Milúgus kug iskuyla bisag gihilantan ku,</i> I forced myself to go to school even though I had a fever. <i>Kinsay naglúgus ínig pasuk sa buhù bísag huut,</i> Who forced this into the hole even though it&apos;s too big? <i>Ayawg ilúgus (lugsa) ímung láwas ug dì giyud mahímù,</i> Don&apos;t force your body if you can&apos;t manage it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>rape</tr>. <i>Gibítay ang naglúgus sa babáyi,</i> The man who raped the girl was hanged. <pos>a</pos> <tr>hardly</tr>, <tr>barely</tr>. <i>Tíngug nga lúgus mabátì,</i> A barely audible voice. <i>Lúgus gánì ming makapalit ug bugas,</i> We can scarcely afford to buy rice. <form>{(&rarr;)|lugus}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>barely</tr> do s.t. under difficult odds. <i>Naglugus giyug iskuyla bísag walay kwarta,</i> He managed to get through school despite his poverty. <form>linugsánay, lugsanay, lugsánay</form> <xr>= <sc>lúgus</sc>, <i>a</i>.</xr> <form>{pa&N;-|panglúgus}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rape</tr>. <form>{ma&N;-r-(&rarr;)|manglulúgus}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rapist</tr>.

<p id=11615><form>lugut</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>thicket</tr>, <tr>woods</tr>. <i>Miadtu siya sa lugut arun pagkúhag talibugsuk,</i> He went to the woods to cut down stakes for fencing. <number>2</number> <tr>ravine</tr> or <tr>gully</tr>. <i>Túbig nga nag-ambak ngadtu sa lugut,</i> Water that leaps down into the ravine. <form>{ka-an|kalugútan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>lugut</sc>, <ix>1</ix>.</xr> <number>2</number> series of ravines or narrow valleys.

<p id=11616><form>lugwà</form> (from <ix>gulà</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)6; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> be <tr>forced out</tr>. <i>Wà makalugwà ang bítuk kay giundángan ang pagpurga,</i> The intestinal worms didn&apos;t come out because he stopped taking his medicine. <i>Mihuphup ang hubag human lugwái sa nánà,</i> The boil shrank after the pus had come out of it. <number>2</number> go out in general. <i>Way púlung nga milugwà sa íyang bàbà,</i> Not a word came out of his mouth.

<p id=11617><form>lugway</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> lengthen the rope on a tether. <i>Kinsay naglugway sa kábaw nga nakaábut man sa maisan.</i> Who gave the carabao enough rope to get to the cornfield? <i>Lugwáyi pa ang tabánug,</i> Give the kite more rope. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB; b]</itype> <tr>extend</tr>, prolong time allotted, for time to be extended. <i>Ug mulugway ang ákung kinabúhì,</i> If my life is extended. <i>Lugwáyi ang panahun sa ákung pagbáyad,</i> Give me more time to pay. <number>3</number> <itype>[A]</itype> have enough of s.t. at one&apos;s disposal. <i>Kun makalugway ka sa pagdágan,</i> If you can stand to run for a long distance. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> length of rope used in tying s.t. that moves. <i>Mub-i ang lugway sa hiniktan,</i> Shorten the rooster&apos;s tether. <number>1a</number> length of rope in a fishing apparatus used in connecting one part with another to render moveability. <number>2</number> extra time allowance given. <i>Mangáyù tag lugway ug dì ni mahuman ugmà,</i> We will ask for an extension if this doesn&apos;t get done tomorrow. <number>3</number> length of s.t. one has at his disposal. <i>Dakù kug lugway sa pasinsiya,</i> I have a great deal of patience. <i>Bisag gastúhan nimug usa ka gatus, dúna pay lugway nga ikapalit ug sapátus,</i> Even if you spend a hundred of the money, there is still enough to buy shoes.

<p id=11618><form>lúhà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tears</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|lúhà} sa bau</form> crocodile tears. <form>{(&rarr;)|luhà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN]</itype> get tears in the eyes. <i>Nag-áway sigúru sila kay nagluhà íyang mata,</i> They must have had a quarrel because her eyes are moist. <i>Nangluhà siya pagkabatì sa sintimintal nga isturya,</i> She got misty-eyed upon hearing the sentimental story. <form>{-an|luháan}, {-un(&rarr;)|luhaun}</form> <pos>a</pos> with tears<corr sic=",">.</corr> <form>walug sa {gin-an|ginluháan}</form> <pos>n</pos> the world, this <tr>vale of tears</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|lúhà} sa dalága</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ornamental hanging vine: <bio>Dischidia oinantha</bio>.

<p id=11619><form>luhag</form> <pos>a</pos> not still, <tr>restless</tr>. <i>Luhag kaáyung kamut nang ímung uyab,</i> Your boy friend has restless hands. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>move about</tr>, not be still. <i>Way magluhag ug dúnay bisíta,</i> You sit still (lit. nobody move) when the visitors are here. <i>Ayaw nig luhaga kay igsaktu nang pagkatáud,</i> Don&apos;t move this an inch because it is just in the right place.

<p id=11620><form>luhàluhà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>joints</tr> of the human or animal anatomy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cut up a chicken or slaughtered animal in the joints. <i>Luhàluhaa ang iníhaw nga manuk,</i> Cut up the slaughtered chicken in the joints.

<p id=11621><form>lúhit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> remove the meat of a sea shell with a pin or the like. <i>Luhíti ang bátà ug <pb n=636>unud sa kinhasun,</i> Remove some of the meat from the sea shells for the child.

<p id=11622><form>lúhu</form> <pos>a</pos> with refinement and elegance in appearance. <i>Mutambung sigúru siyag parti kay lúhu kaáyug pamisti,</i> He must be going to a party because he is elegantly dressed. <i>Lúhung pagkabúhat nga tukadur,</i> A finely built dresser. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12(1); c1]</itype> be <tr>elegant</tr>, luxurious in appearance.

<p id=11623><form>luhud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>kneel</tr>. <i>Nagluhud siya atubángan sa birhin,</i> She is kneeling before the Virgin Mary. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>worship</tr>. <i>Tahúra ang mga santus; ayawg ludhi,</i> Venerate the saints; don&apos;t worship them. <number>3</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>surrender</tr>. <i>Miluhud ang Hapun human bumbáhi sa atúmik bam,</i> Japan surrendered after the atomic bomb was dropped. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> sponsor a wedding. <i>Daghan nang kasal ang ákung naludhan,</i> I have been a sponsor at many weddings. <form>{pa-|paluhud}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> be made to <tr>kneel</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> be thrown to one&apos;s knees. <i>Napaluhud siya pagkaigù sa ákung krús,</i> He fell on his knees after being hit with my cross. <form>linudhan</form> <pos>n</pos> person sponsored in a wedding. <form>ludhanan, luhuránan</form> <pos>n</pos> rail one kneels on. <form>{tali-|taliluhud}</form> <pos>n</pos> about to kneel. <form>{tik-|tikluhud}</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>tikluhud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11624><form>luhudluhud</form> <pos>n</pos> a prostrate, spreading herb found in wasteland and open spaces, bearing small blue flowers in an axilliary, peduncled, leaflike spathe: <bio>Commelina diffusa</bio>.

<p id=11625><form>luib</form> <pos>n</pos> small bits of cooked rice or other burnt or partially burnt food that stick to the corners and creases of leaves which line the bottom of a cooking vessel.

<p id=11626><form>lúib</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S3S; b(1)]</itype> <tr>betray</tr>, be <tr>unfaithful</tr> to s.o. <i>Way mapyúsu nga makaluib sa mapya,</i> No Mafioso can betray the Mafia. <i>Giluíban siya sa íyang asáwa,</i> His wife was unfaithful to him. <form>{ma-un|maluíbun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>unfaithful</tr>, tending to betray. <pos>n</pos> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>maluíbun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11627><form>luing</form> <pos>a</pos> having weak knees such that one can&apos;t stand. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become <tr>weak-kneed</tr>. <i>Pulyu ang nakaluing (nakapaluing) nang batáa,</i> Polio has caused that child to have weak knees.

<p id=11628><form>lúka<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>uproot</tr>, pull s.t. out by the roots. <i>Átung lukáhun ang mga tanum nga way hinungdan,</i> We&apos;ll uproot the useless plants. <number>2</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> for two sisters to be married to two brothers. <i>Ang íyang duha ka anak dalága nalúka pagkaminyù sa magsúun,</i> His two daughters were married to the two brothers. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> dislodge from power, put one&apos;s reign to an end. <i>Way makalúka ni Duránu sa únang puruk,</i> No one can dislodge Durano from his hold on the first district. <pos>n</pos> a case of marriage where brothers marry sisters. <form>lukahay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C23]</itype> for brothers to marry sisters.

<p id=11629><form>lúka<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>lúku</sc></xr> (female).

<p id=11630><form>lukà</form> <pos>n</pos> short piece of bamboo tube, usually used as repository of documents, jewelry, or anything important. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> store s.t. in a <ix>lukà</ix> for safekeeping.

<p id=11631><form>lúkab</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>pry open</tr>. <i>Hiraminta nga ilúkab sa salug,</i> Tools to use in prying the floor up. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> open a door or window shutter. <i>Nalúkab ang pultahan tungud sa kusug hángin,</i> The door came open in the strong wind. <i>Íyang gilukában (gilúkab) ang íyang tindáhan ug sayu,</i> She opened her store early. <number>2a</number> <tr>burglarize</tr>. <i>Gilúkab (gilukában) ang ílang upisína ug nawad-an silag tayipraytir,</i> Their office was broken into and they lost a typewriter. <pos>n</pos> <tr>opening</tr>. <i>Dakug lúkab ning tarúha,</i> This kerosene can has a wide opening.

<p id=11632><form>lúkad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB26; a1]</itype> <tr>uproot</tr>, <tr>dig out</tr> from the ground. <i>Dalì malúkad (mulúkad) nang haligía kay dì lawum ang pagkalubung,</i> That post will get uprooted because it&apos;s not planted deep into the ground. <i>Naglúkad silag mga sáhà sa ságing,</i> They uprooted some banana shoots.

<p id=11633><form>lukal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>local</tr>. <i>Iliksiyun nga lukal,</i> Local elections. <form>{(&larr;)|lúkal mid}<corr>,</corr> {&mdash;|lukal} mid</form> <pos>n</pos> locally made product.

<p id=11634><form>lukalúka</form> <pos>n</pos> the groin of animals, the area connecting the upper thigh and the body of the animal. <pos>a</pos> <tr>detachable</tr>. <i>Lukalúka ang mga tiil sa lamísa,</i> The legs of the table are detachable.

<p id=11635><form>lúkap</form> <pos>n</pos> nightmare in which a person is unable to move or make a sound. Failure to wake up is said to lead to death. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a4]</itype> cause, have such a nightmare. <i>Kanang hilabihang kabusug únà matúlug mauy makalúkap,</i> Overeating before sleeping causes deathly nightmares.

<p id=11636><form>lukápa</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26; b6]</itype> <tr>stumble</tr>, be knocked down and hit the ground hard. <i>Milukápa (nalukápa) ang baksir,</i> The boxer hit the deck hard. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> <tr>fail</tr> in an exam or course. <i>Milukápa siya sa bár,</i> He flunked in the bar exam. <number>3</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> fall from power, be <tr>ruined</tr>. <i>Nalukápa ang gahum sa ílang punduk sa pagkamatay sa ílang lídir,</i> After the death of their leader, their party lost its power.

<p id=11637><form>lukas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; b]</itype> for laundry to become clean and white or for skin to become lighter in complexion. <i>Malukasan ang ímung pamánit ug dì ka magpainit,</i> Your skin will become lighter if you stay out of the sun.

<p id=11638><form>lukat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>redeem</tr> s.t. pawned or mortgaged. <pb n=637><i>Marimáti ang singsing ug dì nímu lukatun,</i> The ring will be foreclosed if you do not redeem it. <number>2</number> <tr>ransom</tr>. <i>Gilukat na ang gikidnap,</i> The man that was kidnapped has been ransomed. <number>2a</number> <tr>redeem</tr>, <tr>save</tr> (figurative). <i>Malukat ku ra gihápun siya sa íyang kalisud,</i> I can save her from her difficulties. <number>2b</number> <tr>redeem</tr>, <tr>compensate for</tr>. <i>Ang íyang kaligdung makalukat sa kalaksut sa íyang dagway,</i> His good manners make up for his ugly face. <number>2c</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lukat} sa signus</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> in folk belief, an occurrence or happening which spares a person&apos;s life by taking s.o. who dies in his stead. <i>Gituhúan nga lukatun ang signus sa tag-íya sa íyang mga buhì,</i> It is believed that domestic animals spare their owners from death by dying in their stead. <number>3</number> pay a fee and get s.t. back that one had fixed or reworked. <i>Lukata nag gipaáyu nímung rilu,</i> Go pick up the watch you had repaired now. <number>4</number> pay for tokens of privilege like tickets, licenses, etc. <i>Mularga giyud ku kay nakalukat na kug tíkit,</i> I&apos;m really going to leave now because I already paid for my ticket. <i>Díay písus ilukat ug sidula,</i> Here is one peso to pay for a residence certificate. <number>5</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lukat} ug áway, {lális|lukat ug lális}</formx> <itype>[A12]</itype> get involved in a dispute or fight. <i>Ayawg tambag ánang lantúgì kay makalukat kag lális,</i> Don&apos;t give advice to people who are arguing because you will just get trouble for yourself. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> amount for redemption or ransom. <number>2</number> fee for having s.t. made or repairs done. <form>{-an(&larr;)|lukátan}</form> <xr>= <sc>lukat</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <i>Pila may ákung lukátan (lukat) ning sinináa?</i> How much do I pay to have this dress sewn?

<p id=11639><form>lúkat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; a1]</itype> <tr>uproot</tr> s.t., <tr>prying</tr> the roots out of the ground. <i>Ang bagyu mauy nakalúkat (nakapalúkat) sa lumbuy,</i> The typhoon uprooted the <ix>lumbuy</ix> tree. <i>Lukáta nang muhun ug ibalhin,</i> Dig out that buried landmark and move it.

<p id=11640><form>lukay</form> <pos>n</pos> coconut palm leaves. <form>lukaylúkay</form> <number>1</number> the bridge of the nose, including the central bony ridge that separates the nostrils. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>hanlulúkay</sc>.</xr> <form>{han-r-(&larr;)|hanlulúkay}</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>hanlulúkay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11641><form>lukba</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; a]</itype> uproot a finger or toenail. <i>Nagkalukba ang íyang kuku nga nalaswahan,</i> His toenail that got scalded is falling off. <i>Tug-an arun dì lukbáhun ímung kuku.</i> Confess so they don&apos;t pull your fingernails out.

<p id=11642><form>lukbun</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>lubuk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11643><form>lukdu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> carry a load on the head. <i>Mas sayun pag lukdúhun (lukdúun, ilukdu) nákù ang duwang,</i> It would be easier for me to carry the basin on my head. <number>2</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> for one to be so many years old. <i>Bísan pa sa katuígan nga íyang gilukdu batan-un siyang tan-áwun,</i> He carries his years well. He still looks young. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lukdu} ug kalbásà</formx> <itype>[A]</itype> be held back a grade. <i>Makalukdu ka giyug kalbásà ug dì ka magtuun,</i> You will fail the grade if you don&apos;t study.

<p id=11644><form>lukdulukdu</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to many species of ornamental ferns.

<p id=11645><form>lukgaw</form> <pos>n</pos> the slender-billed cuckoo dove: <bio>Macropygia phasianella</bio>.

<p id=11646><form>lukguk</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>one-testicled</tr>, having one testicle not descended. <i>Ang lukguk dì kapamabdus,</i> A man with only one testicle cannot get a woman pregnant.

<p id=11647><form>lukim</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>tuck in</tr>, put in between two hugging surfaces. <i>Si Nánay pay mulukim sa ákung púlu,</i> Mother tucks my shirt in for me. <i>Ilukim ang kwarta sa libru arun mahúping,</i> Put the peso bill between the pages of the book to make it smooth. <number>2</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> give a little money to s.o. who would naturally refuse it in such a way that he will accept it (putting it into his pocket). <i>Ilukim lang ning písus dihà pára panigarilyu,</i> Here&apos;s a peso for cigarettes. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> sew a fold into a garment. <i>Ákung gilukiman ang ákung sinínà kay taas ra kaáyu,</i> I sewed a fold in my dress to make it shorter because it was too long.

<p id=11648><form>lukimya</form> <xr>= <sc>lyukimya</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11649><form>luking</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>knock-kneed</tr>. <i>Dáan na siyang luking sa íyang pagkatáwu,</i> She has been knock-kneed since birth.

<p id=11650><form>lukip</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>enclose</tr> or <tr>insert</tr> s.t. in a letter. <i>Ilukip ring bayinti sa birtdi kard,</i> Enclose this twenty-peso bill in the birthday card.

<p id=11651><form>lukluk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; c]</itype> go, put into a tight or hidden place. <i>Sawang naglukluk sa kakugnan,</i> A snake lurking in the grass. <i>Ilukluk ang kwarta sa sikrítu,</i> Put the money into your watch pocket. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> get s.o. into a job (slang). <i>Ang uyuan níyang kungrisman mauy naglukluk níya sa Kustum,</i> His uncle who is a Congressman got him into the Customs. <pos>a</pos> put in such a way that it is hidden or not easy to get at. <i>Lukluk kaáyung pagkabutang sa tutbrás sa iláwum sa bág,</i> The toothbrush was put way in the bottom of the bag.

<p id=11652><form>lukmay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB12; a12]</itype> for feelings to become or be made soft such that a person is persuaded. <i>Ang íyang tíngug mulukmay sa labing tig-a nga kasingkásing,</i> Her voice will soften the hardest of hearts. <i>Nagkalukmay ang íyang balatían sa tantu námung hinangyù,</i> Our imploring is gradually softening his feelings. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126N; c1]</itype> be <tr>dejected</tr>. <i>Nanlukmay si Maryu pagkahibáwung nahagbung <pb n=638>siya sa burd,</i> Mario was dejected when he learned he had failed the board exam. <pos>a</pos> having a dejected look. <form>{ma-un|malukmáyun}</form> <pos>a</pos> having the quality of softening or soothing feelings.

<p id=11653><form>lukmuy</form> <pos>a</pos> having a crestfallen, dejected look on the face. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; c1]</itype> get a dejected, crestfallen look on the face. <i>Malukmuy giyud si Nardu ug makahibáwu siyang nahagbung sa burd,</i> Nardo will surely be crestfallen when he learns that he flunked the board examination.

<p id=11654><form>luksu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>jump</tr>. <i>Miluksu ang ungguy sa kalípay,</i> The monkey jumped up and down with joy. <i>Luksúa lag kanal kay way latayan,</i> Just jump over the ditch because there is no span. <i>Bintánang íyang giluksúan,</i> The window he jumped down from. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>skip</tr> a grade in school. <i>Miluksu kanà siyag grádu mau nga naapsan ku níya,</i> He skipped a grade in school so he has caught up with me now. <pos>n</pos> distance or height jumped. <form>{hi-|hiluksu}/{ha-|haluksu}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> jump involuntarily. <i>Nahaluksu siya sa kakurat,</i> He jumped involuntarily when he was startled.

<p id=11655><form>luktun</form> <pos>n</pos> young of a locust.

<p id=11656><form>lúku</form> <pos>a</pos> stupid in action. <i>Lúku. Ngánung mitug-an man ka nga wà ka pangutan-a?</i> You fool! Why did you let on when nobody even asked you? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN2; a2]</itype> <tr>make a fool</tr> of s.o. <i>Ilára tits. Lukúha si Lúla mu,</i> Don&apos;t try to fool me, buddy. Fool your grandmother. <form>{&mdash;|lúku} diamur</form> <pos>a</pos> gone crazy because of love. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> <tr>go crazy</tr> from love. <i>Nalúku diamur ang ulitáwu sukad bulagi sa íyang trátu,</i> The young man went crazy after his girl friend left him. <form>lukuluku</form> <pos>a</pos> somewhat <tr>stupid</tr> or <tr>foolish</tr>. <form>kalukúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> foolish doings. <form>{ma&N;-r-(&rarr;)|mangluluku}</form> <pos>n</pos> one who makes a fool of people.

<p id=11657><form>lúkù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> be <tr>curled up</tr>. <i>Ilúkù (lukúa) ímung láwas arun masúd ka sa baril,</i> Curl your body up so you can get into the barrel. <number>1a</number> <tr>loaf</tr> in bed. <i>Bísag taas na ang adlaw naglúkù lang gihápun siya,</i> The sun is high in the sky, but he is still lying around <corr sic=on>in</corr> bed. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> fall down in a curled up position. <i>Nalúkù (nahilúkù) siya sa kanal human ku patíri,</i> He fell curled up in the ditch after I kicked him. <form>{(&rarr;)|lukù}</form> <pos>n</pos> piece of cloth formed into a ring used as a cushion when carrying a load on the head. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> place a cushion of coiled cloth on the head. <i>Kinahanglang maglukù ka ug dúna kay lukdúhun,</i> You should put a cushion on your head when you carry a load on it. <form>lukùlúkù</form> <pos>n</pos> inside of the knee joints.

<p id=11658><form>lukub<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> close and lock. <i>Grábi sad nímung nakalukub sa pwirta dì na man maabli,</i> You sure bolted the door hard. I can&apos;t get it open. <number>2</number> enclose s.t. in an area or by putting s.t. over it. <i>Pagsígig hílak kay lukban ta ka sa kasilyas,</i> Go on, keep crying and I&apos;ll lock you in the bathroom. <i>Lukbi ang kan-un arun dì tugdúnan sa lángaw,</i> Cover the rice so the flies won&apos;t get on it. <i>Gilukban ang lagwirtag paril,</i> The garden was enclosed inside a wall. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>shutter</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>cover</tr>. <number>3</number> space enclosed. <i>Túa si Máma sa lukub sa kwartu,</i> Mother is inside the room. <number>4</number> k.o. fish corral for impounding fish in a receding tide.

<p id=11659><form>lukub<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. chisel with a curved (concave-convex) cutting edge. <i>Ang lukub mauy gamítun sa pagkúlit,</i> The curved chisel is used for carving.

<p id=11660><form>lúkub</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>wrap up</tr> in s.t. flat. <i>Naglúkub ku sa hábul kay gitugnaw ku,</i> I wrapped myself up in a blanket because I felt cold. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> for an atmospheric condition to <tr>engulf</tr> an area. <i>Milúkub ang kangitngit sa kalibútan,</i> Darkness engulfed the world.

<p id=11661><form>lukublukub</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. starfish with poisonous spines.

<p id=11662><form>lúkud</form> <xr>= <sc>kulúkud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11663><form>lukun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large shrimp with short and small claws.

<p id=11664><form>lúkun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB456; a12]</itype> <tr>coil up</tr>, coil s.t. up, usually in several coils. <i>Naglúkun siyag nuug arun himúung lukun paglukdu níya sa kahun,</i> He rolled a piece of cloth into a coil to cushion the box he was carrying on his head. <i>Dúnay sawa nga naglúkun sa tugkaran,</i> There is a large snake coiled up in the yard. <i>Lukúna ang hús ug hipúsa,</i> Coil the hose and put it away. <form>{(&rarr;)|lukun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. <tr>coiled</tr>. <number>2</number> piece of coiled cloth used as a cushion for carrying a load on the head. <form>{&mdash;|lukun} sa búlak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wreath</tr>. <form>{-an|lukunan}</form> <pos>n</pos> inside of the knees. <form>lukunlúkun</form> <xr>= <sc>{-an|lukunan}</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11665><form>lúkung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make a <tr>coil</tr>, form a circle from s.t. stiff. <i>Naglúkung kug alambring gihímung ríng,</i> I coiled a piece of wire to make into a basketball ring. <i>Lukúnga ang alambri ug isang-at,</i> Coil the wire and hang it up. <form>{(&rarr;)|lukung}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>coiled</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|lukung} sa búlak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wreath</tr>. <form>lukunglúkung</form> <pos>n</pos> inside of the knees.

<p id=11666><form>lukup</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB2; a12]</itype> do s.t. to the entire area of s.t. <i>Mulukup sà kug súruy sa syudad,</i> I will wander all over the city. <i>Dì kang kalukup ug tanum sa lapad níyang yútà,</i> You can&apos;t plant every inch of his vast lands. <i>Nagkalukup na sa lungsud ang pisti,</i> The epidemic is spreading all over the town. <i>Lukpag silhig ang sawug,</i> Sweep the entire floor. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256; a12]</itype> do s.t. to each and every <pb n=639>one or thing. <i>Nalukup kug pangutána báhin nímu,</i> I asked just about everybody where to find you. <number>3</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> be up to the ears in debt. <i>Nalukup na kining átung balhíbu sa útang,</i> We&apos;re up to the ears in debt (lit. every single hair of our body is in debt). <form>lukuplúkup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> go over almost the entire area of s.t. <i>Nalukuplúkup na níyag súruy ang mga dagkung syudad sa Amirika,</i> He has gone to almost all the big cities in America.

<p id=11667><form>lukut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> leave a mark or cut into the flesh. <i>Milukut ang patiyan sa kabáyù,</i> The bellyband cut into the horse&apos;s flesh. <i>Naluktan ang íyang kamut sa gapus,</i> The bonds left a mark on his arms.

<p id=11668><form>lukut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> edible excretion from a k.o. sea cucumber called <ix>dungsul</ix>, similar in appearance to bean threads, but green, tightly curled up.

<p id=11669><form>lúkut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; ac6]</itype> <tr>roll up</tr>, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Mulúkut ang dáhun inigkaláyà,</i> The leaf will roll up when it is withered. <i>Lukúta ang banig inigmata nímu,</i> Roll up the mat when you wake up. <i>Ilúkut ang panaptun sa káhuy,</i> Wrap the cloth around the wood. <number>1a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lúkut} sa banig</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for political protegees to vacate a position when their political party loses. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> for the body to get rolled over by some force. <i>Nalúkut siya uban sa bawud,</i> He rolled with the waves. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be beaten badly in a contest. <i>Nalúkut si Sirhing sa miáging iliksiyun,</i> Serging was crushed during the last election. <form>{pa&N;-|panglúkut}, {panga-|pangalúkut}, lukutlukut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> for dirt on the body to come off in rolls when scrubbed or rubbed. <i>À, nangalúkut (naglukutlukut, nanlúkut) man lang ágis íyang tagiptip nga gilúgud,</i> My! How the dirt on his body comes off in rolls when you rub it!

<p id=11670><form>lúla</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) title for grandmother or any woman old enough to be one&apos;s grandmother. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> call s.o. <i>lúla.</i>

<p id=11671><form>lúlan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>board</tr>, put on a vehicle. <i>Ilúlan ang bátà sa bisiklíta,</i> Put the child on the bicycle. <pos>n</pos> s.o. or s.t. aboard a vehicle.

<p id=11672><form>lúlaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> <tr>wake up</tr> late, stay in bed long. <i>Ngánung naglúlaw ka man, nag-unsa ka man gabíi?</i> Why are you staying in bed long this morning? What did you do last night?

<p id=11673><form>lulhu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> <tr>roll up</tr> sleeves or pants. <i>Makig-áway sigúru siya kay nanglulhu man,</i> He must be preparing to fight because he is rolling up his sleeves. <i>Lulhúa (ilulhu) ímung karsúnis iniglabang nátù sa subà,</i> Roll up your pants when we cross the stream.

<p id=11674><form>lúlid</form> <pos>n</pos> crippled due to a deformity or underdevelopment of the legs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become a cripple. <i>Nalúlid siya kay gitakbúyag pulyu,</i> He was crippled after his bout with polio.

<p id=11675><form>lulingháyaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> take a <tr>trip</tr>, <tr>go out</tr> for leisure. <i>Ilulingháyaw nákù siya sa Hungkung,</i> I&apos;ll take her on a tour to <corr sic=Hongkong>Hong Kong</corr>. <pos>n</pos> <tr>leisure</tr>.

<p id=11676><form>lulipap</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lollipop</tr>.

<p id=11677><form>lúlu</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) title for grandfather or any other man old enough to be one&apos;s grandfather with whom one is close. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> call s.o. grandpa.

<p id=11678><form>lùlù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; abc]</itype> <tr>masturbate</tr>. <i>Dì na muutug bísan pag lùlúun,</i> I can&apos;t get an erection, even if I masturbate. <i>Ug dì ka kaiyut níya lùlúi na lang,</i> If you can&apos;t have her, just think of her while you abuse yourself (lit. masturbate for her). <i>Ilùlù na lang ang ímung kahígal,</i> Just masturbate your craving away. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> use equipment improperly. <i>Kinsa na puy naglùlù áning makinilyang nagubà na man pud?</i> Who has been abusing my typewriter? It&apos;s broken again. <i>Hala, lùlúa arun makailis ka,</i> Go on abuse it so you can buy me a new one. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>penis</tr> (coarse). <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lùlù} mu</formx> expression of disgust at a person. <i>Lùlù nímu, ingun kag mukúyug ka, wà man lagi,</i> You SOB. You said you were coming along, but you didn&apos;t. <i>Diyis sa lùlù mu! Háin may kwartáhun ta run,</i> Hell, if I&apos;ll give you a dime. Where am I going to get the money from! <number>3</number> expression of disgust in general. <i>Lùlù! Pirmi lang patay way hárì,</i> Shit! It&apos;s always tails, never heads!

<p id=11679><form>lúlut</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>tender</tr> eyes or looks. <i>Lúlut nga mata sa inahan,</i> A mother&apos;s tender eyes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b8]</itype> for s.o. to be tenderly loved. <i>Nalulútan giyud ning batáa sa mga ginikánan kay bugtung,</i> The parents love this child dearly because he&apos;s an only child.

<p id=11680><form>lúluy</form> <pos>a</pos> sleepy, <tr>dull</tr> eyes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23B; b6]</itype> for the eyes to become drooping or dull. <i>Mulúluy (malúluy) giyud ang mata ug way túg,</i> Your eyes will start to droop if you have gone without sleep.

<p id=11681><form>lumà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23; b(1)]</itype> for a liquid to <tr>seep through</tr> s.t. and stain it. <i>Milumà ang dugù sa bindáhi,</i> Blood seeped through the bandage and stained it. <i>Gilum-an nag buling ang kwilyu,</i> Dirt has stained the collar where sweat seeped into the cloth. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> <tr>leave a mark</tr>. <i>Milumà ang banig sa ímung nawung,</i> The mat you were lying on has left marks on your face. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> stain or dirt carried by liquid. <number>2</number> <tr>mark</tr>. <form>{pa-|palumà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>trace</tr> on s.t. to reproduce a copy. <i>Mupalumà ku sa ímung drúwing,</i> I&apos;ll trace your drawing.

<p id=11682><form>lúmà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be overshadowed by s.t. else, put into the background (used by speakers <pb n=640>influenced by Tagalog). <i>Malúmà nang púlu nímug isul-ub ku tung ákung mahalun,</i> Your sport shirt will be relegated to the background if I wear my expensive one.

<p id=11683><form>lúmad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> stay, stick long on.<i> Mulúmad kahà ku niánang trabahúa kun dì pa maáyu ug súhul?</i> Would I stick to that job if the pay wasn&apos;t good? <form>{(&rarr;)|lumad}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>native</tr>, <tr>natural-born citizen</tr>. <form>{-nun|lumadnun}</form> <pos>n</pos> of native origin, make, or quality. <i>Lumadnun nga sáyaw,</i> Native dance.

<p id=11684><form>lumag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B3(1); b6]</itype> for dirt, color to come off s.t. soaked in water. <i>Mulumag (malumag) ang buling ug ímung ihúmul úsà ang mga bulingun,</i> Some of the dirt will come out if the clothes are soaked in water. <i>Naglumag ug kulur úbi ang itum sinínà,</i> The black dress exuded violet color on the water. <number>2</number> <itype>[B3]</itype> for the results of bad behavior to come out. <i>Milumag na ang pagsígig súruy, mimabdus na siya,</i> Now her habits of going out have <corr sic=born>borne</corr> fruit: she got pregnant. <pos>n</pos> colored juice that is squeezed out from s.t. that fades.

<p id=11685><form>*lumaluma</form> <form>{pa-|palumaluma}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> undertake to do s.t. one is incapable of doing. <i>Ayawg palumalumag áyu sa radiyu kay musamut hinúun nag kadáut,</i> Don&apos;t take it on yourself to try and fix the radio. It&apos;ll just get worse. <form>palumalumahun, mapalumalumahun</form> <pos>a</pos> daring to take on s.t. which one may not be capable of doing.

<p id=11686><form>lumat</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> tubers left accidentally in the ground after the harvest which sprout again. <number>2</number> trait that is inherited in a family. <number>3</number> highly contagious skin eruptions or lesions on the soles of the feet which occur after an eruption of yaws (<ix>tabukaw</ix>). The <ix>lumat</ix> are roundish with small fleshy protuberances and continually emit watery pus. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> for tubers left in the ground by accident to sprout. <i>Mulumat ra gihápun ang mga unud sa úbing wà nátù makit-i,</i> The yams we failed to find will sprout again. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> for a certain trait to be inherited. <i>Basta kalíwat ug búang mulumat giyud,</i> If insanity runs in the family, it will sooner or later show in the children. <i>Kinsa may gilumatan niíning íyang batásang ngil-ad?</i> Who does she take after with her bad behavior? <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b4]</itype> for a bad character trait in a person to make its appearance. <i>Mulumat giyud ang íyang pagkamaldítu kun makainum,</i> His mischievous ways come out when he takes a drink. <number>4</number> <itype>[a4b4]</itype> get <ix>lumat</ix>. <i>Gilumat (gilumatan) si Markus,</i> Marcos has <ix>lumat.</ix>

<p id=11687><form>lumáwig</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>lawig</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11688><form>lumay</form> <pos>n</pos> a magical love potion used to cause s.o. to be irresistibly drawn to the user. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> use a love potion on s.o. <i>Kinsa guy mulumay ánang húmuk ug ilung,</i> No need to use a love potion on her when she is so easy to conquer. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> draw s.o. irresistibly with an attractive quality. <i>Ang íyang kabuútan mauy naglumay nákù ngadtu níya,</i> Her good attributes made me irresistibly attracted to her. <form>{-an|lumayan}, {-an(&larr;)|lumáyan}</form> <pos>a</pos> having a <ix>lumay</ix>.

<p id=11689><form>*lúmay</form> <form>{ma-|malúmay}</form> <pos>a</pos> slow and <corr sic=effemininate>effeminate</corr> in speech. <i>Malúmay kaáyung musulti nà si Lusyu kay bayutun man gud,</i> Lucio speaks slow like a girl because he is effeminate.

<p id=11690><form>lumbà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2C; ac3]</itype> <tr>race</tr>, have a race. <i>Lumbáun nátù. Ang mangíkug muy mubangka,</i> Let&apos;s race it out. The one who is last will pay. <i>Lumbáun nátù ang átung bakì,</i> Let&apos;s have our frogs race. <number>2</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> outrace. <i>Hilumbaan ku níyag kalígù kay wà siya manabun,</i> He beat me bathing because he didn&apos;t soap himself. <number>3</number> <itype>[C23]</itype> outdo each other, as if to see who can do it the more. <i>Naglumbà ug katúlug,</i> They are sleeping as if they were trying to outdo each other. <i>Naglumbà ug isturyag hambug,</i> Outdo each other in telling tall stories. <pos>n</pos> race. <form>{-anay|lumbaánay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c3]</itype> race with each other. <i>Naglumbaánay ang mga balud sa lapyahan,</i> The waves are racing against each other to the shore. <form>{ka-|kalumbà}</form> <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s opponent in a race. <form>{-anan|lumbaánan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>racetrack</tr>.

<p id=11691><form>lumbaglumbag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ASP]</itype> <tr>writhe</tr>, twist in pain. <i>Naglumbaglumbag siya sa kasakit sa íyang tiyan,</i> He writhed in pain with his stomachache.

<p id=11692><form>lumbágu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lumbago</tr>, a rheumatic pain in the joints of the lumbar region.

<p id=11693><form>lumban</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>turban shells</tr>, k.o. edible univalve. <form>mata ug {&mdash;|lumban}</form> the operculum of turban shells (which resembles an eye).

<p id=11694><form>lumbang</form> <pos>n</pos> large forest tree, cultivated for its fruit, the seed of which yields an oil similar to linseed oil: <bio>Aleurites moluccana</bio>.

<p id=11695><form>lumbay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> row or column of units. <number>2</number> k.o. tic-tac-toe game for two players. A square with nine dots (three on each side, one in the middle) is drawn and the players take turns putting down their stones on the dots. Whoever gets a row of three stones, wins. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> queue up, fall in line facing in the direction of the line; do, put in a row. <i>Naglumbay ang daghang pumapálit ug prankíyu,</i> Lots of people were queuing up to buy stamps. <i>Naglumbay siya sa mga pyísa,</i> He is lining up the spare parts. <i>Lumbáya ang pagtanum sa humay,</i> Plant the rice in rows. <i>Ilumbay ning silya sa únang lumbay,</i> Put this <pb n=641>chair in the first row. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC]</itype> play <ix>lumbay</ix>. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|lumbayan}</form> <pos>n</pos> a board for playing <ix>lumbay</ix>.

<p id=11696><form>lumbiya</form> <pos>n</pos> sago palm, the trunk of which is used to starch and the leaves for roofing: <bio>Metroxylon sagus</bio>.

<p id=11697><form>lumbuy</form> <xr>= <sc>lungbuy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11698><form>lúmi</form> <pos>n</pos> dish of long Chinese noodles, usually served in broth.

<p id=11699><form>lumì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>crease</tr>, <tr>fold</tr>, <tr>wrinkles</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> get to be all wrinkled, creased. <i>Ayawg lumia nang bag-ung inutaw,</i> Don&apos;t wrinkle your newly ironed shirt. <form>{-un|lumíun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>wrinkled</tr>, <tr>creased</tr>.

<p id=11700><form>lúmid</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wallow or roll in mud, flour, etc. <i>Ang bábuy mulúmid sa lápuk,</i> Pigs roll in the mud. <i>Ilúmid ang pinirítung ságing sa asúkar,</i> Roll the fried bananas in the sugar. <number>2</number> <itype>[B456]</itype> roll in sin, vice. <i>Naglúmid sa salà ang mga babáying nagbaligyà sa ílang dungug,</i> Women who sell their reputation are wallowing in sin.

<p id=11701><form>luminarya</form> <pos>n</pos> numerous lighted candles placed along the streets during religious processions or in the church during services. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> light candles for a religious procession or church service.

<p id=11702><form>lúming</form> <pos>a</pos> tender, soft voice or way of speaking. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> for the voice to become soft and tender. <i>Mulúming dáyun íyang tíngug ug ikasulti ang uyab,</i> Her voice suddenly becomes tender when she speaks with her boy friend.

<p id=11703><form>lumiru</form> <xr>= <sc>numiru</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11704><form>lum-it</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>crease</tr>, <tr>wrinkle</tr>. <i>Ang lum-it sa karsúnis nahíwì,</i> The crease in the trousers came out crooked. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB126; a1]</itype> crease, get creased. <i>Ayawg lum-íta ang bag-ung pinalansa nímung sayal,</i> Don&apos;t crease your skirt. You just ironed it. <pos>a</pos> creased.

<p id=11705><form>lumlum</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> sit on eggs. <i>Wà pa mapisù ang gilumlúmang itlug,</i> The eggs the hen was brooding have not hatched yet. <number>1a</number> <itype>[b]</itype> sit on papers which need processing or attention. <i>Kadtung aplikisiyun nímu sa lún gilumlúman lang,</i> They are just sitting on your application for a loan. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> stay inside s.t. <i>Dúgay na siyang lumlum sa íla kay maúlaw nga mupakítà,</i> He stayed cooped up in his house for a long time because he was ashamed to show himself. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for feelings to be in the breast. <i>Ang kasína nga naglumlum sa íyang dughan,</i> Enviousness that is stored up in her heart. <i>Naglumlum sa dughan ni Kaluy ang kamíngaw kang Plúra,</i> Caloy feels loneliness for Flora.

<p id=11706><form>lumpag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>crumble down</tr>; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Nagkalumpag na ang paril,</i> The wall is crumbling. <i>Hilumpagan ku sa kinamádang láta,</i> The cans that were stacked up neatly came tumbling down on me. <number>2</number> bring to a downfall. <i>Ayawg lumpága ang íyang mga damgu,</i> Do not destroy her hopes. <i>Lumpágun nátù ang gahum sa impiryalismu,</i> We shall overcome the power of imperialism.

<p id=11707><form>lumpánug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; b6]</itype> flee suddenly and rapidly to a far place. <i>Milumpánug lagi pagkakità sa ákung pistúla,</i> He sure got out of there fast when he saw my gun. <i>Layù ang gilumpanúgan sa ákung hunàhúnà samtang namínaw sa diskursu,</i> My mind wandered as I was listening to the speech.

<p id=11708><form>lumpat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> bounce up suddenly. <i>Milumpat ákung kasingkásing sa kahikurat,</i> My heart leaped in sudden surprise. <form>lumpatlumpat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> bounce up and down. <i>Naglumpatlumpat ang dyíp sa batsihun nga dálan,</i> The jeep was bouncing up and down on the bumpy road.

<p id=11709><form>lumpayat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> jump vigorously up and down. <i>Ngánung naglumpayat man ang mga bátà sa katri?</i> Why are the children jumping up and down vigorously on the bed? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> jump up and down to get free, tug against s.t. that restricts movement. <i>Milumpayat ang ungguy sa halwa pagkakità sa ságing,</i> The monkey jumped up and down in the cage upon seeing the banana. <i>Naglumpayat ang irù sa huktanan pagkakità sa iring,</i> The dog jumped up and down tugging against his leash upon seeing the cat.

<p id=11710><form>lumpì, lumping</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dented</tr>, having a dent. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a]</itype> <tr>dent</tr>. <i>Ayawg lumpínga ang táru nga igbabaligyà,</i> Don&apos;t dent the kerosene can we&apos;re planning to sell. <i>Lumpíngi ang kílid sa láta,</i> Make a dent in the side of the can. <pos>n</pos> <tr>dent</tr>.

<p id=11711><form>lumpiyà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>egg roll</tr>, a dish consisting of a thin pancake filled with sauteed meat and vegetables. <form>{&mdash;|lumpiyà} nga prisku</form> an egg roll with the pancake soft and pliant. <form>{&mdash;|lumpiyà} nga prítu</form> an egg roll with the pancake fried crisp. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> have, make egg rolls.

<p id=11712><form>lumpu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a4]</itype> feel tired and sleepy after taking a swim. <i>Gilumpu (nalumpu) ang bátà human malígù,</i> The child felt tired and sleepy after taking a swim.

<p id=11713><form>lumpù</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lame</tr>, <tr>cripple</tr>. <i>Dì siya makalakaw kay lumpù,</i> He can&apos;t walk because he is lame. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b5]</itype> be, become lame.

<p id=11714><form>lumpung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC3; a]</itype> <number>1</number> for s.t. concave to fit or be made to fit snugly in s.t. else convex. <i>Lumpúnga ang mga básu arun sayun dad-un,</i> <pb n=642>Put the glasses inside of one another to make them easy to carry. <i>Ilumpung ning basurahan sa láin,</i> Put this trash can on top of the other. <number>2</number> for two or more things to be or to take place at the same time when they should not be overlapping. <i>Lisud nang maglumpung átung uyab kay gastu,</i> It&apos;s hard to have several girl friends at the same time because it&apos;s expensive. <i>Bísag lumpúngun mung duha, káya gihápun mu nákù,</i> Even if it&apos;s two against one, I can still beat you.

<p id=11715><form>lumput</form> <pos>n</pos> home-woven cloth of a checkered design and with a plain weave. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear clothing of this weave.

<p id=11716><form>lumu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>tender</tr>, gentle in personality. <i>Lumu nga kasingkásing ni Hisus,</i> Jesus&apos; tender heart. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> become gentle, tender. <i>Nagkalumu íyang tíngug samtang nagkabugnaw ang íyang kasukù,</i> His voice got gentler as his anger cooled off. <form>{(&larr;)|lúmu}</form> <pos>n</pos> tenderloin cut of meat. <form>{ma-|malumu}</form> <xr>= <sc>lumu</sc>, <i>a</i>.</xr>

<p id=11717><form>lúmù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> crush s.t. out of shape without breaking it. <i>Nalúmù ang munyíkang ákung natumban,</i> The plastic doll that I stepped on got crushed out of shape. <i>Ayaw lumúa nang láta kay ákung gamítun,</i> Don&apos;t crush that can because I&apos;m going to use it.

<p id=11718><form>lumud</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. porpoise.

<p id=11719><form>lúmud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> be together with s.o. in a place designed for one. <i>Naglúmud silang tulu sa gamayng katri,</i> The three of them slept together in a small bed. <number>2</number> stay with s.o. in the same house. <i>Nakalúmud ku níla ug unum ka búlan,</i> I have lived with them for six months.

<p id=11720><form>lumuk</form> <pos>a</pos> for the hair to be oily after oil has been applied to it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> be, become oily. <i>Ákung lumukun ímung buhuk sa hisù kay ákung hingut-an,</i> I&apos;ll put lots of hair oil in your hair to get rid of the lice.

<p id=11721><form>lúmun</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> live, keep together. <i>Milúmun ang bátang ílu sa íyang tiyù,</i> The orphaned child went to live with his uncle. <i>Naglúmun sila bísag wà pa makasal,</i> They lived together even though they weren&apos;t married. <i>Ayg ilúmun ang dunut nga mangga sa mga maáyu</i>, Don&apos;t put the rotten mangoes together with the good ones. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> crumple or roll up a piece of cloth into a ball. <i>Naglúmun siyag nuug íyang gihímung tutuytútuy,</i> She made a ball out of the cloth to make a false breast.

<p id=11722><form>lúmung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> for water to collect and form a pool. <i>Naglúmung ang túbig sa tugkaran kay way kagwaan,</i> The water formed a pool in the front yard because there was no way for it to exit.

<p id=11723><form>lumus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB16; b1]</itype> <tr>drown</tr>, get drowned. <i>Naglumus siya kay nadispirádu,</i> She drowned herself because she got frustrated in love. <i>Gidaghanun sa tubà nga makalumus (makapalumus),</i> Enough toddy to drown you. <i>Lumsan tikaw sa subà, animála ka,</i> I&apos;ll drown you in the river, you beast! <i>Subang nalumsan níya,</i> The river he drowned in. <number>1a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lumus} sa sabaw</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> disappear into thin air (usually said of a father deserting a family). <i>Nalumus sa sabaw ang amahan niíning batáa,</i> The father of this child disappeared into thin air. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> for an engine to get flooded with fuel. <i>Dì muandar ang makina kay nalumus,</i> The engine won&apos;t start because it&apos;s flooded. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> suffocate, choke in an embrace. <i>Hápit ku malumus sa íyang gakus,</i> I almost suffocated to death in her embrace. <number>4</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> overwhelm with feelings. <i>Kaguul nga milumus sa kasingkásing,</i> A heart drowned in grief.

<p id=11724><form>lumus<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>ung-ung</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr>

<p id=11725><form>lúmut</form> <pos>n</pos> general term for <tr>lichens</tr> or <tr>algae</tr> of the sort that attach themselves. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> <number>1</number> be covered with moss or seaweed. <i>Gilumútan ang lubut sa tangki,</i> The water tank is covered with algae on the bottom. <number>2</number> be left idle (until moss covers it). <i>Gilumútan na lang siya, dága lang gihápun,</i> The years have come and gone, but she remains single. <form>{-un|lumútun}</form> <pos>a</pos> covered with moss or green seaweeds. <form>lumutlumut</form> <pos>n</pos> tiny lichens which grow on the trunks of palms and other trees, or on the sides of water containers not cleaned, greenish in color.

<p id=11726><form>lumuy, lúmuy</form> <pos>a</pos> soft and delicate, not rigid. <i>Lúmuy (lumuy) ang buktun sa way trabáhu,</i> One who doesn&apos;t work has soft arms. <i>Lumuy nga tsíku,</i> A soft sapodilla. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> become soft and delicate, not rigid. <number>2</number> <itype>[BN26]</itype> become momentarily weak on experiencing a great emotion. <i>Nalúmuy ku pagkabatì nákung nakadaug ku sa swipstik,</i> My legs gave way when I heard that I won the sweepstakes. <form>{(&rarr;)|lumuy}</form> <pos>n</pos> a breed of pigs that easily grows fat, and with soft and thin skin. <form>lumyan</form> <pos>n</pos> variety of jackfruit (<ix>nangkà</ix>) the flesh of which is soft, sweet, and juicy with no dry pulp.

<p id=11727><form>lún<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lawn</tr>. <form>{-máwir|lunmáwir}</form> <tr>lawn mower</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> cut the grass with a lawn mower. <i>Nindut nag lún kay ákung gilunmáwir,</i> The lawn looks good now because I mowed it.

<p id=11728><form>lún<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>loan</tr> money from the bank. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> loan from the bank. <i>Unsang bangkúha ang ímung gilúnan?</i> What bank did you get your loan from?

<p id=11729><form>-l-un</form> alternant for <ix>-unun</ix>, added to almost all the bases to which <ix>-unun</ix> is added, usually <pb n=643>with no difference in meaning from <ix>-unun</ix>. <i>Kalan-un,</i> Things to eat. <i>Palalítun,</i> Things to buy.

<p id=11730><form>lúna</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>canvas</tr>. <i>Ang tulda hinímù sa lúna,</i> The tent is made of canvas.

<p id=11731><form>lunà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vacant place</tr> or area; piece of land. <i>Dúna pay lunà sa yútà nga kabalayan,</i> There is still space on the land to build a house. <i>May lunà pa ba ku sa ímung kasingkásing?</i> Do I still have a place in your heart? <form>{hi-|hilunà}/{ha-|halunà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> happen to be in a position. <form>{hi-|hilúnà}/{ha-(&larr;)|halúnà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <number>1</number> be settled down to a place or position. <i>Dì ku mubalhin ug lingkuránan kay nahilúnà na ku diri,</i> I won&apos;t move to another seat because I am already settled here. <number>2</number> be at ease, not restless or nervous. <i>Wà siya mahilúnà nga nagpaábut sa nanganak níyang asáwa,</i> He couldn&apos;t sit still waiting for his wife to have her baby. <form>{pahi-|pahilúnà}/{paha-(&larr;)|pahalúnà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> put oneself or s.t. in proper or convenient position. <i>Mipahilúnà siyag lingkud únà musúgud ug káun,</i> He seated himself properly before he started to eat. <i>Ipahilúnag maáyu ang karga sa bisiklíta,</i> Put the load on the bicycle securely. <number>2</number> accommodate s.o. in a good position or job. <i>Ang manínuy níyang kunsihal mauy nagpahilúna níya sa sitihul,</i> Her godfather, who was a councilor, got her a job in City Hall.

<p id=11732><form>lúna dimiyil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>honeymoon</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> have a honeymoon.

<p id=11733><form>lunag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> for the results of bad behavior to come out. <i>Milunag na giyud ang kalaag ánang bayhána. Gipamabdúsan,</i> Now that woman&apos;s propensity for gadding about has borne fruit. She got herself pregnant.

<p id=11734><form>lúnang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>wallow</tr>. <i>Naglúnang ang gibunù sa kaugalíngung dugù,</i> The murder victim is wallowing in his own blood. <i>Ang gilunángan sa kábaw,</i> The place the carabao wallows. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> be in a bad state to an excessive degree. <i>Ang kalibútan nga naglúnang sa kasal-ánan,</i> The world that is wallowing in sin. <i>Ang katawhan nga naglúnang sa katimáwà,</i> People wallowing in poverty. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|luhangan}</form> <pos>n</pos> mud pool for the water buffalo to wallow in.

<p id=11735><form>lunas</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. smooth bamboo with a yellowish-green trunk: <bio>Bambusa vulgaris</bio>.

<p id=11736><form>lun-as</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> for plants or flowers to become withered, faded, or dried up. <i>Ang kaínit mauy nakalun-as (nakapalun-as) sa mga rúsas,</i> The hot sun caused the rose plants to wither and dry up. <i>Ilísi ang mga búlak nga nagkalun-as na,</i> Replace those flowers since they are withering and fading.

<p id=11737><form>lunaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> cook chopped sweet potatoes with water. <i>Maglunaw ku áring kamúti pára miryinda,</i> I&apos;ll boil chopped up sweet potatoes for my afternoon snack. <pos>n</pos> chopped, boiled sweet potatoes. <form>{-in-|linunaw}</form> <xr>= <sc>lunaw</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=11738><form>lunay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> for pain or illness to subside. <i>Mulunay ang suul sa tiyan ug tambálan,</i> The stomach ache will subside if you take medicine.

<p id=11739><form>lundag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b]</itype> sink to the bottom. <i>Manggáwas ta sa dì pa mulundag ang barku,</i> Let&apos;s go over the side before the boat sinks.

<p id=11740><form>Lundris<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>London</tr>.

<p id=11741><form>lundris<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>alundris<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=11742><form>lunduk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B345; b4]</itype> for the wind to stop blowing. <i>Human sa bagyu milunduk ang hángin,</i> The wind stopped blowing after the storm. <i>Gilundúkan mi sa hángin sa lawud,</i> We were becalmed in the middle of the sea.

<p id=11743><form>lunduk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB3(1)6; a2]</itype> for things usually soft and having length to fall, settle down gathering in a heap; cause them to do so. <i>Milunduk (nalunduk) sa salug ang kurtína pagkaputul sa higut,</i> The curtain fell down in a heap on the floor when the string snapped. <i>Siyay naglunduk sa mga bulingun sa suuk,</i> She heaped the dirty clothes in the corner. <pos>n</pos> k.o. affliction where part of the intestine settles down into the scrotum. <pos>a</pos> having a large scrotum due to such an affliction.

<p id=11744><form>lunga<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sesame seeds</tr> used for tidbit decorations or flavoring on sweets: <bio>Sesamium orientale</bio>.

<p id=11745><form>lunga<sub>2</sub>, lungà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2C23; b(1)]</itype> give up doing s.t. which one had been doing with great expenditure of effort. <i>Wà siya mulungag pangítà sa nawálang anak,</i> He didn&apos;t give up in his search for the lost child. <i>Ayaw siya lung-i (lunghi) ug sugs&umacracu;g hangtud muhílak,</i> Don&apos;t stop your relentless teasing until she cries. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> stop from bothering, subside. <i>Mulunga lang ang íyang húbak kun mutumar siyag tambal,</i> Her asthma attacks do not stop until she takes her medicine. <pos>a</pos> not persisting in one&apos;s work, working off and on. <form>{-an(&larr;)|lungáan}</form> <xr>= <sc>lungà</sc>, <i>a</i>.</xr>

<p id=11746><form>lúngab</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cave</tr>, <tr>pit</tr>, or any large hole in the ground. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; b]</itype> dig a cave or pit, become one.

<p id=11747><form>lúngag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> dig, <tr>bore a hole</tr>. <i>Maglúngag kug pára kumpus pit,</i> I will dig a hole for a compost pit. <i>Nalúngag ang atup nga nahulgan sa lubi,</i> The roof got a hole in it after a coconut fell through it. <i>Lungági ang láta sa litsi,</i> Punch a hole in the milk can. <form>{(&rarr;)|lungag}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>hole</tr>. <i>Lungag sa dágum,</i> Eye of a needle. <i>Lungag sa ilung,</i> Nostrils. <number>2</number> <tr>vagina</tr> (euphemism).

<pb n=644>

<p id=11748><form>lung-ag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> boil rice or any carbohydrate until the product is cooked and dry. <i>Lung-ága nang ságing hilaw pára pamáhaw,</i> Cook the green bananas for breakfast. <form>{-in-|linug-ag}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> staple being cooked. <i>Sigáig linung-ag,</i> Turn up the fire under the rice. <number>2</number> cereals or carbohydrates prepared by boiling, as opposed to any other way. <i>Linung-ag ságing palita ayaw nang minantikaan,</i> Buy the cooked bananas, not the fried ones.

<p id=11749><form>lungas</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> given to much playing and moving around. <number>2</number> for females to be lacking in modesty and proper restraint. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> move, play around vigorously. <i>Ayaw mu palábig lungas kay mangadagmà unyà mu,</i> Don&apos;t keep running about; you might stumble and fall. <i>Magkalungas giyud ang bátà samtang magtubù,</i> A child gets to be terribly active as it grows bigger. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> for females to become wanting in modesty and proper restraint. <i>Nalungas ílang anak kay nagpúnayg kuyugkúyug ánang hustis,</i> Their daughter started to be immodest in her behavior because of her association with that hostess.

<p id=11750><form>lungay</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>drooping</tr>, <tr>hanging loosely</tr>. <i>Ang puya lungay ug líug,</i> A very young baby can&apos;t hold its head up. <number>2</number> unable to stand or flex physically defective muscles, as if without bones. <i>Ang lungay nga bátà nagsígi lag higdà kay dì man makabángun,</i> A crippled child lies in bed all his life for he cannot get up. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B]</itype> <tr>droop</tr>, hang in a drooping way. <i>Nalungay na ang ákung úlu sa kakatulugun,</i> My head is drooping from sleepiness. <i>Nagkalungay na ang sanga nga nabug-atan sa búnga,</i> The branch is drooping down more and more because it is so laden with fruit. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> turn out to have the defect of <ix>lungay, a2</ix>.

<p id=11751><form>lungbuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> small tree with elliptic leathery leaves 6&ndash;12 cm., bearing clusters of juicy, oval fruit, dark purple, 1.5&ndash;2 cm. long: <bio>Syzygium cumini</bio>. <number>2</number> the blunt-nosed lead of small-arm bullets which resemble <ix>lungbuy</ix> fruits (slang). <form>{-in-|linungbuy}</form> having the color of <ix>lungbuy</ix>. <form>lápis {-in-|linungbuy}</form> <tr>indelible pencil</tr>. <form>{-un|lungbúyun}</form> <pos>a</pos> of the color of <ix>lungbuy</ix>.

<p id=11752><form>lungdistans</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>long-distance call</tr>. <number>2</number> long-distance passenger bus or trip. <i>Magsakit ákung likud ug byáhing lungdistans,</i> My back aches when I take long-distance trips. <number>3</number> long-distance shooting in basketball. <i>Maáyu siyang musiyát bísag lungdistans,</i> He is good even in long-distance shots. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> call by long-distance. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> make a long shot in basketball. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> masturbate (from the notion that one is getting sexual gratification thinking of s.o. not present). <i>Gilungdistans níya si Maríya nga nalígù,</i> He masturbated thinking of Maria taking a bath.

<p id=11753><form>lunggù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>decapitate</tr>. <i>Gilunggúan sa mga magahat ang misiyuníru,</i> The headhunters beheaded the missionary.

<p id=11754><form>lunggub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>grab</tr>, <tr>wrest</tr> s.t. away from s.o. <i>Ayawg lunggúba ning ritrátu kay nagtan-aw pa ku,</i> Don&apos;t grab the picture away because I am still looking at it.

<p id=11755><form>lunggung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> <tr>keep inside</tr>, <tr>imprison</tr>, <tr>lock up</tr>. <i>Daghang trabáhung milunggung nákù sa upisína,</i> Lots of work kept me imprisoned in the office. <i>Lunggúnga (ilunggung) ang mga bábuy sa álad,</i> Lock the pigs up in a pen. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> shake a container in the hand to shuffle things up. <i>Lunggúnga (ilunggung) únà sa kamut ang dáyis únà iitsa,</i> Shake the dice in your hand before you throw them. <number>3</number> <itype>[AC; b(1)]</itype> bet on dice thrown from a container. The one who bets on the number which comes out wins. <pos>n</pos> game of dice of this sort. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|lunggungan}</form> <pos>n</pos> the container in which the dice are shaken.

<p id=11756><form>lunggung<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> <tr>cheat</tr> to gain. <i>Gilunggung ku sa tindírang migámit ug gantangang way aríyus,</i> I was gypped by the vendor because she used uncertified measures. <i>Gilunggung ku nímu kay dì kung kamaung mupúkir,</i> You cheated me because I don&apos;t know how to play poker.

<p id=11757><form>lúngì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wrench s.t. off to detach it. <i>Kinsay galúngì sa buktun sa munyíka?</i> Who wrenched the arm off the doll? <i>Lungía nang usa ka dawin ságing,</i> Get me a banana from the bunch.

<p id=11758><form>lúngib</form> <pos>n</pos> cave. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> form a cave or hole in the side of a slope. <i>Nalúngib ang kílid sa bungtud nga gikwári,</i> The side of the mountain that was quarried formed a cave.

<p id=11759><form>lúngis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>wrench off</tr>, twist s.t. off its attachment. <i>Mulúngis kug usa ka dawin sa ímung ságing,</i> I&apos;ll take a banana from your bunch.

<p id=11760><form>lungkab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> break s.t. open by prying so as to get into it. <i>Kawatan ang naglungkab sa ámung baul,</i> A robber broke our trunk open. <i>Lungkába ang kandádug way yáwi,</i> Pry the lock open if there is no key.

<p id=11761><form>lungkaub</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>thumping sound</tr>. <i>Ang lungkaub sa mga túnub,</i> The thumping sound of footfalls. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> make a thumping sound. <i>Naglungkaub ang mga balud nga mihasmag sa mga batu,</i> The waves beat against the stone with a thudding sound. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> throb vigorously in the depths of one&apos;s feelings. <i>Ang kayugut nga naglungkaub sa íyang dughan,</i> Anger that is raging in his heart. <form>{-in-|linungkab}, {-in-(&larr;)|linúngkab}</form> <pos>n</pos> heavy sound of thumping.

<pb n=645>

<p id=11762><form>lungkì</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>limping</tr>, partially disabled in the leg, usually permanently. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; c1]</itype> walk with a limp. <i>Naáyu túud siya sa pulyu apan nalungkì giyud intáwun,</i> He recovered from his polio, but now he walks with a limp.

<p id=11763><form>lunglayin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>longline fishing</tr>.

<p id=11764><form>lungnik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fifth of liquor</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B256]</itype> be a fifth full. <i>Hápit mulungnik (malungnik) ang písu nga idibul nga íyang gipalit,</i> He bought a peso&apos;s worth of cooking oil which nearly filled a fifth. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> make it a fifth of liquor. <i>Lungnikun (ilungnik) na lang kay daghan man tang manginum,</i> Let us buy a fifth because a lot of us are going to drink.

<p id=11765><form>lungnus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>long-nosed pliers</tr>.

<p id=11766><form>lungpli</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>long-playing record</tr>. <number>2</number> lengthy monologue in a conversation. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> record s.t. on a long-playing record. <i>Lungplihun (ilungpli) ug diritsu ang ímung únang pláka,</i> Make your first recording a long-playing record.

<p id=11767><form>lungslib</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>long-sleeved shirt</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> wear, make into a long-sleeved shirt.

<p id=11768><form>lungsud</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>town</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>citizenry</tr>. <i>Tunug na sa tibuuk lungsud nga gipaangkan siya,</i> It has been bruited about town that she has had a child out of marriage. <form>háring {&mdash;|lungsud}</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>electorate</tr>, sovereign people. <form>kalungsúran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>towns</tr>. <form>lungsuránun</form> <pos>n</pos> local citizen. <form>{katagi-|katagilungsud}</form> <pos>n</pos> one from the same town. <form>{-nun|lungsudnun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> pertaining to s.t. civic. <i>Katungdánang lungsudnun sa matag lungsuránun,</i> Civic duty of each citizen. <number>2</number> pertaining to the town or municipality. <i>Mamahanding lungsudnun,</i> Municipal treasurer. <form>{maki-|makilungsud}, {maki-nun|makilungsudnun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>civic-minded</tr>.

<p id=11769><form>lungtad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>last</tr> for a period of time. <i>Makalungtad ug dúgay ang isdà ug aysan,</i> Fish will last long if you put them on ice. <i>Wà lungtári ug tris díyas ang ákung puása,</i> My fast didn&apos;t last for three days. <number>2</number> stay with, at s.t. for a long time. <i>Dì mu lungtáran ug míd ánang inyung taras,</i> No maid will stay long with you, the way you act. <form>{pa-|palungtad}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make, cause to last. <i>Ayaw palungtára (ipalungtad) ug dúgay inyung dúmut,</i> Don&apos;t allow your desire for vengeance to last long. <form>malungtárun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>durable</tr>.

<p id=11770><form>lung tíbul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wedding</tr>, with reference to the banquet (colloquial). <i>Anus-a man ang lung tíbul?</i> When are you getting hitched? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> get married.

<p id=11771><form>lungùlungù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; c1]</itype> for one&apos;s head to sway or shake uncontrollably as when drunk or in old age. <i>Naglungùlungù na siya sa katigúlang,</i> His head tremors due to old age.

<p id=11772><form>lungun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>coffin</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> bury in a coffin, as opposed to other modes of burial.

<p id=11773><form>lungutlungut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456; b3]</itype> be <tr>restless</tr>, moving about and talking in anger, exasperation, impatience to do s.t. <i>Naglungutlungut siyang makaapil sa banggà,</i> He was restless in his impatience to take part in the contest. <i>Ang gisibat níyang alkansíya mauy íyang gilungutlungutan,</i> She rushed about in anger on account of her piggy bank which got stolen.

<p id=11774><form>lunhat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a2b3]</itype> have a <tr>relapse</tr>, most often said of sprains or fractures or illness thought to be derived from them. <i>Nalunhat íyang piang kay nagpúnay siyag lungas,</i> His sprain came back because he kept moving around.

<p id=11775><form>lunhaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for growing things, not fruit, to be green. <i>Lunhaw nga sibsibánan,</i> Green pastures. <number>2</number> <tr>recent</tr>, <tr>young</tr>. <i>Sa lunhawng kinabúhì sa kabatan-un wà pa níya masinátì ang kapakyásan,</i> He was a callow youth, and had never experienced failure. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> for growing things to be green and fresh. <i>Mulunhaw (malunhaw) ug bálik ang sagbut inig-abut sa ting-ulan,</i> The grass will become green again when the rains return. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> bring back s.t. to make it recent, young again. <i>Tam-is lunháwun ang malipáyun tang kabatan-un,</i> It&apos;s nice to reminisce on our happy childhood.

<p id=11776><form>Lúnis<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Monday</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>birnis</sc>.</xr> <form>{pa-(&rarr;)|palunis}</form> <pos>n</pos> work bee done on a Monday. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> hold a work bee on a Monday. <i>Palunisi lang nang pagtúkud sa taytáyan,</i> Have the bridge built by a Monday work bee.

<p id=11777><form>lúnis<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>odd number</tr>.

<p id=11778><form>lúnit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> <tr>tweak the ears</tr>. <i>Hinglunitan si Marta sa maistra kay nagtábì,</i> The teacher tweaked Martha&apos;s ears because she was talking. <pos>n</pos> action of tweaking.

<p id=11779><form>lunlun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>all of one kind</tr>, no mixture. <i>Ang kinabúhì dì lunlun kalípay,</i> Life is not all happiness. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; c16]</itype> have all in one kind, no mixture. <i>Sagúlig pinágud mais ang tablíya, ayawg ilunlun (lunlúna) nga kakaw,</i> Mix some roasted corn in the chocolate tablet, don&apos;t make it pure cacao. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12C; b]</itype> be all together in a place. <i>Dì ta makalunlun ug lingkud sa píkas lingkuránan kay kúlag hángin ang ligid,</i> We can&apos;t all stay on one side because the tire lacks air. <i>Dì ta maglunlun dinhis píkas kay malúnud unyà ta,</i> Let&apos;s not huddle on one side of the boat because it might capsize.

<p id=11780><form>lunsay</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pure</tr>, <tr>unadulterated</tr>. <i>Lunsay nga gátas sa báka,</i> Pure cow&apos;s milk. <i>Lunsayng kaputlì nga wà pa kamansáhi sa kasinatían,</i> Unadulterated innocence that has not been <pb n=646>polluted by experience. <number>2</number> simple, peaceful in way or outlook. <i>Lunsay kaáyu ang kinabúhing banikanhun,</i> Farm life is very simple and peaceful. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; c1]</itype> be simple or peaceful in ways or outlook. <i>Ang maglunsay sa kinahanglan dílì magápus sa útang,</i> One who is simple with his needs won&apos;t get himself engulfed in debt. <i>Malunsay ang átung pamuyù ug mubíyà ka sa súgal,</i> Our life would get peaceful once you stop your gambling.

<p id=11781><form>lunsing</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. very small, yellow banana, particularly delicious and sweet, but not commercially grown.

<p id=11782><form>lunsud</form> <xr>= <sc>lungsud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11783><form>luntad</form> <xr>= <sc>lungtad</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11784><form>luntalunta</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> leap up and down in joy or to get free. <i>Miluntalunta ang kabáyù sa pagkakità sa bayi,</i> The horse struggled to get free when it saw the mare. <i>Mahugnù ang lantay ug inyung luntaluntáhan,</i> The bamboo bed will collapse if you jump up and down on it.

<p id=11785><form>luntud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> for two things of about the same size to lie atop one another, cause them to do so. <i>Dì ka makaluntud ug libru sa Bibliya,</i> You can&apos;t put a book on top of the Bible. <i>Nagluntud silag higdà sa gip-ut kaáyung bangkù,</i> They lay on top of one another on the narrow bench. <i>Luntúra nang duha ka malíta,</i> Put those two suitcases on top of one another. <form>luntudluntud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC23; c1]</itype> <tr>pile up</tr>, be <tr>piled up</tr>. <i>Nagluntudluntud ang mga sáku sa bugas,</i> Sacks of rice are piled up.

<p id=11786><form>lunu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3N; b6]</itype> for an animal to shed its skin or shell. <i>Dinhay naglunu nga hálas dinhi kay dúnay lunu nga gibyáan,</i> A snake must have shed its skin here because there&apos;s an empty snakeskin left behind. <pos>n</pos> skin or shell shed. <form>linunhan</form> <xr>= <sc>lunu</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=11787><form>lun-ub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2; a12]</itype> for s.t. to get a big depression in it, cause it to do so. <i>Kinsay galun-ub sa palanggána? Gilingkúran tingáli,</i> Who made a big dent in the basin? S.o. must have sat on it. <i>Húmuk malun-ub ang hubun sa bátà,</i> A child&apos;s fontanel easily gets sunken. <pos>n</pos> rather large depression.

<p id=11788><form>lúnud<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>sink s.t.</tr> <i>Ang maldítu mauy naglúnud sa sakayan nákung papil,</i> The meany sunk my paper boat. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> <formx>{&mdash;|lúnud} ang puhúnan</formx> for capital to get used up. <i>Magkalunud ang puhúnan sa nigusyung way maáyung kwintáda,</i> Business without proper accounting gradually exhausts capital. <form>{&mdash;|lúnud} ang buwan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>new moon</tr>. <i>Hunas run kaáyu kay lúnud ang buwan,</i> We have an extra low tide today; it&apos;s new moon. <form>{(&rarr;)|lunud}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; b4]</itype> for an illness to settle. It is believed that an illness to get better must come out in hives, rash, or the like, and if it does not do so, it settles, thus becoming worse. <i>Namatay siya kay nalunud (milunud) iyang dáp,</i> He died because his measles didn&apos;t come out. <i>Nabákul siya dihang nalunuran sa íyang buti,</i> He became a cripple after his smallpox sank. <pos>a</pos> causing illnesses to sink. <i>Makamatay nang lunud nga hilánat,</i> A fever that sinks can cause death. <form>udtung {&mdash;|lunud} ang búwan</form> half moon of the third quarter.

<p id=11789><form>lúnud<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put s.t. together with s.t. else which is being processed. <i>Lundi nag bugas ang túbig,</i> Put some rice into the water now. <i>Ilúnud lag ímung bulingun sa ámù nga náa sa wásing masin,</i> Just put your dirty laundry together with ours that&apos;s already in the washing machine. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> put in money, etc. to a pool. <i>Ilúnud ring ákung bayinti sa ímung pusta,</i> Here&apos;s my twenty pesos to put into your betting pool. <form>{&mdash;|lúnud} palit</form> <pos>n</pos> in cockfighting, a purchase of the cock where the owner is not paid, but the value of the cock is made part of the bet. The purchaser then proceeds to fight the cock. If the cock wins, the owner is paid double the purchase price and the purchaser keeps the cock. If the cock loses the owner is given nothing (since his purchase price was his bet). <form>{&mdash;|lúnud} pátay</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>die-hard</tr>, <tr>inveterate</tr>. <i>Lúnud pátay (lunud pátay) nga Libiral,</i> A die-hard Liberal. <form>{-in-|linúnud}</form> <pos>n</pos> way of cooking <ix>adúbu</ix> such that the meat is boiled first and then after it is boiled it is put into the bubbling fat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make <ix>adúbu</ix> in this style.

<p id=11790><form>lunuglunug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146]</itype> for the fat of meat, jelly, or the like to be soft, flabby, and quivering. <i>Naglunuglunug sa katambuk ang unud,</i> The meat is soft and shaking like jelly because it&apos;s all fat.

<p id=11791><form>lúnuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> brown, granular residue which remains after the oil has been cooked from the coconut. <number>2</number> an old man who has lost his virility (humorous). <i>Mamána ka ánang lagas nga wà nay lána, lúnuk na lang,</i> Are you going to marry that very old man, when he doesn&apos;t have any oil (sperm) left? He&apos;s all dried up. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2B12]</itype> form granules like <ix>lúnuk</ix>. <i>Sigíhi ug ukay ug mulúnuk na ang tunù,</i> Keep stirring when granules form in the coconut juice. <i>Nalúnuk ang sabun nga íyang gilútù kay sayup ang timpla,</i> The soap he cooked formed granules because he had the wrong mixture.

<p id=11792><form>lúnup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B456; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>flood</tr>. <i>Pirmi lang maglúnup sa Butwan kay gipamúril ang kakahuyan,</i> There are always floods in Butuan because the mountains have been deforested. <pb n=647><number>2</number> for an emotion to flood over one. <i>Gilunúpan siya sa túmang kalípay,</i> He was overwhelmed with immense joy. <pos>n</pos> <tr>flood</tr>. <i>Ang dakung lúnup sa tyimpu ni Nuwi,</i> The great flood in Noah&apos;s time.

<p id=11793><form>lúnus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; a12]</itype> for fruits, vegetables, root crops to soften; cause them to do so. <i>Mulúnus (malúnus) ang tawung nga dílì lutúun dáyun,</i> Eggplants will soften and wither if you don&apos;t cook them right away. <i>Maglúnus kug ságing nga isugba,</i> I&apos;ll soften bananas for broiling. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> get burned, heavily tanned from the sun. <i>Ang kaínit sa adlaw mauy nakalúnus (nakapalúnus) sa pánit sa mag-uúma,</i> The heat of the sun scorched the farmer&apos;s back. <number>3</number> <itype>[B16; b4]</itype> be <tr>starved</tr>, extremely <tr>hungry</tr> (as if withered). <i>À, lunúsan man sad ta sa gútum ug pinaábut nímu,</i> I&apos;m famished waiting for you. <pos>n</pos> <tr>starvation</tr>. <form>{(&rarr;)|lúnus}</form> <pos>a</pos> for fruits to be soft and withered. <i>Ságing nga lunus,</i> Softly cooked bananas.

<p id=11794><form>lun-us</form> <xr>= <sc>lusnù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11795><form>lun-ut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; ac]</itype> share a small space ordinarily occupied by one or two people. <i>Makiglun-ut siya nákug higdà kay tugnaw kunu,</i> She wants me to sleep in her bed because she says it&apos;s cold. <i>Lun-úta lag mga bátà sa baksit,</i> Just put the children together in the backseat.

<p id=11796><form>lunuy</form> <pos>a</pos> thoroughly soft and tender to touch. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a]</itype> become, make very soft and tender. <i>Nalunuy ang hinug ságing nga giban-ug,</i> The ripe banana got very soft and tender because it got bruised. <form>{(&larr;)|lúnuy}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN]</itype> become weak to the point of near collapse. <i>Mulúnuy (manglúnuy) ku basta gutmun,</i> I become weak when I&apos;m hungry. <i>Nalúnuy dáyun ku pagkahibalu sa íyang kamatáyun,</i> I felt weak all over when I learned of his death.

<p id=11797><form>lupa, lupà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be somewhat depressed below the surrounding land. <i>Giabunúhan níya ang mga dapit sa yútà nga naglupà,</i> He filled up all the places in his land which were depressed. <pos>n</pos> land that is below the level of the surrounding land. <i>Kanúnay bahaan ang íyang baul kay lupà man,</i> His farm is always flooded because it is located in a depression.

<p id=11798><form>lúpà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for one that is misbehaving to do it all the more. <i>Human siya tambági sa pagsúgal, milúpà hinúun,</i> After being cautioned about his gambling, he indulged in it all the more. <i>Ayawg labáni nang batáa arun dì mulúpà,</i> Don&apos;t take that child&apos;s part or he&apos;ll misbehave all the more. <form>{&mdash;|lúpà} ang atay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B246]</itype> swell with pride. <i>Milúpà íyang atay pag-ingun nákung gwápu siya,</i> He swelled with pride when I told him he was handsome.

<p id=11799><form>lupad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>fly</tr>, take a plane, be sent flying. <i>Lupdun lang sa ubang langgam ang láing kuntininti,</i> Some birds fly from one continent to another. <i>Pugngi ímung kálù kay tingálig ilupad sa hángin,</i> Hold on to your hat or the wind will blow it away. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2456]</itype> pass swiftly by. <i>Túling milupad ang mga túig,</i> The years passed swiftly by. <number>3</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> fly into a rage. <i>Hingluparan kus maistra kay nayabu ang tintà,</i> The teacher lost her temper at me because I spilled the ink. <number>4</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>travel</tr>, go s.w. (humorous, mildly derogatory). <i>Mau pa gánì pag-abut milupad sad dáyun,</i> He just arrived then he immediately went away again. <pos>n</pos> act of <tr>flying</tr>. <i>Kusug ang lupad sa dyit,</i> The jet flies fast. <form>{kúyug|kúyug sa lupad}, uban sa {&mdash;|lupad}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> keep up with the latest fad, with the in thing. <i>Dì siya magpaiwit. Muuban giyud sa lupad (panlúpad) sa mga dátù,</i> She does not want to be left behind. She keeps up with the rich. <form>mubù ug {&mdash;|lupad}</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>mubù</sc>.</xr> <form>{(&larr;)|lúpad}</form> <pos>n</pos> expanse of one&apos;s travel. <i>Taas nag lúpad nang tawhána. Nakaabut nas Lundun,</i> That man is widely travelled. He has gone to London. <form>taas ug {&mdash;|lupad}, {(&larr;)|taas ug lúpad}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> always be out of one&apos;s home and be at places where he is not supposed to be. <i>Taas ug lúpad (lupad) bayhána. Ásang bayli túa,</i> This woman goes out too much. Wherever there&apos;s dance, she is bound to be there. <number>2</number> travelling a lot. <i>Dì ba didtu kas Dábaw, nía na man sab lagi ka sa Manílà. Taása pud nímug lupad uy,</i> You were in Davao, weren&apos;t you, and now here you are in Manila. You sure do travel. <form>{pa&N;-|panglupad}</form> <pos>n</pos> act of flying (plural). &dagger;

<p id=11800><form>lup-ad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> <tr>spit saliva</tr>. <i>Kinsa ninyuy naglup-ad diri sa panghugasan?</i> Which one of you spat in the sink? <i>Gilup-aran ku níya,</i> He spat on me. <form>{pa&N;-|panglup-ad}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> keep spitting. <form>lup-aránan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>spittoon</tr>.

<p id=11801><form>lupak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> poke or pound repeatedly with the end of a stick. <i>Naglupak ku sa túbu nga nasampungan,</i> I&apos;m shoving a stick into the pipe that was stopped up. <i>Lupakun ku kanang ilagà nga náa sa sulud,</i> I&apos;ll shove a stick into the hole to flush the rat out. <number>2</number> pound to mash or pulverize s.t. <i>Milupak siya sa humay,</i> He pounded the rice. <i>Maglupak tag ságing,</i> We will mash bananas. <number>3</number> make <ix>lupak</ix>. <pos>n</pos> a k.o. sweet made out of pounded, cooked, unripe bananas, mixed with half-matured coconut, shredded, and sugared. <form>{ni-|nilupak}, {-in-|linupak}</form> <xr>= <sc>lupak</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11802><form>lupak<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the young of the rudderfish (<ix>damagan</ix>, <ix>1</ix>).

<p id=11803><form>lupasì</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>pallid</tr> in complexion. <i>Ang bátang bitúkun <pb n=648>lupasì ug pamánit,</i> A child infested with parasitic worms tends to have a pallid complexion. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> for the complexion to become pale.

<p id=11804><form>lupì</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> turned down corner of a page. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>alupì</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> turn down a corner of the leaf of a book. <i>Gilupian níya ang tumuy sa pahina nga íyang giundángan,</i> She turned down the corner of the page where she stopped.

<p id=11805><form>lúpig</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>inferior</tr>, <tr>outclassed</tr>. <i>Lúpig ku siyag ínum,</i> He is no match for me when it comes to drinking. <i>Lúpig pa nímuy buguy,</i> You&apos;re worse than a hoodlum. <form>walay {&mdash;|lúpig}</form> nothing is better than (lit. outclassed by). <i>Way lúpig sa mag-amping,</i> There&apos;s nothing better than being careful. <i>Lúpig pa níyay galingan mukáun,</i> He can consume more than a mill. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23S; a2b2]</itype> <tr>overpower</tr>, <tr>outclass</tr>. <i>Way makalupig sa íyang katabian,</i> Nobody can outdo her in talkativeness. <i>Mubangka ku ug lupígun ku nímug bú,</i> I will treat you if you beat me in arm wrestling. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b(1)]</itype> <tr>exploit</tr>, take advantage over s.o. by cheating. <i>Kusug siyang mulúpig (manlúpig) sa uban salig kay abugádu siya,</i> Basing himself on his ability as a lawyer, he takes advantage of people. <form>{ma-un|malupígun}</form> <pos>a</pos> exploiting in a cruel way. <i>Malupígun ang mga Katsílà kaniadtu,</i> The Spaniards were oppressive in former times. <form>{pa&N;-|panglúpig}</form> <pos>n</pos> taking advantage of s.o. and cheating him out of s.t.

<p id=11806><form>lúpir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sport jacket</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear a sport jacket.

<p id=11807><form>lúpis</form> <pos>n</pos> dried strips of abaca trunk or certain varieties of bananas which have not been processed into fibers, used for tying and other similar purposes.

<p id=11808><form>lup-it</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> press s.t. tight between two surfaces. <i>Naglup-it ug mga dáhung layà ang libru,</i> The book has some dead leaves pressed inside it. <form>{pa-|palup-it}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put s.t. in between two flat surfaces so as to press it. <i>Pusturáwu siyang tan-áwun ug magpalup-it sa púlu,</i> He looks good when he tucks his shirt in.

<p id=11809><form>lupnis</form> <xr>= <sc>lúpis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11810><form>lupù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small blackish fish with lightly toxic dorsal spines, often found on the bottom in fresh or brackish waters: <bio>Gymnapistes niger</bio>.

<p id=11811><form>lupù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>shut off</tr>, <tr>block</tr> a passage or flow. <i>Gúmun sa buhuk ang nakalupù (nakapalupù) sa labábu,</i> The wash basin was stopped up by some hair. <i>Ílang gilup-an (gilupuan) ang agiánan arun pagbanhig sa ílang mga kaáway,</i> They blocked the way so that they could ambush their enemy. <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to block the flow or passage.

<p id=11812><form>lúpug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for the eyes to be smarting. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A123P; b4]</itype> for the eyes to sting. <i>Bùbúig túbig ang bátà kay gilupúgan,</i> Pour water on the child because his eyes are stinging. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for tears to fill the eyes and blur the vision. <i>Nalúpug ang íyang mga mata sa lúhà,</i> Tears filled her eyes.

<p id=11813><form>lúpug<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> chase, run after s.t. that is running. <i>Mulúpug nang irúag mudágan ka,</i> That dog will chase you if you run. <i>Lupúgun ta ka run ug dílì ka muari,</i> I will run after you if you don&apos;t come here. <i>Hinglupugan siya kay nangáwat ug mangga,</i> He got himself chased because he stole some mangoes.

<p id=11814><form>lup-ug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; b6]</itype> slump down to one&apos;s feet. <i>Nadismáyu siya ug nalup-ug (milup-ug) sa yútà,</i> She fainted and slumped to the ground. <i>Dihà ra hibuntagi ang hubug sa íyang gilup-úgan,</i> Morning found the drunk lying where he had fallen.

<p id=11815><form>lúpuk</form> <pos>n</pos> young <tr>locust</tr>.

<p id=11816><form>lúpus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> for a person to be <tr>drenched</tr>. <i>Nalúpus siya sa singut,</i> He was drenched in sweat. <i>Diyútay rang túbig ikalígù. Dì gánì makalúpus,</i> This isn&apos;t enough water to bathe with. It won&apos;t even get me wet.

<p id=11817><form>lúpus<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>bully</tr>. <i>Lupúsun lang mi nímu kay dakù man ka,</i> You bully us because you are bigger than us.

<p id=11818><form>luput</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B23(1); b4]</itype> <number>1</number> leave a mark on or injure the skin after winding, tying, etc. s.t. tightly on it. <i>Miluput ang písì sa tiil sa bábuy,</i> The rope was tied so tight around the pig&apos;s foot it left a mark. <number>2</number> leave a crease on a cloth upon folding or pressing. <i>Muluput (maluput) ang íyang inutawan,</i> She irons creases into the clothes. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> mark left on the skin after tying s.t. tightly around it. <number>2</number> crease, fold on a cloth.

<p id=11819><form>lup-ut<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>luput</sc>, <i>n1, v1.</i></xr>

<p id=11820><form>lup-ut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; cP]</itype> <tr>tuck s.t. in</tr> or under. <i>Ilup-ut (ipalup-ut) ang ímung púlu,</i> Tuck your shirt in.

<p id=11821><form>lup-ut<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C1; b6]</itype> share a space for sitting or sleeping with s.o. <i>Dì ta makalup-ut sa tihíras,</i> We can&apos;t sleep together on one small cot. <i>Naglup-ut ming duhag lingkud sa usa ka síya,</i> We sat together in one chair.

<p id=11822><form>lupuy</form> <pos>n</pos> the fry of <ix>andúhaw</ix>.

<p id=11823><form>lupyak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> get, make a <tr>dent</tr> in s.t. <i>Lupyákig gamay ang táru ágig timáan,</i> Put a small dent into the kerosene can to mark it. <number>2</number> for earth to sink, cause it to do so. <i>Ang yútang giabúnu sa bangag mulupyak ug ulanun,</i> The earth that was filled into the hole will collapse when it rains. <pos>a</pos> <tr>sunken</tr>, <tr>dented</tr>. <pb n=649><i>Lupyak ug áping ang níwang,</i> A thin person has sunken cheeks.

<p id=11824><form>*lupyù</form> (from <ix>puyù</ix>) <form>{-um-r-|lumulupyù}, {mu-|mulupyù}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>inhabitant</tr>, <tr>resident</tr> of a locality. <i>Ang kasagáran sa mga lumulupyù (mulupyù) dinhi mangingisdà,</i> Most of the inhabitants here are fishermen.

<p id=11825><form>lurang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B24]</itype> <number>1</number> for a storm or some other natural force to <tr>abate</tr>. <i>Milurang na ang bagyu,</i> The typhoon has let up. <number>2</number> for problems, anger, etc. to abate. <i>Wà giyuy paági nga makapalurang (makalurang) sa kagúbut sa midul-ist,</i> There seems to be no solution to the trouble in the Middle East.

<p id=11826><form>lúrat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; c1P]</itype> <number>1</number> open the eyes wide. <i>Papyúnga ang mata sa minatay kay naglurat,</i> Close the dead man&apos;s eyes because they are wide open. <i>Dì kang kakità? Luráta (ilúrat, paluráta, ipalúrat) ímung mata,</i> You can&apos;t see? Open your eyes wide. <number>2</number> <tr>glower</tr> at s.o. to show angry disapproval. <i>Gilurátan sa maistru ang mga istudiyanting nagtábì,</i> The teacher glowered at the students who were talking. <pos>n</pos> act of <tr>glowering</tr>. <i>Sa usa lang ka lúrat ni Tátay hílum ming tanan,</i> Father can silence us with just one look. <form>{hi-|hilúrat}/{ha-|halúrat}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> have one&apos;s eyes pop wide open. <i>Nahalúrat siya sa kahibúlung,</i> Her eyes opened wide in surprise.

<p id=11827><form>lúray<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)6]</itype> for a top to wobble as it spins to a stop. <pos>n</pos> wobbling of a top as it spins to a stop.

<p id=11828><form>lúray<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; c1P]</itype> for the voice to be affectionate with a slurring intonation. <i>Mulúray na gánì íyang tíngug dúna siyay ihangyù nímu,</i> When her voice gets sweet, she has a request to make. <pos>a</pos> affectionate with a slurring intonation. <form>{pina-|pinalúray}</form> <pos>a</pos> with an affectionate, slurring intonation. <i>Pinalúray ang íyang tíngug nga mihanggat nákù sa pagpangatúlug,</i> With an affectionate voice, she asked me to come to bed.

<p id=11829><form>lúrir</form> <xr>= <sc>rúlir</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11830><form>luru</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2N]</itype> for hair to fall out. <i>Mangluru (muluru) ang buhuk basta kaspahun,</i> If you have dandruff your hair will fall out. <form>{pa&N;-|pangluru}</form> <pos>n</pos> falling hair.

<p id=11831><form>lúrù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B6]</itype> be <tr>drooping</tr>. <i>Milúrù ang sangang namungíngi sa mga búnga,</i> The branch was drooping, it was so laden with fruits. <i>Nalúrù ang babáying gikuyapan sa simbahan,</i> The lady fainted in church and sat there limp. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> <tr>become dizzy</tr>. <i>Nalúrù ku sa bangkà kay bawud,</i> I felt seasick in the boat because of the rough seas. <i>Tyubíbu ang nakalúrù (nakapalúrù) níya,</i> The merry-go-round made her dizzy.

<p id=11832><form>lúrung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b3(1)]</itype> get dizzy from motion or from being poisoned or nauseated. <i>Nalúrung ku humag tuyuktúyuk nákù,</i> I got dizzy after I turned myself round and round. <i>Ísug nga sigarilyu nga ákung nalurúngan,</i> The strong cigarettes made me dizzy.

<p id=11833><form>lús</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> lower the sail of a boat. <i>Lúsun (ilús) ang láyag ug línaw ang dágat,</i> The sail is lowered when the sea is calm.

<p id=11834><form>lusa, lusà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> stare unseeingly into space, usually due to lack of interest, comprehension. <i>Unsay ímung gihunàhúnà nga naglusa na man lang nang ímung mata?</i> What are you thinking about? You&apos;re just staring blankly into space.

<p id=11835><form>lúsa</form> <pos>n</pos> plate made of metal coated with enamel. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> eat from metal plates.

<p id=11836><form>lusà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>nit</tr>, the egg of a louse. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infested with nits. <form>{pa&N;-|panglusà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> for lice to lay eggs. <form>{-un|lusáun}</form> <pos>a</pos> full of nits. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be, become full of nits.

<p id=11837><form>lúsad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> go, bring <tr>down</tr>, <tr>descend</tr>, <tr>dismount</tr>. <i>Lugar bay. Anhi lang ku lúsad,</i> Stop, Driver. I&apos;m going to get off here. <i>Milúsad siya sa hagdanan,</i> He went down the stairs. <i>Patábang ug lúsad sa pyánu ngadtu sa sílung,</i> Let some people help you bring the piano down. <i>Lusára ang búla sa sílung,</i> Go down and get the ball. <i>Ang walang tiil mauy ilúsad pag-úna,</i> Descend with the left foot first. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A2; a1c]</itype> go, bring to the sea to fish, bathe. <i>Mag-íhaw mig bábuy ug maglúsad mig panágat,</i> We slaughter a pig when we bring our fishing nets to the sea for the first time. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> launch one&apos;s or s.o.&apos;s political candidacy. <i>Kadaghan na siya makalúsad, karun pa giyud kadaug,</i> He ran so many times, but this is the first time he won. <form>lusaránan</form> <pos>n</pos> place one descends onto or over.

<p id=11838><form>lusak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> pound s.t. by hitting it with the blunt end of a stick or with bombs. <i>Kusga paglusak ang halu nga náa sa lungag,</i> Poke the monitor lizard that is in the hole hard with the end of the stick. <i>Lusaka ang inad-ad nga báni pára sa bábuy,</i> Pound the sliced banana stem with a pestle for the pig. <i>Gilusak ang Hanuy sa mga bumba,</i> Hanoi was pounded with bombs. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make <ix>linusak</ix>. <form>{ni-|nilusak}, {-in-|linusak}</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. delicacy made of pounded cooked banana mixed with shredded coconut meat and sugar.

<p id=11839><form>lusay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>swollen lymph node</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; b4]</itype> have a swelling in the lymph nodes. <i>Milusay (gilusayan) ang íyang búgan,</i> She had a swollen lymph node in the groin. <form>lusaylusay</form> <pos>n</pos> small swollen lymph nodes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4; b(1)]</itype> have a small swelling in the lymph nodes.

<p id=11840><form>lúsay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>seaweed</tr>. <form>sáma sa {&mdash;|lúsay}</form> not firm in one&apos;s <pb n=650>convictions (drifting like seaweeds). <form>{ka-an|kalusayan}</form> <pos>n</pos> place where seaweeds abound.

<p id=11841><form>lusbà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB2; a12]</itype> for s.t. with an area to <tr>collapse</tr> or <tr>cave in</tr>. <i>Bumba ang naglusbà (nagpalusbà) sa atup sa simbahan,</i> The bomb caused the roof of the church to collapse. <i>Mulusbà (malusbà) ning salúga kun tungtúngan ug bayinti ka táwu,</i> This floor will collapse if twenty persons stand on it. <i>Lusbáa ang tayaung lubut sa baril,</i> Knock out the rusty bottom of the barrel. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> press s.t. rounded or bulging to level it off or flatten it. <i>Dì ka makalusbà sa búla sa baskitbul kun dì kuháan ug hángin,</i> You cannot flatten a basketball if you do not let the air out.

<p id=11842><form>lusbak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> for a horizontal surface to give way or yield to pressure above it. <i>Mulusbak (malusbak) ang taklub sa kaban ug tungtúngan ug bug-at,</i> The trunk lid will get a dent if s.t. heavy is put on top of it. <pos>n</pos> shallow depression, dent. <i>Daghang lusbak sa karsáda kay dílì pinisun,</i> The road has lots of holes because it has not been rolled.

<p id=11843><form>lusbak<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> cook very small fish in vinegar and garlic. <form>{-unun|lusbakunun}</form> <pos>n</pos> very small fish to be cooked in such a manner. <form>{ni-|nilusbak}, {-in-|linusbak}</form> <pos>n</pos> dish of small fish cooked in vinegar.

<p id=11844><form>lusbù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>sink</tr>, <tr>sag</tr>, get a <tr>dent</tr> on the top or simply give way. <i>Ayawg lingkúri ang táru kay malusbù,</i> Don&apos;t sit on the can because it will get a dent in it. <i>Nalusbù ang tánil,</i> The tunnel caved in. <i>Ang kabug-at sa sulud mauy nakalusbù (nakapalusbù) sa bulsíta,</i> The heavy contents caused the bottom of the paper bag to give way. <number>2</number> for a person to slump or the bones that hold him to get dislocated. <i>Nalusbù ákung háwak,</i> I got a dislocated hip.

<p id=11845><form>lusbug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB; c]</itype> immerse oneself in s.t. <i>Milusbug siya sa túbig ug milanguy,</i> She immersed herself in the water and swam. <i>Ang lambay maglusbug sa balas,</i> A sea crab buries itself in the sand.

<p id=11846><form>lusgus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> rub s.t. rough vigorously against s.t. to clean it. <i>Akuy naglusgus sa kasíli arun pagkúhà sa danglug,</i> I rubbed the eel vigorously to get the slime off. <i>Lusgúsa ug maáyu ang takuling sa kaldíru,</i> Scrub the soot off the kettle.

<p id=11847><form>lúsì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> tweak or pinch with a twisting motion. <i>Milúsì kug usa ka dawin sa sipì nga ságing,</i> I twisted off a banana from the bunch. <i>Kagáhì mu karug úlu, lusíun ta giyud ka,</i> How hard-headed you are. I&apos;m going to tweak your ears. <form>{(&rarr;)|lusì}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> work on an itchy foreskin by pinching, twisting and turning it inside out. <i>Ang mga bátang pisut maglusì kay katlan man,</i> Uncircumcised boys rub their foreskin because it itches. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>lùlù</sc></xr> (humorous).

<p id=11848><form>luslus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for s.t. that wraps s.t. and is attached to it to slip off, esp. the foreskin. <i>Human na siya makaluslus sa unud gíkan sa mga bukug,</i> She managed to slip the meat off the bones to which it had been attached. <i>Naluslus na ang pánit sa íyang tintin, hustu nang tulíun,</i> He can pull his foreskin back, so he&apos;s ready to be circumcised. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> use s.t. in a way that will destroy it. <i>Hala, luslúsa nang makinilya arun makailis ka,</i> Go on and use that typewriter in such a way as to break it so you can buy me a new one. <number>3</number> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> <tr>swindle</tr>, make a fool of s.o. (coarse). <i>Giluslus ming Pidru. Inay ibáyad sa bangku ang kwartang gihátag námù, íya hinúung giláyas,</i> Pedro swindled us. Instead of paying the money we gave him to the bank, he skipped out of town. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>penis</tr> (vulgar). <form>{&mdash;|luslus} mu, níya</form> <number>1a</number> expression of anger at s.o. <i>Luslus mu! Wà man gánì ku swildúi íni unyà kasab-ankasab-an pa,</i> Damn! You scold me but I&apos;m working for you without pay! <number>1b</number> expression debunking s.o. <i>Maáyu sa luslus mu, nga húmuk rang mabálì!</i> Good, my eye! It breaks so easily!

<p id=11849><form>lusnù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126; b8]</itype> for a structure to <tr>collapse</tr>, <tr>crash down</tr>. <i>Nalusnù ang taytáyan pagbagyu,</i> The bridge collapsed in the storm. <number>1a</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> for a person to collapse. <i>Nalusnù siya pagkadungug sa aksidinti,</i> She collapsed upon hearing of the accident. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> for feelings, hopes, and aspirations to collapse. <i>Nagkalusnù na ang ákung damgu sa kadaúgan,</i> My hopes for victory are gradually crumbling.

<p id=11850><form>luspad</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>pale</tr>, for a person to have lost his color. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN; a]</itype> be; become pale. <i>Nanluspad siya pagkadungug sa hukum,</i> She paled when she heard the decision. <form>lusparun</form> <pos>a</pos> of a pale sort. <i>Ang lusparung kaháyag sa búlan,</i> The pale light of the moon.

<p id=11851><form>luspì</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>pallid</tr> in complexion due to some physical deficiencies or sickness. <i>Luspì kaáyu ang masakitun,</i> The sick man is very pale. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> be, become pallid in complexion.

<p id=11852><form>lusù</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>hypocrite</tr> (slang). <i>Ang lusù nga dakù daw santus giyud nga ímung iatúbang, apan mangtas diay,</i> He is a terrible hypocrite. He looks like a paragon of virtue, but actually he&apos;s a monster.

<p id=11853><form>lúsù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>penis</tr> (coarse). <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lúsù} nímu, {níya|lúsù níya}</formx> <number>2a</number> expression of anger at s.o. <i>Lúsù nímu, ikay naghulam sa libru unyà akuy paulíun!</i> Nuts <pb n=651>to you. You borrowed the book and you want me to return it! <number>2b</number> expression of disbelief. <i>Lúsù níya. Ayaw ku níyag patuhúa,</i> Hell! Don&apos;t try to make me believe him.

<p id=11854><form>lúsub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>attack</tr>, force one&apos;s way into s.t. <i>Gilúsub (gilusúban) sa milù ang tangkal sa manuk,</i> The civet broke into the chicken coop.

<p id=11855><form>lusug</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>stout</tr>, <tr>corpulent</tr>, usually said of children. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6(1)]</itype> grow stout. <i>Mulusug (malusug) ka ug mukáun kag kusug,</i> You&apos;ll grow stout if you eat a lot.

<p id=11856><form>lúsug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> ride together in tandem, usually on s.t. most often ridden by one. <i>Unsa! Maglúsug ta ánang pyangguy nga kabáyù?</i> What! Shall the two of us ride together on that scrawny horse?

<p id=11857><form>lusuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> clove or segment of any fruit that has segments. <i>Usa ka lusuk áhus,</i> One garlic clove. <number>2</number> drops or beads of tears, perspiration, rain, and the like. <i>Pipila ka lusuk lúhà,</i> Some drops of tears. <i>Lusuk sa rusaryuhan,</i> Rosary beads. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> break off s.t. that comes in sections. <i>Lusuka úsà ang áhus úsà pa paníti,</i> Split the garlic into cloves first before you peel it. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> gouge out an eye. <i>Luskun ku nang mata mu run,</i> I&apos;ll gouge out your eyes. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> wrench s.o.&apos;s feelings. <i>Gilusuk ang íyang dughan sa túmang kakulbà,</i> Her heart was wrenched with anxiety. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2N]</itype> form segments or similarly shaped things. <i>Milusuk (nanlusuk) ang mga lúhà sa íyang mga mata,</i> Drops of tears formed in her eyes. <form>{-in-|linusuk}</form> <pos>n</pos> dangling earrings with little pellets at the bottom.

<p id=11858><form>Lusun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Luzon</tr>, the largest island in the Philippines.

<p id=11859><form>lusung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> large <tr>mortar</tr> for pounding rice. <number>2</number> <pos>a</pos> <tr>mortarful</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a mortar. <form>{(&larr;)|lúsung}<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> pour grains into the mortar. <number>2</number> lower a coffin into the burial pit. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>lusung</sc>, <ix>2</ix>.</xr>

<p id=11860><form>lúsung<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>huddle</tr>, <tr>crowd close together</tr>. <i>Dì ta makalúsung íning gamayng barútu kay súd ra nig duha ka táwu,</i> We can&apos;t all ride in this small boat because it is only good for two people. <i>Lusúnga (ilúsung) lang nang mga sinakung humay sa karumáta,</i> Just pile those sacks of rice in the cart.

<p id=11861><form>lusut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P; ac]</itype> <tr>pass</tr>, <tr>go through</tr>. <i>Milusut ang kumagkù sa gisiung midiyas,</i> The big toe came out of the torn socks. <i>Dílì giyud ku makalusut (makapalusut) ug hílu sa dágum,</i> I can never thread a needle. <i>Kanang kupúa lutsun gihápun sa tun-ug,</i> Cold air can still pass through your cape. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> go through, come out successful. <i>Magbluáwut ku basta makalusut sa burd,</i> I&apos;ll have a party if I hurdle the board exams. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> in basketball, drive through the defense. <i>Sayun ra kaáyung lusutan (lutsan) ang inyung dipinsa,</i> It is very easy to drive through your defense. <form>{pa-(&larr;)|palúsut}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> squeeze in a witty remark in a conversation. <i>Maáyung mupalúsut nà siya,</i> He is good in making funny remarks in a conversation. <pos>n</pos> the act of squeezing in some witty remarks during a conversation. <form>lutsanan</form> <pos>n</pos> a way out.

<p id=11862><form>lusyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lotion</tr> for use as a cosmetic or cleansing the skin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; b]</itype> use a certain k.o. lotion. <form>{pa&N;-|panglusyun}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> apply lotion on oneself.

<p id=11863><form>luta<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> nosepiece that is made to pass through the hole in the nose of domestic animals to which a tether rope is attached. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make a nosepiece. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> tie such a nosepiece onto s.t.

<p id=11864><form>luta<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>joints</tr> in the body. <i>Haplási ang mga luta (lutaluta, lutáhan) ug lána arun mawálà ang pamául,</i> Rub oil on the joints to relieve the pain. <form>lutaluta, lutalúta, lutáhan</form> <xr>= <sc>luta</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11865><form>lúta, lutà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>imprints</tr> made by the pressure or weight of s.t. <i>Lúta sa ligid dihà sa lápuk,</i> Tire marks in the mud. <i>Lúta sa tudlù sa básu,</i> Finger marks on the glass. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> make an <tr>impression</tr>, mark on s.t. <i>Milutà (nalutà) ang íyang ngípun sa ákung buktun,</i> Her teeth left their mark on my skin. <number>2</number> be visible through s.t. <i>Milutà ang mamisus sa íyang nipis nga bulsa,</i> The peso bills were visible inside his shirt pocket.

<p id=11866><form>*lútab</form> <form>{-an|lutaban}, {-un|lutabun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for fruits and sugar cane to be watery, lacking in sweetness. <number>2</number> for <ix>nípà</ix> or lumber to be too soft or have a tendency to rot. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become watery and lacking in sweetness.

<p id=11867><form>lutak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>crack</tr>, a break usually without complete separation of parts. <i>Náa nay gamayng lutak sa básu,</i> There&apos;s a slight crack on the glass. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B3(1)6]</itype> crack. <i>Ang yútà milutak sa paglínug,</i> The earth cracked in the earthquake. <number>2</number> rack one&apos;s brains. <i>Makalutak (makapalutak) sa úlu ning prublimáha,</i> This problem can crack one&apos;s brains.

<p id=11868><form>lutang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> surface in the water. <i>Ug walà mulutang ang bátang nalumus dílì untà makit-an,</i> If the body of the boy who was drowned had not floated on the surface, it would never have been found. <form>lutanglútang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> float freely in the water.

<p id=11869><form>lútang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>heal</tr> s.t. completely. <i>Manghihilut mauy naglútang sa ákung piang,</i> A bone setter set my dislocated bone. <i>Gilútang sa tambálan ang ákung sakit,</i> The folk doctor completely relieved me of my <pb n=652>ailment. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB12; a1]</itype> <tr>solve</tr> or clear up a problem, esp. a financial problem. <i>Ang pagdaug ra sa swipstik ang makalútang (makapalútang) sa átung mga suliran,</i> The sweepstakes are the only solution to our problems.

<p id=11870><form>lutaríya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lottery</tr>. <number>2</number> k.o. bingo game played with many players, where the cards have the figures of the Spanish cards in place of numbers, which are covered when the corresponding card is drawn. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> hold a lottery. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> play <ix>lutaríya</ix>.

<p id=11871><form>lutas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>overcome</tr>, <tr>surmount</tr>. <i>Kinsay naglutas sa ímung galastuhan sa iskuylahan?</i> Who shouldered all your expenses in school? <i>Hápit na ku makalutas sa ákung pagtuun,</i> I am almost through with my studies.

<p id=11872><form>lútas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>wean</tr>. <i>Lutásun ang bátà ug manghúran na,</i> A baby is weaned when the next child is born. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> have a boy or girl friend five years or more younger than oneself. <i>Ganáhan siyang mulútas ug hayiskul sa íya nang pagkálids,</i> He likes to go out with high-school girls though he is in college. <number>3</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> for a husband to be temporarily deprived of marital relations (humorous slang).

<p id=11873><form>lutaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>float</tr>. <i>Ang asyíti mulutaw sa túbig,</i> Oil floats on water. <number>1a</number> <itype>[AB]</itype> move gracefully as if floating on air. <i>Nindut tan-áwun ang maglíap nga maglutaw,</i> It is nice to see a basketball shot where the player just floats up to the basket as he sinks it in. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>show</tr>, <tr>manifest</tr> itself. <i>Usa ka pahiyum milutaw sa íyang nawung,</i> A smile showed on his face. <number>2a</number> for a character trait, truth, and the like to come out. <i>Milutaw na ang tinúud níyang batásan,</i> His real character now came out. <i>Mulutaw ra ang tinúud,</i> The truth will eventually come out. <number>2b</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lutaw} ang ganansiya</formx> <itype>[B3(1)4]</itype> for it to be clear that there is going to be a profit. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> for fish to come to the surface. <i>Andáma ang báling kay hápit na mulutaw ang bansíkul,</i> Prepare the net because the mackerel are about to surface. <number>4</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> for fever or measles to come out and fully develop. <i>Walà nay kuyaw kun mulutaw (makalutaw) na ang dáp,</i> There is no more danger once the measles rash appears. <number>5</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lutaw} sa hángin</formx> <itype>[A13]</itype> a lacking awareness of s.t. <i>Dílì mahímung maglutaw sa hángin ang átung mga anak sa kalisud sa pangwarta,</i> Our children should know how hard it is to earn money. b having an uncertain outcome. <i>Naglutaw pa sa hángin ang ákung numramyintu,</i> My appointment is still up in the air. <pos>n</pos> freeboard. <i>Lagmit ta malúnud kay gamay ang lutaw sa sakayan,</i> We might sink because the boat has a small freeboard. <form>{&mdash;|lutaw} ug dugù</form> glowing with a healthy pink color. <i>Lutaw ug dugù ang mga dugung Katsílà,</i> People who have Spanish blood have a healthy pinkish complexion. <form>{&mdash;|lutaw} ang ganansiya</form> clearly affording a profit. <i>Lutaw ang ganansiya sa nigusyung bay-ansil,</i> You clearly will make a profit in the buying and selling business. <form>{(&larr;)|lútaw}</form> <pos>n</pos> low-lying place near the shore into which sea water enters, but separated from the main sea by a bar of dry land. <form>{pa-|palutaw}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. to hasten the coming out of a rash or fever. <form>{pina-|pinalutaw}</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. <tr>rice cake</tr> (<ix>bibingka</ix>) cooked by steam.

<p id=11874><form>lutay</form> <pos>a</pos> for s.t. long to be <tr>supple</tr>. <i>Lutay kaáyug láwas ang misáyaw sa bali,</i> The person who danced the ballet has a very supple body. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be <tr>pliant</tr>, easily bent. <i>Mulutay (malutay) ang lipak ug nipsun ang paglútì,</i> Bamboo sticks will be pliant if they are stripped thin.

<p id=11875><form>luthang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>popgun</tr> made of a small bamboo stem which shoots seeds or paper pellets. <number>2</number> bamboo cannon that makes a loud retort using kerosene, used for noise-making during festive events. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> shoot with a native popgun or bamboo cannon. <number>1a</number> shoot s.o. with any gun. <i>Naprísu siya kay nakaluthang,</i> He went to prison for shooting a man. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> make s.t. into a <ix>luthang</ix>. <form>luthangluthang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12C2]</itype> play games with <ix>luthangs</ix>.

<p id=11876><form>lúti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lot</tr>, a parcel of land, usually residential. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> divide land into lots for sale. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain a lot.

<p id=11877><form>lútì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> split a piece of bamboo, rattan, or <ix>nítù</ix> into narrow strips. <i>Lutíun ang kawáyan pára himúung búbù,</i> When they make a fish trap, they split narrow pieces of bamboo for it. <form>{-in-|linútì}</form> <pos>n</pos> thin strips of bamboo, rattan, or <ix>nítù</ix>.

<p id=11878><form>lutiríya</form> <xr>= <sc>lutaríya</sc>, <i>n1, v1.</i></xr>

<p id=11879><form>lutlut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c6]</itype> squeeze s.t. extra into an area which has little room, be squeezed in. <i>Mulutlut lang ku áring mga karga arun lang makapaúlì ku,</i> I will just sit here in between the cargo, just so I can get home. <i>Unsang librúhang ímung gilutlútan sa sulat?</i> What book did you put the letter in? <i>Ilutlut lang ning lubi sa ilálum sa lingkuránan,</i> Just squeeze these coconuts under the seats.

<p id=11880><form>lutu, lutù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>blister</tr> gotten by rubbing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B23(1)6; b4]</itype> develop or form blisters. <i>Milutu (giluthan) ang íyang tudlù sa paglinúbù sa mais,</i> Blisters have formed on her fingers from shelling the corn.

<pb n=653>

<p id=11881><form>lútu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> wear black clothes in mourning. <i>Kinsa may inyung gilutúhan?</i> Whom are you mourning? <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make, sew into mourning clothes. <number>3</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> consider a member of the family or s.o. close to the family dead because of his rebellious or unforgiveable act. <i>Gilutúhan si Sunya sa íyang mga ginikánan kay nakigminyù siya sa ílang draybir,</i> Sonia&apos;s parents simply considered her dead when she married their driver. <pos>n</pos> <tr>mourning clothes</tr>.

<p id=11882><form>lutù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB246N; a12P]</itype> crack one&apos;s knuckle(s); for the joints to crack. <i>Mulutù (manglutù) ang íyang lutáhan inigtindug níya,</i> His joints crack when he stands up. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> stay idle doing nothing, twiddling the thumbs, cracking the knuckles, and the like. <i>Naglutù lang. Walà makahunàhunà unsay maáyung kurìkuriun,</i> He&apos;s just twiddling his thumbs. He hasn&apos;t thought of anything worthwhile to do. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> do things at a slow and lazy pace. <i>Ug lutuun nátù ang átung líhuk magabin-an ta,</i> If we walk lazily, we will be overtaken by night. <pos>n</pos> sound produced by cracking the joints.

<p id=11883><form>lútù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB12; a]</itype> <tr>cook</tr>. <i>Humut ang nagkalutung inasal,</i> The roast pig smelled delicious as it was cooking. <i>Lutúun nátù ang kík,</i> Let us cook the cake. <number>1a</number> <itype>[AB12; b6]</itype> make ice products. <i>Gáhì na ang áyis, nalútù na diay,</i> The ice has hardened; it is done. <number>2</number> <itype>[AP; a1]</itype> make s.t. tender. <i>Súkà ray mulútù (mupalútù) sa kinílaw,</i> Vinegar can get the raw fish tender. <i>Alkuhul ang naglútù sa atay niánang palaínum,</i> Alcohol is giving that drunkard a tender liver. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lútù} dáan</formx> <itype>[a12]</itype> have the outcome pre-planned. <i>Ang banggà gilútù dáan sa mga maghuhúkum,</i> The judges prejudged the contest. <number>4</number> <itype>[B; c6]</itype> become darkened. <i>Mulútù (malútù) ug samut ang ímung pánit ug magsígi kag painit,</i> Your skin will become darker if you keep staying in the sun. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> cooked rice or corn grits. <i>Paghúkad ug lútù,</i> Bring some cooked rice to the table. <number>2</number> manner of cooking. <i>Kináham ku ang lútung binisayà,</i> I love Visayan cooking. a <number>1</number> done, cooked. <i>Ug lútù na ang kamúti átung kan-un,</i> If the sweet potatoes are done, let&apos;s eat them. <number>1a</number> for ice to be frozen. <number>2</number> dark in shade. <i>Ang blú sa dágat mas lútù ikumparar sa lángit,</i> The blue of the sea is darker than the blue of the sky. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lútù} dáan</formx> <tr>prejudged</tr>. <i>Lútù na man dáan ang ákung grádu,</i> My grades are fixed. <number>4</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lútù} nga makaw</formx> <number>a</number> dish prepared for short-order cooking. <number>b</number> shabbily made. <i>Lútung makaw ang pagkabúhat sa lamísa,</i> The table was poorly made. <number>c</number> prejudged. <i>Lútung makaw ang kumbinsiyun,</i> The convention was rigged. <form>{(&rarr;)|lutù}<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> well-fermented fish. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>lútù</sc>, <ix>1a</ix>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b3]</itype> become fermented fish paste. <i>Wà pa gánì makalutù ang ginamus nahurut na námug káun,</i> The fish paste had not even gotten fermented before we ate it up. <form>{ni-|nilútù}, {-in-|linútù}</form> <pos>n</pos> food bought prepared. <i>Pagpalit ug linútù ug kabsan tag sud-an,</i> Buy some carry-out food if we run short. <form>{ni-an(&rarr;)|nilutuan}, {-in-an(&rarr;)|linutuan}</form> <pos>n</pos> manner of cooking. <form>{ma-(&rarr;)|malutù}</form> <pos>n</pos> boiled rice usually wrapped in banana leaves carried as one&apos;s lunch. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> bring a lunch of this sort. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> prepare a lunch of this sort.

<p id=11884><form>lútub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> form a blister from burning or rubbing. <i>Milútub (nalútub) ang ákung pasù,</i> My burn formed a blister. <number>2</number> for blood to form a black spot under a finger- or toenail that has been injured. <i>Milútub ang dugù sa ákung tudlù nga hingdukdukan sa martilyu,</i> Blood formed a black spot on my fingers where I had hit them with a hammer.

<p id=11885><form>lut-ud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC23; ac]</itype> <tr>pile up</tr> on top of one another. <i><corr sic="Naglùt-ud">Naglut-ud</corr> ang mga plátu,</i> The plates are stacked on top of one another. <i>Lut-úra pagdala nang mga libru,</i> Carry the books in a pile on top of one another. <number>2</number> <itype>[B36]</itype> pile up, <tr>accumulate</tr>. <i>Paspas uy kay naglut-ud na ning ímung mga buluhatun,</i> Faster! Your work is piling up. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. <tr>stacked</tr> up. <i>Tulu ka lut-ud nga libru,</i> Three stacks of books. <number>2</number> having several rows of petals. <i>Antuwángang lut-ud,</i> Hibiscus with several rows of petals.

<p id=11886><form>lutuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> put a finger into an orifice of s.t. living, usually to get at s.t. <i>Akuy mulutuk sa bàbà sa bátà arun makúhà ang singsing,</i> I will reach into the child&apos;s mouth to get the ring out. <i>Luktun ku nang mata mu,</i> I&apos;ll poke out your eyes. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> squeeze and pull off the edible flesh of jackfruit. <i>Dì ku makalutuk sa súuy sa nangkà,</i> I can&apos;t take out the edible flesh of the jackfruit.

<p id=11887><form>lútuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>stare at</tr>. <i>Namula siyang gisalíhan nákug lútuk,</i> She blushed when I kept staring at her.

<p id=11888><form>lutung</form> <pos>a</pos> for fruits to be <tr>very ripe</tr>, almost overripe. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become very ripe. <i>Mas lamì kan-un ang nangkà kun malutung na,</i> Jackfruit is most delicious to eat when it is very ripe.

<p id=11889><form>lútung</form> <pos>n</pos> contraction of the uterus during labor. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> for the uterus to contract during labor. <i>Maggahìgáhì ang pus-un sa umaának ug mulútung na,</i> The stomach of a mother in labor hardens when her uterus is contracting.

<p id=11890><form>lutup</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> for s.t. to show through s.t. <pb n=654>translucent that touches it. <i>Milutup ang íyang tútuy sa nipis níyang bláwus,</i> Her breasts showed through her flimsy blouse. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> for s.t. to give off a reproduction on s.t. that touches it. <i>Milutup ang banig nga íyang gihigdáan dihà sa íyang bukubuku,</i> The mat he lay on left an impression on his back. <number>2a</number> leave a crease in cloth upon folding or pressing. <i>Naglutup ang pinil-an sa sinínà,</i> There was a crease left on the dress where it was folded. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> mark, imprint on the skin. <number>2</number> crease, fold on a cloth. <form>{pa-|palutup}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> reproduction of a picture made by rubbing it with a candle and then scratching a sheet of paper over it. <number>2</number> <tr>tracing</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> reproduce a picture by rubbing or tracing.

<p id=11891><form>lútus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>chase</tr> or <tr>run after</tr>. <i>Daghan kaáyung táwung milútus sa mangunguut,</i> A lot of people were chasing the pickpocket. <i>Bísag ása pa mutágù ang kriminal, lutúsun giyud sa baláud,</i> No matter where the criminal hides, the law will go after him. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>persecute</tr>. <i>Si Níru naglútus sa mga Kristiyánus,</i> Nero persecuted the Christians.

<p id=11892><form>lútus<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lotus</tr> plant cultivated for ornamental purposes, flowers esp. used for decorating altars: <bio>Nelumbium nelumbo</bio>.

<p id=11893><form>lútuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S3(1); b4]</itype> for the skin to swell and form a blister from being burnt with s.t. hot or cold. <i>Milútuy ang ákung buktun nga napiksan sa ínit nga mantíka,</i> Hot lard spattered on my arm and it swelled. <pos>n</pos> swelling on the skin caused by heat or acid.

<p id=11894><form>lutya, lutyà</form> <xr>= <sc>bisul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11895><form>lúub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> brood on eggs. <i>Luúban sa himungáan ang itlug,</i> The hen will sit on the eggs. <number>1a</number> stay around a place. <i>Dì ka ba pul-an ug lúub sa balay?</i> Aren&apos;t you sick of hanging around the house? <number>2</number> for emotions to be stored up in one. <i>Kasína nga naglúub sa ákung dughan,</i> The envy that dwelt in my breast.

<p id=11896><form>luud</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>nauseous</tr>, causing nausea. <i>Luud kan-un ang pagkáung pan-us,</i> Stale food is nauseous to eat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a4]</itype> become, feel nauseous. <i>Nagkaluud ang báhù sa kasilyas,</i> The toilet is getting to smell more and more nauseous. <i>Lud-un giyud kung mamínaw sa ímung mga pasálig,</i> I really get nauseated listening to your promises. <form>lud-ánun, lud-unun</form> <pos>a</pos> easily given to feeling nauseous.

<p id=11897><form>*lúud</form> <form>{pa&N;-|panglúud}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b3]</itype> <tr>sulk</tr> by refraining from doing s.t. because of an offense or a wish not granted. <i>Dì na siya mukanta. Nanglúud nga wà pakpáki,</i> She won&apos;t sing any more. She is sulking because she didn&apos;t get enough applause. <form>luuray</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C23]</itype> take offense at each other and sulk. <i>Way mahímù ang átung kláb kay nagluuray ang mga upisyális,</i> Our club won&apos;t achieve anything because the officers are constantly taking offense at each other and refraining from doing things. <form>luuran</form> <pos>a</pos> easily given to sulking, withdrawing from an activity.

<p id=11898><form>luug</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>savage</tr>, <tr>uncivilized</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>ignorant</tr>, lacking sophistication like a savage. <i>Ayg tudlùtudlúa nang mga trák. Luug ka man tingáli,</i> Don&apos;t point your finger at those vehicles. Are you ignorant? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a2]</itype> be, become ignorant, unsophisticated. <i>Maluug kag adtu ka magpuyù sa búkid,</i> You will grow up ignorant if you stay in the mountains. <form>{-in-|linuug}</form> <pos>a</pos> in the manner of a savage. <i>Linuug nga búhat ang panglúgus,</i> Rape is a savage act. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> act like a savage. <form>{-ing(&larr;)|luúging}</form> <xr>= <sc>luug</sc>, <i>a2</i> (humorous euphemism).</xr>

<p id=11899><form>lúuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>strangle</tr>, esp. with two hands. <i>Luúkun ta ka dihag musúkul ka,</i> I&apos;ll strangle you if you fight back. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC2; a12]</itype> neck, pet to the point of or nearly to the point of intercourse (slang). <i>Gilúuk bítaw nákù, sugut lagi,</i> I got her over-excited, and you bet she gave in. <form>{ma&N;-r-(&rarr;)|mangluluuk}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>strangler</tr>.

<p id=11900><form>lúuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bay</tr>. <i>Pagbagyu mitágù ang lantsa sa may lúuk,</i> During the typhoon the launch took shelter in the bay. <form>luuklúuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> eat food alone by oneself. <i>Siya ray nagluuklúuk ug káun sa íyang bálun,</i> She was eating her lunch off in a corner by herself. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> do the work alone by oneself without help from others. <i>Aku ra giyuy nagluuklúuk niíning trabahúa,</i> I did this work all alone by myself. <form>{kina-an(&rarr;)|kinaluukan}</form> <pos>n</pos> inmost part of a bay.

<p id=11901><form>lúum</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put s.t. entirely into the mouth. <i>Íyang gilúum ang usa ka buuk pán,</i> He put the whole piece of bread into his mouth. <form>{(&rarr;)|luum}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> hold one&apos;s breath, stifle back one&apos;s breath. <i>Napakung ang íyang bitíis ug miluum siya sa kasakit,</i> He banged his shins and he held his breath in pain. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> repress, keep to oneself or cry in a repressed way. <i>Miluum siyag hílak dihang ákù siyang gibyáan,</i> She cried softly when I left her. <i>Ayawg iluum ang ímung kayugut sa ímung amahan,</i> Don&apos;t repress your resentment at your father.

<p id=11902><form>lúun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; ac]</itype> <number>1</number> share a space to occupy it. <i>Naglúun mig sakay sa kábaw,</i> We rode on the carabao together. <i>Dì mahímung luúnun ang duha ka himungáan sa usa ka pugaran,</i> You can&apos;t put two hens in one nest. <number>2</number> live together in the same house or room. <i>Ayaw silag ilúun sa ámung kwartu kay hugawan,</i> <pb n=655>Don&apos;t let <corr sic=him>them</corr> stay with us in our room because <corr sic="he is">they are</corr> messy. <number>3</number> for an unmarried couple to live together. <i>Gilúun níyag íyang uyab,</i> He brought his girl to live with him. <form>{(&rarr;)|luun}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put a buffer sheet over the mouth of a vessel between the mouth and the cover. <i>Lun-ig dáhun ang linung-ag kay hungaw ang takub,</i> Put some leaves as a buffer for the pot of rice because the cover is not airtight. <pos>n</pos> s.t. used as a buffer for a pot top. <form>{ka-|kalúun}</form> <pos>n</pos> one whom one shares a space with.

<p id=11903><form>luup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> shut off or block a passage or flow. <i>Ílang gilup-an ang sapà ug mga dagkung batu,</i> They blocked one end of the stream with stones. <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to shut off or block a passage or flow.

<p id=11904><form>luus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> be constantly doing s.t. <i>Dílì ka makaluus ug lingkud dinhi kay binatunan ka,</i> You can&apos;t constantly sit around because you are supposed to be the maid. <i>Gilus-an níyag bása ang kúmiks,</i> She did nothing but read the comics. <number>2</number> stay long in a place. <i>Dì ku muluus sa baryu,</i> I will not stay in the village long.

<p id=11905><form>lúuy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>pitiful</tr>. <i>Lúuy kaáyu ang mga ílung tuwápus,</i> Orphans are very pitiful. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b5c]</itype> have pity, mercy on s.o.; give s.t. out of pity. <i>Ayaw táwun kug patya, malúuy ka,</i> Don&apos;t kill me. Have mercy. <i>Limus, Dung, kaluy-i (kaluy-a) ang kabus,</i> Alms, lad. Have pity on the poor. <i>Ihátag lag suklì ikalúuy lang nà sa draybir,</i> Just give the change to the driver out of kindness. <form>{paki-|pakilúuy}, {pakima-|pakimalúuy}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> beg for mercy. <i>Nagpakilúuy (nagpakimalúuy) sila sa asindírung hakug,</i> They beg for mercy from the greedy landowner. <number>2</number> <tr>plead</tr>. <i>Mipakilúuy (mipakimalúuy) siya nga dì nákù byáan,</i> She begged me not to leave her. <pos>n</pos> pleading for mercy. <form>{ka-|kalúuy}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pity</tr>, <tr>mercy</tr>. <i>Kalúuy sa Diyus,</i> Thanks be to God. <form>maluluy-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>kind</tr>, <tr>merciful</tr>. <form>makalulúuy</form> <pos>a</pos> inspiring pity.

<p id=11906><form>lúuy<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)6; bc1]</itype> be, become <tr>stagnant</tr>. <i>Malúuy (mulúuy) ang túbig dinhi kay wà may kanal,</i> Water stagnates here because there is no canal.

<p id=11907><form>luwa-</form> <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>lula-</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11908><form>luwa<sub>1</sub></form> a word of command for a carabao to halt. <form>{pa-|paluwa}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> command a carabao to stop. <i>Paluwaha sà ang kábaw arun makapahúlay,</i> Stop the carabao so it can take a rest.

<p id=11909><form>luwa<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>dismember</tr> a slaughtered animal. <i>Dalì siya nga nakaluwa sa kábaw nga giíhaw,</i> He dismembered the slaughtered water buffalo in no time. <pos>n</pos> piece cut off of a slaughtered animal.

<p id=11910><form>lúwa</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. poem, one of the forms used by the players in the <ix>murumúru</ix> play, consisting of short lines of around ten syllables, in rhyming couplets. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> recite the <ix>lúwa</ix>. <number>2</number> recite any poem from memory.

<p id=11911><form>luwà, lúwà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> <tr>spit</tr> or eject from the mouth. <i>Giluwaan (gilud-an) níya ang sáwug,</i> He spat on the floor. <i>Iluwà nang kindi kay húgaw,</i> Spit out that candy. It&apos;s dirty. <number>1a</number> <itype>[AN; b(1)]</itype> spit to express contempt. <i>Nakaluwà (nakapangluwà) ku dihang nanghambug siya,</i> I couldn&apos;t help spitting when he started to boast. <number>2</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> for a processing machine to expel a solid by-product. <i>Inigsúd sa tubu, ang iluwà sa makina bagásu,</i> Sugarcane is fed into the crushers. Then it comes out as bagasse. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>spit</tr>, <tr>spittle</tr>. <number>2</number> action of spitting. <form>maabut sa {&mdash;|luwà}</form> near not far. <form>lud-anan, {-anan|luwaánan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>spittoon</tr>.

<p id=11912><form>luwàlúwà</form> <pos>n</pos> the reed suspender in a loom, two pieces of wood which suspend the reed (<ix>suluran</ix>) and allow it to swing back and forth, holding it in proper position with regard to the warp threads.

<p id=11913><form>luwag, lúwag</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ladle</tr>. <form>duul sa {&mdash;|luwag}</form> be close to influential people such that one has pull. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> make into, hit with, use a ladle.

<p id=11914><form>luwak, lúwak</form> <pos>n</pos> the other side of s.t. elevated. <i>Ang ílang dápit luwak niánang bungtúra,</i> Their place is s.w. beyond that hill. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; ac]</itype> <number>1</number> pass over a summit, go up to a pass and then come down, bring s.t. over a pass. <i>Gíkan dinhi muluwak ka pa ug duha ka bungtud,</i> From here you have to climb over two hills. <number>2</number> climb up and over s.t. elevated in coming down towards the other side. <i>Makaluwak ang bátà sa abatan,</i> The child can climb over the railing. <i>Nakaluwak ning baúla ngadtu sa tapun,</i> This field stretches over the mountain to the other side. <pos>n</pos> other side of a mountain or elevation.

<p id=11915><form>luwang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> bilge, the rounded lower part of a ship&apos;s hull or hold. <i>Ákung hinubígan ang luwang sa sakayan,</i> I&apos;ll bail out the water from the bilge of the boat. <number>2</number> quadrilateral section of a rice paddy bounded by dikes. <i>Tulu ra ka luwang ang ákung nadáru,</i> I have plowed three sections of the rice paddy. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> divide the rice paddy into sections. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> harvest the rice partition by partition. <form>{-in-|linuwang}</form> <pos>a</pos> by the section. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do by the section.

<p id=11916><form>luwas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> save, remove s.o. from harm. <i>Tambal ang nakaluwas (nakapaluwas) nímu,</i> Medicine has saved your life. <i>Ákung luwasun ang bátà sa balay nga nasúnug,</i> I&apos;ll <pb n=656>save the child from the burning house. <number>1a</number> save from sin and death. <i>Maluwas ta sa kalisud ug makatrabahu na ku,</i> We will escape from our financial worries when I find a job. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> safe from danger. <number>2</number> free from debt, discomfort. <form>{ka-an(&larr;)|kaluwásan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> safety, preservation from destruction. <number>2</number> salvation. <number>3</number> freedom from difficulties, problems, etc. <form>{ma&N;-r-(&larr;)|manglulúwas}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>saviour</tr>, esp. The Saviour, Jesus Christ.

<p id=11917><form>luwas<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>{hi-|hiluwas}</sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr> <form>{hi-|hiluwas}, hilwas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>articulate</tr>, pronounce words or letters. <i>Dì makahilwas ug íri ang Insik,</i> The Chinese can&apos;t pronounce an <ix>r</ix>. <number>2</number> utter taboo words. <i>Sa íyang kasukù, nakahilwas siyag mga púlung nga law-ay,</i> In his anger he uttered profanity. a well articulated. <i>Hilwas na kaáyug sinultihan ang bátà,</i> The child can now speak very articulately. <form>{-in-(&larr;)|linuwas}, {ka-an(&larr;)|kaluwásan}</form> <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s full name. <i>Idut ang íyang anggà apan Prídu ang íyang kaluwásan (linúwas),</i> His nickname is Edot but his real name is Fredo.

<p id=11918><form>luwat<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>quit</tr> a job. <i>Muaplay ku sa trabáhu nga ímung giluwatan,</i> I&apos;ll apply for the job you quit. <number>2</number> <itype>[b2]</itype> accidentally let go of s.t. <i>Hiluwatan níya ang mga plátu nga íyang gidala,</i> She accidentally let go of the plates. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2B236; b]</itype> let out, cause to come out from within. <i>Nakaluwat siyag usa ka makahulugánung pahiyum,</i> She gave forth a meaningful smile. <i>Way usa ka púlung nga miluwat (naluwat) sa íyang bàbà,</i> Not a single word came out of his mouth. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> issue a press release, communiqué. <i>Mau ni ang balità nga giluwatan sa imbaháda,</i> This is the news issued by the embassy. <number>3b</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> issue for a purpose. <i>Miluwat ug kasugúan ang Prisidinti sa pagpadakup sa mga Huks,</i> The President gave out orders to capture the Huks.

<p id=11919><form>luwat<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> climb up and over s.t. elevated and come down to the other side. <i>Miluwat siyag tulu ka bungtud paingun nganhi,</i> He passed over three hills to get here. <i>Luwatun sa bátà nang mubù mung abatan,</i> The baby will climb over that low railing of yours.

<p id=11920><form>luwat<sub>3</sub></form> too, also (dialectal).

<p id=11921><form>lúwis, lúwist</form> <pos>n</pos> low waist, a style of trousers in which the waist line is cut comparatively low. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> wear, make trousers in this style.

<p id=11922><form>l&umacracu;y</form> <xr>= <sc>lúluy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11923><form>lúya</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>weak</tr>, or lacking in strength of body or muscle. <i>Lúya kaáyu ku gíkang nasakit,</i> I am very weak after my illness. <number>2</number> not active, aggressive enough. <i>Lúya man gud ka maung láin ang nadáwat,</i> You were slow. That&apos;s why s.o. else got the job. <number>3</number> weak in a subject. <i>Lúya kaáyu ku sa mát,</i> I&apos;m weak in math. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1B12S; a12]</itype> be, become weak, tired out, make s.o. tired. <i>Dì kung katrabáhu kay nagluya ku,</i> I can&apos;t work because I&apos;m weak. <i>Nalúya kug dinágan,</i> I got tired running. <i>Luyáha ang isdà úsà kubráha ang pasul,</i> Tire the fish out before you pull in the line. <form>maluyáhun, luyahun</form> <pos>a</pos> of a weak sort. <i>Luyahun (maluyáhun) nga tíngug,</i> A feeble voice.

<p id=11924><form>luy-a</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ginger</tr>: <bio>Zingiber officinale</bio>. <form>{&mdash;|luy-a} nga tapul</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. purple ginger used medicinally. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> flavor with ginger. <form>luy-aluy-a</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. herb similar to ginger: <bio>Zinziber zerumbet</bio>.

<p id=11925><form>lúyang</form> <pos>n</pos> sweet prepared of cooked plantains pounded and mixed with grated coconut and sugar. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> prepare this dish. <form>{-in-|linúyang}, {ni-|nilúyang}</form> <xr>= <sc>lúyang</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=11926><form>luyat, lúyat</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> lacking in fullness and firmness. <i>Luyat ra kaáyu ning unlána,</i> This pillow is too soft. <i>Luyat kaáyu kug láwas,</i> I&apos;m very flabby. <number>2</number> for bananas to be soft before getting mature. <i>Luyat kaáyu ang ságing kay linghud pagkapùpù,</i> The bananas are soft because they were immature when they were cut down. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> get to be <tr>soft</tr> and <tr>flabby</tr>. <number>2</number> for bananas to get soft before maturity.

<p id=11927><form>luyluy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>drooping</tr>, hanging limply. <i>Luyluy na ang íyang buktun sa túmang kakápuy,</i> His arms are limp from utter exhaustion. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become drooping or limply hanging. <i>Nagluyluy na ang mga sanga sa káhuy nga nabug-atan sa búnga,</i> The branches of the tree are bending under the weight of the fruits.

<p id=11928><form>luyluy<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>byatilis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11929><form>luyu</form> <number>1</number> at the back of, <tr>behind</tr>. <i>Tágù luyu sa batu,</i> Hide behind the rock. <i>Anáa luyu sa pangánud ang adlaw,</i> The sun is behind the clouds. <number>1a</number> behind what is shown, as an action or attitude. <i>Luyu sa íyang pahiyum anáa ang pagbudhì,</i> Treachery lurks behind her smile. <number>1b</number> one&apos;s back. <i>Kalúta ning ákung luyu,</i> Scratch my back. <number>2</number> on the other side of. <i>Luyu sa panaptun,</i> Reverse side of the cloth. <i>Luyu nga dágat,</i> Sea on the other side of the island. <i>Luyu nga bulsa,</i> Back pocket. <i>Luyung dunggan,</i> The other ear. <i>Luyung kwartu,</i> The adjacent room. <number>2a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|luyu} ug {&mdash;|luyu}</formx> both sides of. <i>Putì ang luyug luyu sa playwud,</i> The plywood is white on both sides. <number>3</number> <tr>despite</tr>. <i>Luyu sa ákung pagsakripisyu way bili níla ang tanan,</i> Despite the sacrifices I had made, they counted it all for nothing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> assist s.o. in his work. <i>Nars ang miluyu sa dukt&ucaron;r pag-upira,</i> A nurse assisted the doctor in the operation. <i>Ikaw lay ákung iluyu <pb n=657>(luyuhun) sa trabáhu,</i> I&apos;ll have you be my assistant in my work. <form>{pa-|paluyu}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> stay, put at the back. <i>Nagpaluyu ug lingkud ang mga mayukmuk,</i> The small fry sat at the back. <i>Ipaluyu nang ímung karga,</i> Put your baggage at the back. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> lurk, be behind s.t. as a cause. <i>Adúnay kahulugang nagpaluyu sa íyang pahiyum,</i> There is a hidden meaning lurking behind her smile. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> support from behind the scenes. <i>Ang kudita gipaluyuhan sa siay-i,</i> The coup d&apos;état was backed up by the CIA. <form>luyulúyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>assistant</tr>. <form>luyhánun, {taga-|tagaluyu}</form> <pos>n</pos> one living on the other side of the island. &dagger;

<p id=11930><form>lúyung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>sow</tr> seeds in a seedbed. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>transplant</tr>. <i>Ilúyung ang mangga ngadtu sa luyu,</i> Transplant the mango tree in the back. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> dump corpses into a big pit. <i>Mga sundálu ang naglúyung sa ílang gipamatay,</i> The soldiers dumped the corpses of the people they massacred. <form>{(&rarr;)|luyung}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>seedling</tr>. <i>Ang átung luyung hustu nang ibalhin,</i> Our seedlings are ready to be transplanted. <number>2</number> s.t. transplanted. <form>{tag-|taglúyung}</form> <pos>n</pos> one who transplants.

<p id=11931><form>lúyut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> for s.t. not firm to sag out of shape under a weight. <i>Nalúyut ang bakat nga ákung gilingkúran,</i> The hamper I was sitting on sagged out of shape. <i>Nagkaluyut ang dúyan nga pirming higdáan,</i> The hammock is sagging out of shape because it is constantly used. <form>{(&rarr;)|luyut}</form> <pos>a</pos> be out of shape.

<p id=11932><form>lyábi<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>yábi</sc>.</xr> <form>{-ra|lyabíra}, {-ru|lyabíru}</form> <xr>= <sc>yabíra</sc></xr>, <xr><sc>yabíru</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11933><form>lyábi<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> lock in judo or wrestling. <number>2</number> in Jai-alai, where one bets as to who comes out first and second place out of six players, bet twice: once that those numbers come out first and second place, respectively (e.g. 1 first place and 5 second place), and once that the same numbers come out in reverse order (i.e. 5 first place and 1 second place). Thus, one avoids betting on the right combination in the wrong order. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b4]</itype> get a lock on s.o. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> make a bet a <ix>lyábi</ix>.

<p id=11934><form>lyágay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. flying fish smaller than <ix>barúnguy</ix>.

<p id=11935><form>lyamáda</form> <pos>n</pos> home service for a haircut and shave. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> request home service for a haircut and shave.

<p id=11936><form>lyamar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>summon</tr>, call s.o. to come or for s.t. to be brought. <i>Mulyamar ku ug lima ka saup arun patrabahúun sa pinsa,</i> I will summon five tenants to work on the fence. <i>Naglyamar na pagsúgud ang armi sa mga bayinti anyus,</i> The army is beginning to draft the twenty-year olds. <i>Ilyamar ku ug taksi,</i> Call me a taxi. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> speak to s.o. to ask for s.t. <i>Milyamar si Pidru nga manghulam siya ug kwarta nákù,</i> Pedro called me to borrow money. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A]</itype> signify one&apos;s intention. <i>Milyamar ug pangasáwa ang ákung anak,</i> My son signified his intention of getting married. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> for a disease or mania to show signs of recurring. <i>Milyamar na sad ang ákung mata. Magkibídu na giyud ku niíni,</i> My eyes are bothering me again. Now I really will have to wear eyeglasses. <number>3a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|lyamar} ang tiyan</formx> <tr>feel hungry</tr>. <number>4</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> for a gear to engage. <i>Dílì mulyamar ang primíra sa ákung mutur,</i> My motorbike won&apos;t go into first. <number>4a</number> for one&apos;s ability or strategy to produce results. <i>Walà mulyamar ang ákung lung syát,</i> My long shots did not score. <number>5</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> for wind to change directions. <i>Milyamar ang hángin paingus habagatan,</i> The wind changed directions to the south. <pos>n</pos> <tr>summons</tr>, order to start doing s.t. <form>lyamadur</form> <pos>n</pos> one who calls for bets at a cockfight.

<p id=11937><form>lyáwi</form> <xr>= <sc>yábi</sc>, <i>n1,</i> <i>v</i>.</xr>

<p id=11938><form>lyukimya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>leukemia</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1246; a4]</itype> be afflicted with leukemia.

<p id=11939><form>lyúpis</form> <xr>= <sc>lúpis</sc>.</xr>


</body>
</text>
</TEI.2>
