<pb n=1164>
<div1 id=biblio type=Bibliography>
<head>BIBLIOGRAPHY</head>


<p>CEBUANO DICTIONARIES


<p>Cabonce, Rudolfo, <i>Visayan-English Dictionary</i>.
(Mimeographed.)

<p>Encarnacion, Juan Felix de la, R. P. Fr., <i>Diccionario
Bisaya-Español</i>. Third Edition. Manila, 1885.

<p>Estorco, Avelino, <i>Basic Cebuano-English Dictionary</i>.
(Manuscript.)

<p>Hermosisima, Tomas V., <i>Bisayan-English-Tagalog
Dictionary</i>. Manila: Pedro B. Ayuda and Co.,
1966.

<p>Ruijter, Juan, M. S. C., <i>Cebuano-English Dictionary</i>.
Lawa-an, Talisay, Cebu: Sacred Heart Seminary,
1967.


<p>CEBUANO GRAMMAR

<p>Wolff, John U., <i>Beginning Cebuano, Parts I and
II</i>. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1966,
1967.

<p>Wolff, John U., 'The Classification of Cebuano
Verbs', <i>Philippine Journal of Linguistics</i>, Vol. I,
No. 1, 1970.


<p>FLORA AND FAUNA


<p>BIRDS

<p>Delacour, Jean T., and Ernst Mayr, <i>Birds of the
Philippine Islands</i>. New York: The Macmillan
Co., 1946.

<p>Hachisuka, The Hon. Masaiya,<i> The Birds of the
Philippine Islands</i>. London: H. F. Witherby,
1931&ndash;1935.

<p>Thomson, A. Landsborough, <i>A New Dictionary
of Birds</i>. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964.


<p>FISHES AND SHELLFISHES

<p>Abbott, R. Tucker, <i>Sea Shells of the World</i>. New
York: Golden Press, 1962.

<p>Herre, Albert W.,<i> Checklist of Philippine Fishes</i>.
United States Department of Interior, Fish and
Wildlife Service, Research Report No. 20. Washington:
Government Printing Office, 1953.

<p>Herre, Albert W., and Agustin F. Umali,<i> English
and Local Names of Philippine Fishes</i>. United
States Department of Interior, Circular No. 140.
Washington: United States Government Printing
Office, 1948.

<p>Hvass, Hans, <i>Fishes of the World</i>. London:
Methuen and Co., Ltd., 1965.

<p>Munro, Ian S. R., <i>The Marine and Fresh Water
Fishes of Ceylon</i>. Canberra: Department of External
Affairs, 1955.

<p>Nichols, John T., and Paul Bartsch, <i>Fishes and
Shells of the World</i>. New York: The MacMillan
Co., 1945.

<p>Scott, J. S., <i>Sea Fishes of Malaya</i>. Kuala Lumpur:
Ministry of Agriculture, 1959.

<p>Tinker, Spencer Wilkie, <i>Pacific Sea Shells</i>. Tokyo:
Charles E. Tuttle Co., 1958.

<p>Umali, Agustin F., <i>Edible Fishes of Manila</i>. Commonwealth
of the Philippines, Department of
Agriculture and Commerce, Popular Bulletin
No. 6.

<p>Zim, Herbert S., and Lester Ingle, <i>Seashores</i>. New
York: Golden Press, 1955.


<p>INSECTS

<p>Curran, C. M., <i>Insects of the Pacific World</i>. New
York: The Macmillan Co., 1946.

<p>Fichter, George S., <i>Insect Pests</i>. New York:
Golden Press, 1966.


<p>MAMMALS

<p>Carter, T. D., J. E. Hill, and G. H. H. Tate, <i>Mammals
of the Pacific World</i>. New York: The Macmillan
Co., 1946.


<p>PLANTS

<p>Brown, William, <i>Useful Plants of the Philippines</i>.
Republic of the Philippines, Department of
Agriculture and Commerce, Technical Bulletin
No. 10. Manila, 1946.

<p>Merrill, Elmer D., <i>Plant Life of the Pacific World</i>.
New York: The Macmillan Co., 1945.

<p>Merrill, Elmer D., <i>Flora of Manila</i>. (Mimeographed).

<p>Quisumbing, Eduardo, <i>Medicinal Plants of the
Philippines</i>. Republic of the Philippines, Department
of Agriculture and Natural Resources,
Technical Bulletin No. 16, Manila, 1951.

<p>Salvosa, Felipe M., <i>Lexicon of Philippine Trees</i>.
College, Laguna, Philippines: Forest Products
Institute, 1963.

<p>Steiner, Mona Lisa, <i>Philippine Ornamental Plants
and their Care</i>. Second Edition. Manila: Carmelo
and Bauermann, Inc., 1960.


<p>ANTHROPOLOGICAL STUDIES

<p>Baduel, Concesa M., <i>A Study of the Cebuano Dayegon</i>.
Unpublished Master's Thesis, University
of the Visayas, Cebu City, 1959.

<p>Demetrio, Francisco R., S. J., <i>Dictionary of Philippine
Folk Beliefs and Customs</i>. Cagayan de
Oro City: Xavier University Press, 1970.

<p>Hart, Donn V., <i>The Cebuano Filipino Dwelling in
Caticugan: Its Construction and Cultural Aspects</i>.
Yale University, Southeast Asia Studies
Cultural Report Series. New Haven, 1958.

<p>Lieban, Richard W., <i>Cebuano Sorcery</i>. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1967.

<p>Quisumbing, Lourdes R., <i>Marriage Customs in
Rural Cebu</i>. University of San Carlos, San Carlos
Publications, Series A: Humanities No. 3.
Cebu City, 1965.

<p>Sodusta, Jesucita. <i>A Study of the Marriage and
Family Practices of the Inhabitants of Siargao
Island</i>. Unpublished Master's Thesis, University
of San Carlos, Cebu City, 1964.

<p>Tago-Gonzales, Lourdes, <i>A Study of the Superstitious
Beliefs, Practices, Pastimes of the People
of the Province of Bohol</i>. Unpublished Master's
Thesis, University of the Visayas, Cebu
City, 1959.

<p>Umali, Agustin F., <i>Guide to the Classification of
Fishing Gear in the Philippines</i>. United States
Department of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service,
Research Report No. 17. Washington:
United States Government Printing Office,
1950.
