<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN" [

<!ENTITY larr       CDATA "&#x2190;"            -- leftwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY rarr       CDATA "&#x2192;"            -- rightwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY glots      CDATA "&#x0294;"            -- glottal stop -->

<!ENTITY amacr      CDATA "&#x0101;"            -- a with macron -->
<!ENTITY imacr      CDATA "&#x012B;"            -- i with macron -->
<!ENTITY umacr      CDATA "&#x016B;"            -- u with macron -->

<!ENTITY amacrgra   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0300;"    -- a with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY imacrgra   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0300;"    -- i with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY umacrgra   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0300;"    -- u with macron and grave -->

<!ENTITY amacracu   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0301;"    -- a with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY imacracu   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0301;"    -- i with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY umacracu   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0301;"    -- u with macron and acute -->

<!ENTITY acaron     CDATA "a&#x030C;"           -- a with caron -->
<!ENTITY ucaron     CDATA "u&#x030C;"           -- u with caron -->
<!ENTITY icaron     CDATA "i&#x030C;"           -- i with caron -->

<!ENTITY schwa      CDATA "&#x0259;"            -- schwa (turned e) -->

]><TEI.2 lang=en>
<teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
        <titleStmt>
            <title>A Dictionary of Cebuano Visayan</title>
            <author>John U. Wolff</author>
        </titleStmt>
    </fileDesc>
    <profileDesc>
        <langUsage>
            <language id=en>English</language>
            <language id=en-US>English (United States)</language>
            <language id=ceb>Cebuano</language>
        </langUsage>
    </profileDesc>
</teiHeader>
<text>
<body>
<pb n=246>
<div1 n=G>
<head>G</head>


<p><form>G.</form> abbreviation for <ix>Ginúu</ix> &lsquo;Mister&rsquo;. <i>G. ug Gng. Purtunátu Búut,</i> Mr. and Mrs. Fortunato Buot.

<p><form>-g-</form> infix added after the vowel of the first syllable of adjectives referring to measurements to pluralize&mdash;i.e., form adjective referring to more than one thing. <i>Dagkù,</i> Big. <i>Tag-as,</i> Long. <i>Lagpad,</i> Wide. <i>Lagyù,</i> Far away from each other.

<p><form>ga</form> <xr><ix>short for</ix> <sc>SANGGA<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ga-</form> <xr><ix>short for</ix> <sc>NAGA-</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>g&amacracu;</form> <xr>= <sc>GÁLA<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gà<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>GÁNÌ</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p><form>gà<sub>2</sub></form> <ix>short for</ix> <foreign lang=ceb>pinalanggà</foreign>, <ix>used in address:</ix> <tr>sweetie pie</tr>.

<p><form>gâ</form> <xr>= <sc>GALÀ</sc>.</xr><note>[**note: unexplained accent usage.]</note>

<p><form>gáab</form> <xr>= <sc>AGAAB</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gaak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146; a12]</itype> walk with legs somewhat spread apart. <i>Naggaak siya kay gihubagan sa búgan,</i> He walked with legs spread apart because he had a boil in the groin. <pos>a</pos> walking with legs somewhat spread apart.

<p><form>gaan</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>light</tr>, not heavy in weight. <i>Gaan ka kay kanákù,</i> You&apos;re lighter than I am. <number>2</number> easy, not strenuous. <i>Gaan nga búhat,</i> Light jobs. <number>3</number> not grave. <i>Gaan ra ang sílut,</i> The sentence was too lenient. <form>&mdash; ug buut</form> <number>1</number> in a good mood, having a light disposition by nature. <number>2</number> somewhat mentally deranged. <form>&mdash; ang dugù</form> having specially good feelings toward a person. <i>Parinti diay nákù maung gaan ang ákung dugù níya,</i> I have special feelings for him as he turned out to be a relative of mine. <form>&mdash; ug kamut</form> <number>1</number> quick to lift a hand when provoked. <i>Manumbag kun masukù ang gaan ug kamut,</i> A quick-tempered person lifts his hand when angry. <number>2</number> quick to get at or steal s.t. without being noticed. <number>3</number> good at drawing or doing things with hands. <i>Himúang dibuhista kining batáa kay gaan ug kamut,</i> Make this child an artist because he has creative hands. <form>&mdash; ang láwas</form> feel better after an illness. <i>Gaan na ang ákung láwas human kaindiksiyuni,</i> I feel better now after the injection. <form>&mdash; ug sulti</form> speak in a disorganized way as if mentally deranged. <form>&mdash; ug úlu</form> have a light-headed feeling from lack of sleep, seasickness, and the like. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> become light. <i>Mugaan kanang ímung gipas-an kun kuháag katungà,</i> Your load will be lightened if you remove half of it. <i>Gigaanan ku sa trabáhu,</i> I consider the work not strenuous. <number>2</number> lessen in intensity. <i>Ang pagtug-an makagaan (makapagaan) sa sintinsiya,</i> If you confess, your sentence will be lighter. <form>&mdash; ang buut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6]</itype> <number>1</number> get to be in good mood. <number>2</number> get somewhat deranged. <i>Nigaan ang íyang buut pagkamatay sa íyang anak,</i> She went nearly crazy when her son died. <form>&mdash; ang láwas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> get recovered from an illness. <form>&mdash; ang úlu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> get light-headed from lack of sleep, airsickness, etc.

<p><form>gáang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> large coral rocks, sharp pointed with deep depressions. <number>2</number> clod of earth. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> place with lots of sharp-pointed rocks. <number>2</number> field covered with dried clods of earth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> for an area to lose its soil such that it becomes stony and infertile.

<p><form>gáay</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for wood, twigs, leaves to be light and extremely dry. <number>2</number> an old maid. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B23(1); a]</itype> be, become dry. <i>Migáay (nagáay) na ang kupras,</i> The copra is already dry. <i>Sigaun kaáyu ang langkay basta makagáay na,</i> The dry coconut frond burns easily once it has become dry. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23N]</itype> become an old maid. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>GÁAY</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> light, not heavy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> become light, not heavy. <i>Mugaay (magaay) giyud ang dalag yayúngan,</i> A load gets lighter if several people carry it.

<p><form>gáb<sub>1</sub></form> acronym for Games and Amusement Board.

<p><form>gáb<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>GALAB</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gábà</form> <pos>n</pos> punishment which comes as a natural consequence of some transgression, esp. a moral transgression. <i>Ang íyang sakit mauy gábà nga gihátag sa Ginúu,</i> His sickness is the punishment which the Lord imposed on him. <form>puyra &mdash;</form> formula for warding off <ix>gábà</ix>: &lsquo;May God not punish me for this.&rsquo; <i>Puyra gábà, ngánung musúkul ka man sa ímung amahan?</i> God forgive you, why did you rebel against your father? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b4]</itype> have retribution visited on one. <i>Gabáan ka sa ímung pagpasipálà sa dibultu,</i> You will be punished for defiling the image. <i>Ayaw kug gabái,</i> Don&apos;t be a cause of my getting divine retribution (said by s.o. who has <pb n=247>done s.t. to s.o. which might bring him <ix>gábà</ix>, e.g., leaving a host while he is eating). <form>gabàgabà</form> <pos>n</pos> <ix>gábà</ix> which comes in small installments as the result of a long period of moral transgression. <i>Súgud nang gabàgabà, búnga sa íyang pagkapalikíru,</i><i></i> Now the punishment he deserves begins, the result of his philanderings<corr>.</corr> <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> one who has power of causing people to suffer <ix>gábà</ix>.

<p><form>gaban</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> have sexual relations. <i>Ígù ka lang gabanun ánang mga laláking ímung gikuyugkúyug,</i> You will end up having sexual relations with the boys you go around with. <number>2</number> swipe, steal (slang). <i>Gigaban ang ákung sigarilyu,</i> S.o. stole my cigarettes.

<p><form>gabang</form> <pos>n</pos> instrument for turning the soil over, consisting of a round, wooden pole with a tongue made of a short, rectangular piece of iron attached to one end. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> strike with a <ix>gabang</ix>. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> turn the soil over with a <ix>gabang</ix>.

<p><form>gabardin</form> <pos>n</pos> gabardine cloth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> wear gabardine.

<p><form>gabas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>saw</tr>. <i>Kining parti sa tabla mau ang gabsun,</i> Saw this part of the wood. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2N; b6]</itype> take a short cut s.w. <i>Anhi ku dinhi manggabas paingun sa íla,</i> I take a short cut through here to get to their house. <pos>n</pos> <tr>saw</tr>. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> do intense sawing. <pos>n</pos> intense sawing action. <form>gabasgábas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> go back and forth. <i>Gabasgabásun nang kapitulyug nganhi ug mailiksiyun,</i> We will keep going back and forth from here to the Capitol during the elections. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> hit a billiard ball so that it cris-crosses. <form>gabsanan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sawmill</tr>. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sawdust</tr>. <form>-in-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> rough cuttings of lumber. <i>Ang mga ginábas kinahanglan nga sipilyáhan,</i> The rough cuttings must be planed smooth. <number>2</number> excess cuttings of lumber. <form>ginabsan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. from which a piece was sawed off. <number>2</number> s.o. already lightly used, like lumber with a piece sawed off (slang): a widow or widower, an unwed mother. <form>-íru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sawyer</tr>. <form>gabsunun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sawdust</tr>.

<p><form>gabas<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> old maid, spinster. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become an old maid.

<p><form>gábas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> walk side by side with. <i>Mugábas tag lakaw sa mga dalága,</i> Let&apos;s catch up to the girls to walk alongside of them.

<p><form>gábat</form> <xr>= <sc>KALÁBAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gabay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> hold on to s.t. to keep from sinking. <i>Ímung gabyan kining salbabída,</i> Hold on to this life saver. <pos>n</pos> support, s.t. to hold on to. <i>Ang ákung mga anak mahímung gabay sa ákung katigulangun,</i> My children will support me in my old age. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b6(1)]</itype> walk with s.t. to lean on or to hold on to for support. <i>Migábay sa kurdísu paingun sa kusína,</i> She walked to the kitchen supporting herself on the window sill. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. which one holds on to keep from falling or sinking.

<p><form>gabhang</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>gaping tear</tr> or <tr>hole</tr>. <i>Tapáki ang dakung gabhang sa ímung sinínà,</i> Patch the large gaping hole in your dress. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; b6(1)]</itype> get a gaping tear or hole in it. <i>Migabhang (nagabhang) ang atup nga nípà nga nahulúgan sa lubi,</i> The thatch roof got a big hole in it where a coconut fell through it.

<p><form>gabhut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> tie string around s.t. or over the mouth of a container. <i>Siyay naggabhut sa pakíti nga ipadala sa Amirika,</i> He bound the package to be sent to the States. <i>Uway ang igabhut sa batúang punù sa ságing,</i> Use rattan to close the top of the basket of bananas. <pos>n</pos> string used to tie on s.t. or over the mouth of containers.

<p><form>gábi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>taro</tr>, a large herb with arrow-shaped leaves, cultivated mainly for its underground corms, which are eaten in sweet stews. They are also eaten boiled or baked in times of famine. The leaves, shoots and petioles are also used as a vegetable: <bio>Colocasia esculenta</bio>. <form>&mdash; sa Amirikánu, Haway</form> <xr>= <sc>BISUL</sc>.</xr> <form>gabigabi</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to various plants which resemble <ix>gábi</ix>. <number>1</number> wild plants, <bio>Monochoria spp.</bio> <number>2</number> ornamentals, <bio>Caladium spp.</bio>

<p><form>gabíi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>night</tr>. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>KA-</sc>.</xr> <form>gabhiúna</form> <pos>n</pos> particular night. <i>Niánang gabhiúna walà mahimutang si Liliya,</i> That night Lily could not rest. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B5]</itype> be night. <i>Mugabíi na ang alas singku,</i> It gets to be night at five o&apos;clock. <i>Magkítà sila magabíi,</i> They see each other at night. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13P]</itype> do s.t. until night. <i>Maggabíi tag tuun,</i> Let&apos;s study until night. <number>3</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> be overtaken by night. <i>Nagabhian (nagabin-an) siya sa íyang pagpaúlì,</i> He was overtaken by night on his way home. <form>pa-(&rarr;), paka-(&rarr;), pa-, paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> <number>1</number> spend the night. <i>Nagpagabíi (nagpagabii, nagpakagabíi) sila sa mutil,</i> They spent the night in a motel. <number>2</number> allow oneself to be overtaken by night. <i>Ug magpagabii (magpakagabíi) ka sa ímung lakaw, piligru kaáyu,</i> It will be dangerous for you if you allow yourself to be overtaken by night while you are out. <form>panghi-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> for it to be almost night. <i>Manghigabíi tingáli siya muanhi,</i> He&apos;ll get here round about nightfall. <form>Culu-, gabiigabíi</form> evenings. <i>Malígù siya gabiigabíi,</i> He swims in the evening. <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> happening every night. <i>Ginabii ang ílang dúlà sa hay-alay,</i> They play Jai-Alai every night. <form>ka-</form> last night. <i>Ang pulis gipatay kagabíi,</i> The policeman was killed last night. <form>kagabhíun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>nighttime</tr>. <pb n=248><form>gabhíun, gabhiánun</form> <pos>a</pos> taking place at night. <i>Ang gabhíung (gabhiánung) tulumanun sa radiyu,</i> The evening program on the radio. &dagger;

<p><form>gabing<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> close up a rip, join two pieces of cloth together by sewing or pinning. <i>Ákung gabingun (igabing) ang duha ka ngilit,</i> I&apos;ll join the two edges. <i>Ákung gabingan ang gisì,</i> I&apos;ll close up the tear. <pos>n</pos> closure made by sewing two edges together. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> aperture that has been sewed or pinned together.

<p><form>gabiníti</form> <pos>n</pos> government cabinet.

<p><form>gabling</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> push or pull to the side. <i>Gigabling sa iskultur ang tabun sa istatúwa,</i> The sculptor pulled the cover off the statue. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> snatch in a sidewise motion. <i>Migabling siya sa íyang pitáka,</i> He snatched her purse. <i>Gablínga (gablinga, igabling) ang takup sa pultahan,</i> Pull the door shutter to the side.

<p><form>gabnut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> pull up and uproot s.t. flexible with a jerk. <i>Nagabnut (nagabnutan) ku man pag-apil ang mga búlak nga gitanum,</i> I accidentally pulled out the flowers along with the weeds. <i>Ákung gigabnut ang íyang buhuk,</i> I pulled her hair.

<p><form>gabù, gábù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> pull out by the roots. <i>Gabúa lang ang mga balíli arun dì muturuk pag-usab,</i> Just pull out the grass by the roots so it won&apos;t grow back.

<p><form>gábù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6c1]</itype> heat medicinal herbs wrapped in banana leaves over live coals before applying them. <i>Maggábù kug mga sagibunhun pára sa ryúma ni Tátay,</i> I&apos;ll warm medicinal herbs for Father&apos;s rheumatism.

<p><form>gabuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for wood and fiber to be weakened from decay. <i>Nabugtù ang písì kay gabuk na diay,</i> The rope broke because it was already rotten. <number>2</number> not well-founded, unsound. <i>Tinuhúang gabuk,</i> Unsound religions. <form>&mdash; ug balatían</form> readily persuaded. <i>Kagabuk nímug balatían! Misálig ka man dáyun níya,</i> How easily you are persuaded! You believed him right away! <form>&mdash; ug láwas</form> tending to get sick easily. <form>&mdash; ug tinái</form> having a lousy stomach. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a4]</itype> for wood or fibers to get decayed and weak. <i>Nagkagabuk na kining sawug,</i> This floor is beginning to rot. <i>Ang káhuyng maáyung gamítun mau kanang wà pa gabka (gabuka),</i> The best wood to use is the kind that has not begun to decay yet.

<p><form>gabuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. univalve.

<p><form>gab-ul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fish prepared by salting, spicing, and partly drying in the sun. <number>2</number> smell of <corr sic=rottan>rotten</corr> fish. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> prepare <ix>gab-ul</ix>. <i>Lamì gab-úlun ang isdang bangus,</i> Milkfish makes good <ix>gab-ul</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; a]</itype> come to smell spoiled like rotten fish. <i>Nagab-ul na lang ang isdà kay dúgay kaáyung gilútù,</i> The fish got spoiled because they didn&apos;t cook it right away.

<p><form>gabun<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>MUUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gabun<sub>2</sub>, gábun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. half-woody herb, the leaves of which have medicinal uses: <bio>Blumea balsamifera</bio>.

<p><form>gábun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fog</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; b6]</itype> be covered with fog. <i>Mugábun (gabúnan) ang búkid sa sayung kabuntágun,</i> On early mornings the mountains are covered with fog. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>foggy</tr>.

<p><form>gábut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> pull out plants not in a careful way. <i>Ang lagwirta gigabútan na sa mga sagbut,</i> The weeds in the yard have been pulled out now. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> fatty tissue attached to the lining of the pig&apos;s abdomen and rib cage which can be removed by simply pulling it off. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. that can be pulled out without digging. <i>Maning gabutun,</i> A variety of peanut that is just pulled out when harvested because the nuts hang on to the roots.

<p><form>gádim</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; a12b2]</itype> say god damn. <i>Gadímun ka giyug magsurangsurang ka,</i> He&apos;ll say god damn to you if you pester him.

<p><form>gadímit</form> expression of annoyance. <i>Gadímit ning tawhána,</i> Damn that guy.

<p><form>gadlas</form> <xr>= <sc>GARAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gága</form> <xr>= <sc>GÁGU</sc> (feminine).</xr>

<p><form>gagmáting</form> <xr>= <sc>GAMÁTING</sc> (plural).</xr>

<p><form>gagmátuy</form> <xr>= <sc>GAMÁTUY</sc> (plural).</xr>

<p><form>gagmay</form> <xr>= <sc>GAMAY</sc> (plural).</xr>

<p><form>gagming</form> <xr>= <sc>GAMING</sc> (plural).</xr>

<p><form>gagmítuy</form> <xr>= <sc>GAMÁTUY</sc> (plural).</xr>

<p><form>gágu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>stupid</tr>, lacking in sound judgment. <i>Kagágu nímu! Ngánung wà ka man muhangyù?</i> You&apos;re a fool. Why didn&apos;t you bargain the price down? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become stupid. <form>kagagúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stupidity</tr>.

<p><form>gaguy</form> <pos>a</pos> doing crazy, improper things (slang). <i>Gaguy. Nagbrip lang sa gawas,</i> The idiot. He goes outside in his briefs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become silly or stupid.

<p><form>gáhab</form> <xr>= <sc>GALHAB</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gahad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cut down grass, weeds, young plants. <i>Nagahad kug apil ang mga gagmay nga mangga,</i> I accidentally cut down the small mango trees as well. <i>Dalì rang mutúbù ang mga sagbut ug gadhun lang,</i> The grass will grow back quickly if you only cut it down.

<p><form>gahápun</form> (from <ix>hápun</ix>) yesterday. <i>Gahápun ku lang siya makítà,</i> I only saw her yesterday. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> one&apos;s past. <i>Ang íyang kagahápun punù ug mga masulub-ung handumánan,</i> Her past is full of sad memories. <form>may &mdash;</form> for a woman to have a shady past. <number>2</number> <xr>= <pb n=249><sc>GAHÁPUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gahas, gáhas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> clear an area by cutting down trees and tall plants, but not grass and weeds. <i>Manggáhas siya sa púngut úsà daúbi,</i> He cuts down the second growth jungle before he sets the fire for clearing it. <i>Sila ang únang naggáhas sa dálan sa kaálam sa mga lapyù nga kaisípan,</i> They were the ones who paved the way (lit. cleared the road) for the education of young minds. <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> one who lives by slash and burn agriculture.

<p><form>gáhas<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>GÁS</sc>, <pos>n</pos> <i>1</i>.</xr>

<p><form>gáhì</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> hard, not soft. <i>Gáhì pa ang nilat-ang manuk,</i> The chicken stew is still tough. <number>2a</number> hard to do s.t. to. <i>Gáhì kaáyung ablíhun,</i> Very hard to open. <i>Gáhì nga dad-un sa sáyaw,</i> Difficult to lead in dancing. <number>2b</number> hard to get to do s.t. <i>Misugut na ang asáwa apan ang bána mauy gáhì,</i> The wife has consented but the husband remains adamant. <number>2c</number> insensitive. <i>Gáhig kasingkásing,</i> Stone-hearted. <number>2d</number> slow to do s.t. which one is supposed to do. <i>Gáhì kaáyung mubáyad sa útang,</i> Very slow to pay his debts. <number>3</number> slow to adapt, understand. <i>Gáhing muusab sa íyang kinaíya,</i> Slow to change his ways. <number>4a</number> <formx>i nga &mdash;</formx> letter <ix>e</ix> (speaking of English). <number>4b</number> letter <ix>i</ix> (speaking of Spanish). <form>&mdash; nga tíngug</form> stern, angry tone of voice. <form>&mdash; ug ilung</form> contrary, stubborn (like a carabao that goes the opposite direction when s.o. pulls on his nose ring). <i>Gáhig ilung. Dì giyud magsapátus,</i> What a stubborn child. She simply won&apos;t put her shoes on. <form>-g úlu</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>GÁHIG ILUNG</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> slow to understand. <i>Gáhig úlu, dì kasabut,</i> He is slow in comprehending; he doesn&apos;t understand. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN2S3(1); a2]</itype> become tough, hard. <i>Mugáhì (manggáhì) ang láwas inigkamatay,</i> The body stiffens when one dies. <i>Maggahì ning ákù ug makaadláwun,</i> Mine (my penis) is always stiff in the morning. <i>Gahíun paglútù ang latik,</i> Cook the syrup until it is hard. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> be rigid so as to be difficult to carry. <i>Ug sakwátun ka ayaw panggáhì,</i> If s.o. carries you, don&apos;t make yourself rigid. <form>ma-</form> <pos>a</pos> hard. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> be hard to convince about s.t., be set against s.t. <i>Nagmagáhì si Núri sa pagpagámit sa íyang yútà,</i> Nory was firmly set against letting anyone farm his land. <form>pagahìgáhì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> play hard to get, convince. <i>Pagahìgahían gánì ku nímu dì tikaw lahusun,</i> If you play hard to get with me, I might just quit. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> of a stubborn sort.

<p><form>gahid</form> <pos>n</pos> bamboo or wooden hook attached to a rope and used to pull a fish trap out of the water. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> get a trap out of the water with a hook. <i>Átung gahirun ang búbu,</i> We&apos;ll hook the fish trap and pull it up.

<p><form>gahin</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> set aside a portion. <i>Naggahin siyag usa ka úras pagpakigsulti kanímu,</i> She set aside an hour to talk with you. <i>Gahinan ta kag kík,</i> I&apos;ll set some cake aside for you. <pos>n</pos> portion set aside, appropriation. <i>Ang gahin sa badyit álang sa idukasiyun,</i> The appropriation from the budget for education.

<p><form>gahit<sub>1</sub>, gáhit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> clear a strip surrounding a clearing which will be burnt to prevent the fire from spreading. <i>Nakakánat ang káyu kay wà ku makagahit sa kaíngin,</i> The fire spread because I failed to make a fire-break around the clearing. <number>2</number> make a temporary trail in an otherwise unpenetrable thicket. <i>Gahiti ang kalibunan kay dì masúut,</i> Make a trail in the thicket because we can&apos;t go through it. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fire-break</tr>. <number>2</number> temporary trail.

<p><form>*gahit<sub>2</sub></form> <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146]</itype> do harm with energy and eagerness. <i>Nagpanggahit ang asáwa nga nakig-áway sa babáyi sa íyang bána,</i> The wife was only too eager to get at her husband&apos;s mistress.

<p><form>gáhù</form> <xr>= <sc>HÁGÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gáhub</form> <pos>a</pos> noisy, tumultuous. <i>Halayù sa gáhub nga dakbayan,</i> Far from the noisy city. <pos>n</pos> loud, continuous, roaring noise. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b6]</itype> be in uproar, din. <i>Migáhub (nagáhub) ang istadiyum dihang nadáwun ang kampiyun,</i> The stadium was in uproar when the champion hit the deck. <form>ka-, -in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>GÁHUB</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <form>-un</form> <pos>n</pos> of a noisy sort.

<p><form>gahuk</form> <pos>n</pos> a pointed piece of wood about a foot in length used to dig sweet potatoes.

<p><form>gahum</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>power</tr>. <i>Ang gahum sa Tayid,</i> The power of Tide. <i>Ang gahum sa hárì,</i> The power of the king. <i>Ang anáa sa gahum,</i> Those in power. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> gather enough strength. <i>Nakagahum siya pagbutyag sa masulub-ung balità ngadtu kaníya,</i> She gathered enough strength to break the sad news to him. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2456; b4]</itype> <tr>overpower</tr>, take power over. <i>Ang kahadluk sa kamatáyun migahum kaníya,</i> He was completely overpowered by his fear of death. <i>Taliwalà sa kalampúsan walà siya gamhi sa garbu,</i> In the midst of his success he wasn&apos;t overcome with pride. <form>gamhánan</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>powerful</tr>, able to effect chance<note>[**typo: change]</note>. <i>Ang labing gamhánang ingridiyinti sa Tayid,</i> The most powerful ingredient in Tide. <form>gamhánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dominating</tr>. <i>Usa ka gamhánung tíngug milánug,</i> A dominating voice resounded. <form>galamhan</form> one&apos;s inner feelings, inner self. <i>Natay-ug ang íyang galamhan sa túmang kabalísa,</i> Her inner self was shaken by intense anxiety. <form>kagamhánan</form> <pb n=250><tr>government</tr>. <i>Kagamhánang dimukratiku,</i> Democratic government. <form>makagagáhum</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> overpowering all else. <i>Usa ka makagagáhum nga unus,</i> An overpowering squall. <number>2</number> The Almighty.

<p><form>gáhung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pit trap</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b6(1)]</itype> make a pit trap. <i>Gahúngi nang dapíta kay labyanan sa bábuy ihálas,</i> Make a pit trap over there because that&apos;s where wild pigs pass by. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a6]</itype> trap s.t. in a pit. <i>Gahúnga ang bábuy ihás,</i> Trap the wild pig in a pit. <form>mang-ay</form> <pos>n</pos> one who traps with pits.

<p><form>gahut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> complain, scold with shouting. <i>Gigahutan kung máma kay nahubug ku,</i> Mother screamed at me because I was drunk. <form>gathánay, gahutay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c3]</itype> shout at each other.

<p><form>gáid</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> lash, tie s.t. against s.t. <i>Igáid nang istatúwa sa pusti arun dì matumba,</i> Tie the statue to the post so that it won&apos;t topple down. <number>1a</number> <xr>= <sc>GÁPUS</sc>, <pos>v</pos> <i>2</i>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> whip soundly. <i>Gaírun ku ikaw ug dì ka mutúu,</i> I&apos;ll give you a sound whipping if you don&apos;t listen. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. to tie with.

<p><form>gáka</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S3S; a]</itype> go up an incline or slope. <i>Human mi makagaka (makagáka) sa bungtud, nakítà ang dágat,</i> After we had gone up the hill, we could see the sea. <form>gakahun</form> <pos>a</pos> on an incline.

<p><form>gak-ang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> squat, sit on one&apos;s heels on top of s.t. <i>Ayaw gak-ángi ang bangkíyu,</i> Don&apos;t squat on the toilet seat. Sit right on it.

<p><form>gákit</form> <pos>n</pos> bamboo or log <tr>raft</tr>. <i>Ang gákit nga gipunduhan mauy silúngan sa isdà,</i> An anchored raft is used to draw the fish. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> ride on a raft. <i>Maggákit mi paingun sa isla,</i> We are going to take the raft to the island. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a raft. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> lashed together to form a raft.

<p><form>gakud</form> <xr>= <sc>GÁID</sc>, <ix>1, 1a</ix>.</xr>

<p><form>gakus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; ab2]</itype> <tr>hug</tr>, <tr>embrace</tr>. <i>Tiggakus siyag alungnag matúlug,</i> He usually embraces a pillow when he sleeps. <i>Ang duha ka buksidur naggákus,</i> The two boxers were clenching. <i>Gigakus níya ang íyang hinigugma,</i> She embraced her beloved. <pos>n</pos> <tr>embrace</tr>. <i>Hugut nga gakus,</i> A tight embrace. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> act of mutual embracing. <i>Kútub ra sa gákus, way háluk,</i> It just went as far as hugging. No kissing. <form>gakusgákus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> hug repeatedly. <form>gaksanay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> embrace each other.

<p><form>gakut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>scars</tr> on the skin marked by heavy scar tissue. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> have large, ugly scars. <i>Nagakut ang íyang líug kay mibutu kini,</i> She has large ugly scars on her neck from boils she had.

<p><form>gákut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> tie s.t. so as to prevent it from being opened or detached. <i>Ang kutsíru mauy migákut sa mga malíta sa atup sa tartanilya,</i> The rig driver tied the suitcases on the roof of the rig. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> lashings.

<p><form>gála<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[Ac; ac]</itype> <tr>play games</tr>, play with s.t. <i>Mugála gihápun kag munyíka?</i> Do you still play with dolls? <i>Dílì na nátù siya igála,</i> Let&apos;s not play with her any more. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> influence, lure s.o. into doing s.t. he shouldn&apos;t. <i>Ikaw giyuy nakag&amacracu; kaníya sa binúang,</i> You influenced him to do s.t. foolish. <number>3</number> <itype>[c]</itype> give money for a performance. <i>Gigaláhan siya sa mananan-awg diyis písus nga giitsa sa intabládu,</i> He got ten pesos from the money which the audience had thrown on the stage. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>game</tr>. <number>2</number> gift of money given for performing. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>playmates</tr>. <form>galáhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>toy</tr>. <number>2</number> <pos>a</pos> plaything which gives certain magical powers to the owner. <i>Ang trabungku galáhan sa sawa,</i> A crystal ball is the special magic toy which a snake possesses. <number>3</number> amusement devices at fairs and carnivals. <number>4</number> penis (used as one&apos;s plaything&mdash;slang). <form>galagala</form> <pos>n</pos> companions, usually unwholesome. <i>Nahímu siyang dautan tungud sa gagá,</i> He became evil because of bad company. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; b5]</itype> induce s.o. to do s.t. unwholesome. <i>Gigalagala (gigalagalahan) ku níla pagsúkul sa ákung inaína,</i> They induced me to fight my stepmother.

<p><form>gála<sub>2</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> dress used for festive occasion. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> use, wear a gala attire. <form>&mdash; nga unipurmi</form> <pos>n</pos> gala uniform. <form>&mdash; primyir</form> <pos>n</pos> gala premier.<note>[**premire/première]</note> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c6]</itype> hold a gala premier.<note>[**premiere/première]</note>

<p><form>galà</form> <pos>n</pos> dry twigs. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> gather dry twigs.

<p><form>galab, gálab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cut with a scythe, sickle. <i>Gigalab níya ang kúgun,</i> He cut the saw grass with a sickle. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> scythe, sickle.

<p><form>galam</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>take care of</tr>, <tr>attend to</tr> the needs of s.o. <i>Gigám ang mabdus sa duktur,</i> The doctor attended to the pregnant woman. <number>2</number> <tr>raise</tr>, <tr>rear</tr>. <i>Gigám sila sáma gayud sa kaugalíngun níyang anak,</i> She raised them like her own children. <pos>n</pos> <tr>care</tr>, watchful attention. <i>Way gám, maung nangaláyà,</i> They withered because no one took care of them. <form>galalmun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>delicate</tr>, requiring much attention and care. <i>Galalmun kaáyu ning buwáka,</i> This flower is very delicate.

<p><form>*gálam hi-/ha-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> develop the habit or liking for doing s.t. after having tried it once. <i>Nahigálam nà siyag sulugsúlug kay dì man suklan,</i> He has been encouraged to keep teasing because nobody stands up to him. <i>Makahigálam (makapahigálam) man ning lamía,</i> This taste makes one crave for more. <pb n=251><i>Ug muhátag ka kanúnay, higadman kag pangáyù,</i> If you always give, he&apos;ll be encouraged to ask you for some all the time.

<p><form>galangan</form> <pos>n</pos> small variety of <ix>balingbing</ix> (<bio>Averrhoa carambola</bio>) which is very juicy, sour, and dark orange in color.

<p><form>galansíyang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. jet-black, glossy starling: <bio>Aplonis panayensis</bio>.

<p><form>galanti</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>a</pos> swashbuckling and ostentatiously courteous, esp. to ladies. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> act in a swashbuckling and ostentatiously courteous way. <i>Tihik apan nagalanti kay dihay babáyi, ug siyay mibáyad,</i> He&apos;s a cheapskate, but he suddenly got generous because there was a lady in the company, and he paid the bill.

<p><form>galas, gálas</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> cut through a thicket to make a trail. <i>Maggalas tag agiánan sa kalibunan,</i> We will cut a trail through the thicket. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> make a clearing along the perimeter of a cultivated area to use as a boundary marker. <i>Gigalasan nákù ang matag saup arun way áway,</i> I made a clearing as a boundary marker for each of my tenants to avoid quarrels.

<p><form>galaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>twig</tr>, small branches.

<p><form>galawgaw</form> <pos>n</pos> one who is good for nothing and who is only a nuisance in a group activity. <i>Dílì giyud kita magkasinábut kun paapilun ta nang galawgaw sa átung panaglantúgì,</i> We won&apos;t be able to reach an agreement if we let kibitzers join our discussion.

<p><form>gálay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sweet potato tops</tr> used as a green. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> cook sweet potato tops. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> gather sweet potato tops.

<p><form>galbanisádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>galvanized</tr>.

<p><form>galgal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> entice s.o. to do s.t. that leads to eventual misfortune. <i>Nanggalgal siya nákù pagpangábang,</i> He talked me into getting a prostitute. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of enticing people into doing things bad for them. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>tempting</tr>, <tr>enticing</tr>. <i>Nahiráda ku sa magalgálun níyang pahíyum,</i> I fell a victim to her seductive smile.

<p><form>galhà</form> <pos>a</pos> warm and airless. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a4b6]</itype> be, become warm and airless. <i>Mugalhà (magalhà) ang kwartu basta daghang táwu sa sulud,</i> The room will become hot if there are too many people inside. <i>Gigalhà ka ba? Do you feel warm? Gigalháan ka ba áning kwartúha?</i> Do you consider this room hot?

<p><form>galhab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a large, gaping tear or hole. <i>Dinamíta ang nakagalhab sa kílid sa dinamitíru,</i> Dynamite explosion made a gaping wound on the fisherman&apos;s side. <i>Galhábun ku ang ímung sinínà kun dì nímu hubúun,</i> I&apos;ll rip your dress if you don&apos;t take it off. <pos>n</pos> <tr>tear</tr>, <tr>wound</tr>. <pos>a</pos> having a gaping wound or tear.

<p><form>gálì</form> <xr>= <sc>GÁNÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>galihíra</form> <pos>n</pos> printer&apos;s galley.

<p><form>galing</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>mill</tr> s.t. or grind in a mill. <i>Mugaling sila sa tubu run,</i> They&apos;ll mill the sugarcane now. <i>Galinga ang kapi,</i> Grind the coffee. <number>2</number> turn a wheel or crank to run some sort of machine. <number>2a</number> spin cotton into thread. <number>2b</number> turn the crank of a cable. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make a motion picture. <i>Ang &lsquo;Safari&rsquo; didtu níla galinga sa Aprika,</i> &lsquo;Safari&rsquo; was filmed in Africa. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> do intense milling. <i>Naggáling run sa tubu kay madáut ug taudtauran,</i> They are rushing to mill the sugarcane now because it will spoil if the milling is delayed. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>mill</tr> for grinding s.t. <number>2</number> <tr>spinning wheel</tr>. <form>galinggaling</form> <pos>n</pos> another name for the bug called <ix>daging</ix>, so called because children play with it, tying a string to its waist and letting it fly around in circles. &dagger;

<p><form>gáling<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> make a post, tree, or anything rooted to the ground face a different direction or straighten up without removing it from its foundations or roots by means of ropes. <i>Galíngun nátù ang dakung mangga,</i> Let&apos;s straighten up the mango tree. <form>&mdash; nang &mdash;</form> words uttered while letting a baby stand on one&apos;s lap and allowing it to sway back and forth. <form>galinggáling</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> move or rock sidewise s.t. rooted or stuck, usually to loosen it. <i>Gigalinggáling níya ang pusti nga íyang hulbútun,</i> He moved the post that he is going to uproot back and forth.

<p><form>gáling<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>UGÁLING</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>galiríya</form> <pos>n</pos> gallery, place for the general public.

<p><form>galmù</form> <pos>a</pos> for food to be spoiled or damaged from too much touching. <i>Galmù na ang sud-an nga gipunáyag híkap,</i> The dish has become spoiled because they kept touching it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a2]</itype> become spoiled or damaged by too much touching.

<p><form>galù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>fool</tr>, <tr>simpleton</tr>. <i>Galù ka giyud kun mutúman ka sa íyang dautang tambag,</i> You are a fool if you follow his bad advice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>fool</tr>, <tr>bluff</tr> s.o. <form>galùgálù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>tease</tr>, make fun of. <i>Ayaw galùgalúa ang bungì,</i> Do not make fun of the harelip.

<p><form>galù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> shake, rock back and forth. <i>Kinsay mugalù sa láta sa dáyis?</i> Who will shake the can with the dice in it? <form>galùgálù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> work s.t. back and forth, shake back and forth. <i>Galùgalúa nang bugsuk arun masayung ibtun,</i> Work the stake back and forth so it will be easy to pull it out.

<p><form>galun<sub>1</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>gallon</tr> capacity. <number>2</number> gallon container. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> be one <tr>gallon</tr>. <i>Hápit mugalun ang tubà,</i> There is almost a <pb n=252>gallon of toddy. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> measure out by the gallon. <form>-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> gallon container.

<p><form>galun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>epaulet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear epaulets.

<p><form>gálung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> attach a rope through the ears or nose of an animal for control. <number>1a</number> attach a controlling string to the kite. <number>2</number> put a string over the mouth of a vessel as a handle. <i>Gawngig písì ang balding nawad-an sa kuptanan,</i> Put a rope over the mouth of the pail that lost its handle. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> keep s.o. in restriction or control. <i>Gigalúngan ang mga Katuliku sa paggáwì sa pils,</i> The Catholics are restrained from using the pill. <pos>n</pos> s.t. that controls or restrains s.t., e.g. rope in the ears or noses of animals, string tied to the main spar of a kite.

<p><form>galusgálus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>hug</tr> s.o. playfully. <i>Galusgalúsa lang ímung asáwag masukù,</i> Just hug your wife playfully if she gets angry.

<p><form>galut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>haughty</tr> and giving oneself airs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; ab6]</itype> <tr>haughty</tr>. <i>Gigalutan kaáyu aku níya kay dílì na siya muípun nátù,</i> I think she&apos;s haughty because she avoids our company.

<p><form>galut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. grouper (<ix>pugápu</ix>): name given to species that are small.

<p><form>galyíra, galyirahan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cockpit</tr>, enclosed space for cockfighting.

<p><form>galyíta, galyítas</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. dry and crisp cracker.

<p><form>galyu</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>MÍSA<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>*gam babul &mdash;</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>BÁBUL GAM</sc>.</xr> <form>tsúwing &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>SÚWING GAM</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gám</form> <xr>= <sc>GALAM</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gamà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>manufacture</tr>, <tr>make into</tr>. <i>Gam-un ku ning kawáyan ug (nga) mga lingkuránan,</i> I will make this bamboo into seats. <number>2</number> make into s.t. <i>Gigamà ku níyang (ug) suluguun,</i> She turned me into her servant. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> thing produced. <i>Gamà ni sa Inglatíra,</i> This was made in England. <number>1a</number> thing made or created. <i>Kining mga urug lumalábay kay kini gamà lang sa táwu,</i> These fads are just transitory because they are purely s.o.&apos;s creation. <number>2</number> <tr>result of</tr>. <i>Gamà ni sa ímung pagsuruysúruy,</i> This is the result of your roaming about. <form>galam-un, gam-unun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>materials</tr>. <number>2</number> things to make. <form>galam-an, gam-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>factory</tr>. <form>tag-, tig-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>manufacturer</tr>.

<p><form>gámà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> go s.w. secretly, without being detected. <i>Akuy mugámà sa kampu kung wà bay gwardiya,</i> I&apos;ll try to sneak into the camp to see whether there is a guard.

<p><form>gámat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> tie s.t. which contains s.t. in such a way as to keep the contents from coming out. <i>Ang naggámat niíning kartúna nanigúru giyud nga way mawálà,</i> Whoever tied this box up made sure that nothing would be lost. <pos>n</pos> knot made to prevent s.t. from coming out of a container.

<p><form>gamáting</form> <pos>a</pos> very teensy, weensy in size or amount (smaller than <ix>gamátuy</ix>). <form>-g-</form> teeny (plural).

<p><form>gamátuy</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>tiny</tr> in size or amount (smaller than <ix>gamay</ix>). <form>-g-</form> tiny (plural).

<p><form>gámaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> come to the surface. <i>Ug mugámaw ang isdà,</i> If the fish comes to the surface. <number>2</number> come out partly from behind. <i>Migámaw ang íyang nawung sa pulta,</i> His face showed from behind the door. <pos>n</pos> part of s.t. exposed on the surface or from behind s.t. <i>Nagkadakù ang gámaw sa submarínu,</i> More and more of the submarine appeared on the surface.

<p><form>gamay</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> small in size, amount, number. <i>Ngánung gamay ka mang pagkatáwu?</i> Why are you a small person? <number>2</number> young person. <i>Gamay ka pang mag-apil-apil sa isturyang law-ay,</i> You&apos;re too young to listen to lewd stories. <number>3</number> one&apos;s small child. <i>Wà pa manghúri ang ámung gamay,</i> Our little son hasn&apos;t gotten any younger brothers and sisters yet. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2S]</itype> be, become small, few. <i>Migamay (nagamay) siya human masakit,</i> He became thin after his illness. <i>Nagkagamay ang klinti sa tikasan nga abugádu,</i> The clients of the crooked lawyer are dwindling. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> make s.t. small. <i>Ang sastri mauy migamay sa ákung sinínà,</i> The dressmaker reduced the size of my dress. <i>Gamyi ang síga sa sugà,</i> Turn the lamp down. <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> do s.t. in a small way. <i>Gamaya rag pangáyù,</i> Ask for only a small amount. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B23]</itype> be in the process of becoming small. <i>Migámay (nagámay) ang balun nga gihibúsan,</i> The balloon got small when air was let out of it. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26; b6]</itype> feel comparatively unworthy or small, consider s.o. as such. <i>Migámay (nagámay) aku atubángan sa rayna,</i> I felt very small before the queen. <i>Gigamyan siya nímu,</i> He considers you small fry. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. dish containing chopped meat with various vegetables. <form>gamaygamay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> reduce s.t. into small pieces. <form>-g-</form> small (plural). <form>-in-g-</form> <pos>a</pos> little by little. <i>Iginagmay (ginagmaya) ug hátag,</i> Give it out, a little at a time. <form>tag-, -in-g-</form> <pos>a</pos> little each time. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> of a small type. <form>-ut, -ut(&larr;)</form> small and thin. <i>Dáan nà siyang gamayut,</i> He is born very small. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> become small, thin. <i>Migamayut (nagamayut) ang íyang nawung sa pagkasakit níya,</i> Her face became small and thin after her sickness. <form>-utun</form> <pos>a</pos> of a small type.

<p><form>gambálay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> compose s.t. poetic. <i>Naggambálay siyag matam-is nga mga púlung nga ighuhunghung ngadtu níya,</i> He composed sweet words to whisper to her. <number>2</number> <pb n=253><xr>= <sc>BÁLAY</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>BALAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gambat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make s.t. into a network. <i>Naggambat si Tátay sa íyang palàpálà,</i> Father is making a frame of latticework to port his climbing plant. <i>Gigambat nákù pagsursi ang midyas,</i> I fixed the socks by darning them.

<p><form>gaming</form> <pos>a</pos> very small in size or amount. <form>-g-</form> small (plural). <form>gamíng</form> very small.

<p><form>gaminggaming</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small, inedible, black fish which exudes poison from its thorns.

<p><form>gámit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> use s.t. <i>Migámit siyag pilduras arun dílì manganak,</i> She used pills to prevent pregnancy. <i>Gamítun ku ang kutsi,</i> I will use the car. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> use a woman for sexual pleasure. <i>Kay nagámit na, dì na dunsilya,</i> Because s.o. has used her, she is no longer a virgin. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> borrow money. <i>Mugámit ku nímug singku písus,</i> Will you lend me five pesos? <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>implement</tr>, <tr>instrument</tr>. <i>Gamit sa pangisdà,</i> Fishing equipment. <number>2</number> personal effects such as clothes, toilet articles, furniture, and the like. <form>-in-</form> thing used. <i>Ginámit ang tanang kusug, gihampak níya ang kaáway,</i> Using all his strength, he struck the enemy. <form>-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> red-light district, bawdy house. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the use to which a thing is put. <i>Unsa may kagamítan sa mata?</i> Of what use are the eyes? <number>2</number> personal effects. <i>Klasiklási ang pahumut sa íyang kagamítan,</i> She has many k.o. perfume in her personal effects. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; sa balay</formx> household furniture. <form>-l-un(&rarr;), -in-un(&rarr;)</form> utensils, equipment. <i>Galamitun (ginamitun) sa panday,</i> Carpenter&apos;s tools.

<p><form>gamíting</form> <pos>a</pos> very, very tiny. <i>Gamíting kaáyu ang bátà nga bag-ung natáwu,</i> The newly-born infant is very, very tiny.

<p><form>gamítuy</form> <xr>= <sc>GAMÁTUY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gamlù</form> <xr>= <sc>GAM-UL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gamu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fussy</tr>, for small children to be annoying because of ill temper. <i>Gamu kaáyung batáa, muhílak ug ibutang,</i> This child is so fussy. It cries when I put it down. <number>2</number> <tr>tedious</tr>, <tr>cumbersome</tr>. <i>Tib-a na lag lista kay kun tagsatagsaun, gamu na kaáyu,</i> Put it all under one entry because if you list them one by one, it&apos;s tedious work. <number>3</number> <formx>way &mdash;</formx> not hard to please, not fussy. <i>Way gamu tawhána kay mukáun bisag unsay idúlut,</i> He isn&apos;t hard to please because he is not choosy in his food. <number>4</number> being a hindrance to one&apos;s movements. <i>Gamu kaáyu ning magdá tag bátà sa byáhi,</i> It&apos;s a lot of trouble to take a child along on a trip. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B146]</itype> be fussy. <i>Naggamu ang bátà kay gibutdan sa tiyan,</i> The baby is restless because it has gas pains. <number>2</number> be filled with anxiety, worry. <i>Naggamu ang íyang kahiladman tungud sa pagkawálà sa íyang anak,</i> He was very worried about his lost child. <number>3</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> consider s.t. tedious, wearisome. <number>4</number> <itype>[B46]</itype> be a hindrance to one&apos;s movements. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> have difficulty managing to carry things. <i>Nagkagámu siya sa íyang gipamalit,</i> Her hands are full with the things she had bought.

<p><form>gamù</form> <xr>= <sc>GAM-UL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gam-ul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> mix a small amount of salt with fish to preserve it for a short period of time. <i>Naggam-ul ku sa bulinaw arun magámit pa ugmà,</i> I am mixing a little salt with the anchovies so we can still use them tomorrow. <number>2</number> touch food and spoil its appearance or make it so it becomes rancid. <i>Kinsay naggam-ul niíning kík, nga nawad-an sa hitsúra,</i> Who touched this cake; its looks are ruined. <number>3</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> become spoiled. <pos>a</pos> spoiled food.

<p><form>gamus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> preserve with salt without drying, most commonly said of small fish or fry. <i>Gamusa ang subrang bulinaw,</i> Preserve the extra anchovies with salt. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. preserved in salt. <number>2</number> secret or hidden wrongdoings. <i>Giugkat sa blakmílir ang mga ginamus sa íyang kagahápun,</i> The blackmailer unearthed the putrid secrets of her past. <form>ginamusginámus</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tag played by teams whereby the object is to reach a home base, and the team members try to capture each other in so doing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> play this game. <form>gamsanan</form> <pos>n</pos> container for preserving fish in salt.

<p><form>gamúsa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>suede</tr>. <number>2</number> shoes made of suede. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> wear suede shoes.

<p><form>gamut</form> <pos>n</pos> root of plants. <form>&mdash; dakù</form> primary root. <number>2</number> root cause. <i>Ang pangabubhu mauy gamut sa ílang pagbulagay,</i> Jealousy is at the root of their separation. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN23; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> for plants to take root. <i>Migamut (nanggamut) na ang ákung kamúting káhuy,</i> My cassava plant has taken root. <i>Láwum nag gigamutan ang binhì,</i> The seedlings have taken deep roots. <number>2</number> stay long in a place. <i>Way manggamut niíning trabahúa,</i> No one lasts long on the job here. <number>3</number> be well-founded, established. <i>Migamut ang ílang nigusyu kay maáyung pagkadala,</i> Their business took root due to good management. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> gather roots. <i>Nakapanggamut na aku pára sa íyang hilánat,</i> I&apos;ve gathered roots for her fever. <form>pa-</form> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> propagate plants by letting cuttings develop roots. <i>Pagamti ang rúsas,</i> Take a cutting from the rose bush. <pos>n</pos> method of propagation with cuttings.

<p><form>gána</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> appetite for eating. <i>Kining midisináha makaáyu sa gána,</i> This medicine helps <pb n=254>one&apos;s appetite. <number>2</number> desire, feel like doing s.t. <i>Wà kuy gánang malígù,</i> I don&apos;t feel like bathing. <form>abri-</form> appetizer. <form>sira-</form> s.t. taken after the meal. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B246; b4]</itype> have, help give appetite for eating. <i>Mugána ang ákung káun ug dúnay ginamus,</i> My appetite is good when we have salted fish. <number>2</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> have desire, find enjoyment. <i>Giganáhan ku sa salída,</i> I enjoyed the movie. <i>Ganáhan siyag mangga,</i> He likes mangoes. <number>3</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> have a crush on one. <i>Ganáhan ku ánang Ríki Bilmunti uy,</i> I have a crush on Ricky Belmonte. <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> appetizer. <number>2</number> aphrodisiac. <i>Gúlang na ang bána, nagkinahanglag pagána,</i> The husband is already old; he needs an aphrodisiac. <form>-du</form> <pos>a</pos> full of desire or eagerness to do a thing. <i>Ganádu nà síyang magpakasal kaníya,</i> She&apos;s eager to marry him. <form>ka-</form> <xr>= <sc>GÁNA</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p><form>ganà</form> <xr>= <sc>GUNÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ganansiya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> profit from a transaction. <number>2</number> one&apos;s offspring (humorous slang). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> make profit. <i>Makaganansiya ka kun patas-an nímu ang prisyu,</i> You can make a profit if you raise the price. <i>Pílay ganansiyahun sa usa ka rím sigarilyu<corr sic=",">?</corr></i> How much profit do you get from a carton<corr> of cigarettes</corr>? <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> have an advantage over s.t. <i>Nakaganansiya siya sa kuntra kay dakùdakù siya,</i> He has an edge over his opponent because he is much bigger. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make a profit on s.o. <i>Dì ku mupaganansiya nímu ug dakù,</i> I will not make a big profit on you.

<p><form>ganas</form> <xr>= <sc>GÁLAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gánas</form> <pos>n</pos> the ceremony of taking the bride from her house to the house of the groom after the banquet in the bride&apos;s house. Both families accompany the newly-weds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> take the bride in the <ix>gánas</ix> ceremony. <i>Paghuman ug pangáun, gigánas ang babáyi ngadtu sa balay sa laláki,</i> After the wedding reception, the bride was taken to the groom&apos;s house.

<p><form>gánay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> reverberating sound which echoes and persists for a while. <i>Ang gánay sa kampána muabut sa layù,</i> The reverberating sound of the bell reaches far. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> reverberate with a persisting echo.

<p><form>gánay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> for things to go s.w. in a long line. <i>Migánay (nanggánay) na ang mga kamwà. Maáyu untag dì mabahà arun dílì maánud,</i> The young crabs are going upstream now. I hope it won&apos;t flood so they won&apos;t be carried away. <i>Igánay (ganáya) ang mga bátà sa plúris,</i> Line up the children to present their flowers. <form>ka-, -an</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <number>1</number> walk in a long file. <i>Nagganayan (nagkaganay) ang mga Subánun nga nanglákat,</i> The Subanos walk in <corr sic=lone>long</corr> lines. <number>2</number> for large number to go s.w. <i>Nagganayan (nagkaganay) ang mga táwu pagsúgat sa Santu Pápa,</i> The people flocked to see the Pope. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> group of people going s.w.

<p><form>ganda</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. leek: <bio>Allium odorum</bio>. It is used as spice or for rubbing ailing parts of the body. Sometimes called the onions of the Subanos.

<p><form>gáng</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> gang, a cohesive group of young people having a common name and purpose. <number>2</number> band of criminal elements. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C12]</itype> be a member of a gang. <i>Dì ta makiggáng ug kídyi,</i> We won&apos;t have a KJ (killjoy) in our gang. <form>ganggáng</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C12]</itype> go around with one&apos;s gang.

<p><form>gangad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; b8]</itype> bend the end of s.t. up or out with force. <i>Nagangad nang tagáa kay nasángit sa batu,</i> That fish hook is bent because it got snagged in a rock. <i>Nagangad ang íyang náwung nga gilúwir dyú,</i> His head was thrown back after being hit in the lower jaw. <pos>a</pos> bent up or out.

<p><form>gángan</form> <xr>= <sc>GALANGAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gangay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> broil peeled bananas over live coals. <i>Gangayun ku ning sagínga,</i> I&apos;ll broil this banana. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put s.t. beside a fire to keep it hot. <i>Igangay nang takurì arun ínit kanúnay ang túbig,</i> Put the kettle beside the fireplace so the water will remain hot.

<p><form>ganggang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> put s.t. over the coals to dry it or heat it. <i>Nagganggang ku sa pán nga giumigas,</i> I am heating the bread which the ants swarmed over. <i>Akuy muganggang sa kupras,</i> I&apos;ll dry the copra in the drier. <number>2</number> broil bananas. <i>Magganggang kug ságing ipaínit,</i> I&apos;ll broil bananas for a snack. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> copra drier.

<p><form>ganggáng</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>BUNSUDBUNSUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ganggrína</form> <xr>= <sc>KANGGRÍNA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ganghà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> emerge, appear at the door or gate. <i>Mau nang pultáha ang gigangháan sa úngù,</i> That&apos;s the door where the witch appeared. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> door, gate.

<p><form>gangì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> loosen s.t. stuck in the ground by wiggling it back and forth. <i>Way nakagangì sa ugsuk,</i> Not one succeeded in budging the peg loose. <number>2</number> break s.t. off by moving it back and forth. <i>Nagangì ang buktun sa munyíka,</i> The arm of the doll worked itself off. <number>3</number> work s.t. affixed back and forth. <i>Gigangì níya ang kambiyu sa awtu,</i> He moved the gear shift of the car.

<p><form>gángì</form> <pos>n</pos> dance (slang). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> hold a dance. <i>Sa ámù na lang ta maggángì kay luag,</i> Let&apos;s hold our dance at my house because there&apos;s lots of room. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC; a]</itype> dance the slow drag.

<pb n=255>

<p><form>gangis</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish.

<p><form>gángis</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. cicada. <form>háring &mdash;</form> <number>1</number> the toughest of all, the most astute, gutsy one in the group. <number>2</number> political boss.

<p><form>gangkap</form> <pos>a</pos> complete, whole. <i>Gangkap ang íyang bisti sa kasal,</i> Her wedding ensemble is complete. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> make s.t. complete. <i>Nagangkap ang usa ka líbu,</i> I have one thousand pesos complete. <i>Gangkapi ang kúlang,</i> Add to it to make up the lack. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a1]</itype> be able to do s.t. to all of s.t. <i>Makagangkap kahà ka sa ímung abangan dinhi?</i> Do you think you can meet the entire rental payment? <i>Dílì ku magangkap paggakus ang íyang háwak,</i> I can&apos;t manage to get my arms around her waist.

<p><form>gangkay</form> <pos>a</pos> well dried out, cooked dry. <i>Gangkay ang mga langkay sa lubi,</i> The coconut fronds are dry and brittle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; c1]</itype> dried stiff, cooked crisp. <i>Gangkáya (igangkay) pagbulad ang isdà arun dílì udlun,</i> Dry the fish completely so it won&apos;t get wormy.

<p><form>gangking</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); a12]</itype> for soft and moist things to dry hard and get stiff. <i>Ang bagang amirul makagangking (makapagangking) sa sinínà,</i> Thick starch makes the clothes very hard. <pos>a</pos> hardened after drying.

<p><form>gangrína</form> <xr>= <sc>KANGGRÍNA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gangsà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>goose</tr>, <tr>gander</tr>.

<p><form>gángu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> anchored raft to which branches have been tied, to which fish are attracted. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put up, make a fishing raft of this sort.

<p><form>gángu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <note>[**typo: <number>1</number>]</note> k.o. large marine fish. <number>2</number> a big shot or top brass. <i>Dakung gángu sa pulitika,</i> A political bigwig.

<p><form>gangù</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>loose</tr>, not firmly implanted. <i>Gangù na kaáyu ang ákung tangu,</i> My tooth is very loose. <number>2</number> having a screw loose, acting strange at times. <i>Dipiktádu tingáli ang útuk kay gangù usáhay,</i> He must have some brain defects because he acts strangely at times. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> loosen s.t. by working it back and forth. <i>Gangua úsà nang usuk únà ibta,</i> Work the stake back and forth before you pull it out. <form>gangùgángù</form> <pos>a</pos> wiggling back and forth. <pos>n</pos> handle of a water pump operated manually. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <xr>= <sc>GANGÙ</sc>.</xr> &dagger;

<p><form>gangut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>thick scar tissue</tr> left on the neck after a wound. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; b4]</itype> form thick scar tissue on the neck. <i>Inigkaáyu sa ímung upirasyun sa líug mugangut (magangut) unyà nà,</i> When the wound from your neck operation has healed, it will form a heavy scar.

<p><form>gangut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> pull out by roots, uproot. <i>Limpiyu na ang kamutihan kay gigangutan na níya,</i> The sweet potato patch is cleared now because he has pulled out the vines.

<p><form>gángut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> close s.t. by tying it. <i>Gangúti ang pultahan kay walay trangka,</i> Tie the door to because we have no bolt. <number>2</number> <itype>[BN; b4c1]</itype> for the jaws to stiffen so that the mouth cannot open. <i>Naggángut (nanggángut) ang íyang bàbà kay gititanus siya,</i> His jaws stiffened because he had tetanus. <number>3</number> <itype>[A]</itype> clutch firmly by sinking the claws in. <i>Ang kuku sa banug migángut sa ákung buktun,</i> The hawk dug its claws into my arm. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> lock s.t. <i>Igangut (ganguta) ang kandádu,</i> Secure the padlock. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> fasten s.t. by tying. <i>Gigangtan níyag lupnis ang íyang kalsúnis,</i> He tied a cord around his trousers. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> tie into a knot. <i>Igangut (ganguta) ang tumuy sa písì arun dì mabakhad,</i> Tie the end of the rope so the fibers won&apos;t get undone. <number>4</number> <itype>[B]</itype> get stuck, be impeded from moving. <i>Kun magangut ang angkla sa dakung batu, lisud na kuháun,</i> If the anchor gets stuck under a big rock, it will be difficult to <corr sic=retrive>retrieve</corr> it. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> anything used to close or tie. <i>Gangut sa sapátus,</i> Shoelaces.

<p><form>gánì</form> <number>1</number> even. <i>Wà gánì kuy písu,</i> I don&apos;t even have a peso. <i>Manlimbung gánì siya sa kaugalíngun níyang amahan,</i> He would even cheat his father. <number>1a</number> <formx>pa &mdash;</formx> [so-and-so] cannot, should not happen because it is still.... <i>Sayu pa gánì ipaúlì,</i> It&apos;s still too early to go home. <i>Miminátay nga dihà pa gánì sa hagdanan,</i> She started to wail even while she was on the staircase. <number>2</number> <ix>particle accompanying a statement offered as proof of an allegation:</ix> even. <i>Barátu tu, nakapalit man gánì ku,</i> It was cheap<corr sic=.>,</corr> I even bought one. <i>Walay pulus. Mau man gánì tu nga wà nákù dawáta,</i> It was a useless thing. That&apos;s why I did not accept it. <number>3</number> if it is [so-and-so]. <i>Babáyi gánì hisgútan, mukíat dáyun,</i> If the subject moves to women, he perks up immediately. <number>3a</number> <formx>man &mdash;</formx> [so-and-so] does, did indeed happen, but.... <i>Mupahulam man gánì, piru lúgus pung musugut,</i> He will lend you money, but only with the greatest reluctance. <number>3b</number> [so-and-so] is true except that.... <i>Paríhu tag sinínà, gánì ang ímu putì,</i> We have the same shirt, only yours is white. <number>3c</number> <formx>maáyu &mdash;</formx> at least, the one redeeming thing. <i>Nahúlug ku. Maáyu gánì wà ku mapíang,</i> I fell down. At least I didn&apos;t break anything. <number>3d</number> <formx>unsa, sa &mdash;</formx> be that as it may, whatever turns out I&apos;ll stick to my decision. <i>Unsa gánì, dì sila mangadtu, kita lang adtu,</i> Be that as it may, even if they don&apos;t, we&apos;ll go anyway. <number>4</number> <ix>particle with a statement reminding s.o. of s.t.:</ix> remember? <i>Kadtu si Manang Díday, kadtu gáning kusiníra?</i> Diday, you <pb n=256>know, the cook? <number>4a</number> particle with insistence. <i>Didtu gánì ku,</i> I was so there. <i>Si Pidru gánì tu uy. Dílì aku,</i> That was Pedro, not me. <number>4a1</number> <ix>with commands:</ix> particle giving a tone of insistence. <i>Hílum gánì,</i> Damn you. I said shut up. <i>Pagtuun gánì dihà,</i> You get down to your studies, hear? <number>5</number> <formx>sa &mdash;</formx> <number>a</number> <xr>= <sc>UNSA &mdash;</sc>.</xr> <number>b</number> s.t. rather like. <i>Sa gánì báhù sa kandílà ang ákung nasíngu,</i> I smelled s.t. like a burning candle. <number>c</number> [so-and-so] is likely to happen. <i>Sa gánì muulan rung adláwa,</i> It is likely to rain today. <number>d</number> [so-and-so] should have happened, happen rather than what did. <i>Sa gánì midúaw ka únà sa ímung mga ginikánan inay maghubughúbug,</i> You should have visited your parents first instead of getting drunk.

<p><form>gánid<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> invite s.o. to go s.w. <i>Ímu ra ning gustu nga muanhi ka. Way naggánid nímu,</i> You came of your own free will. Nobody dragged you here. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> drag, involve s.o. in s.t. unpleasant. <i>Wà ku damha nga magánid ang ákung ngálan niíning dakung iskandalu,</i> I never expected that I would be involved in this big scandal.

<p><form>gánid<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>ABÁNID</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ganíha</form> <number>1</number> before, at a previous time. <i>Milakaw siya ganíhang buntag,</i> She left this morning. <i>Dinhi siya ganíha. Karun, walà na,</i> He was here a minute ago. Now he isn&apos;t. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; ra</formx> since a while ago. <i>Ganíha ka ra dinhi?</i> Have you been here for some time? <i>Ganíha ra nákung pinaábut nímu, ganíha ra kung nagpaábut nímu,</i> I have been waiting for you for some time. <form>ka-</form> <xr>= <sc>GANÍHA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ganína</form> <xr>= <sc>GANÍHA</sc>.</xr> <form>ka-</form> <xr>= <sc>GANÍHA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gánir</form> <pos>n</pos> one in charge of pouring and passing the glass of liquor around in a drinking spree (slang). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> be, become the &lsquo;gunner&rsquo; in a drinking spree (slang).

<p><form>gansà</form> <xr>= <sc>GANGSÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gansal</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>rough</tr>, not smooth-surfaced. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a12]</itype> be, become rough. <i>Gansála pagsimintu ang banyu arun dílì ta madalin-as,</i> Put a rough cement flooring in the bathroom so it won&apos;t be slippery. <form>gansalgansalun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>rough</tr>, <tr>uneven</tr>.

<p><form>*gansang</form> <form>gansanggansang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; c1]</itype> be <tr>rough</tr> and <tr>uneven</tr>. <i>Naggansanggansang nga ngípun,</i> Uneven teeth. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>uneven</tr>, <tr>rough</tr>. <i>Gansangun siyag nawung,</i> She has lots of pockmarks on her face.

<p><form>gansilyu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>crochet</tr>. <i>Kuti gansilyúhun kanang mútip,</i> That motif is an intricate one to crochet. <pos>n</pos> <tr>crochet hook</tr>. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> crocheted material.

<p><form>gansíyang</form> <xr>= <sc>GALANSÍYANG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gansu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>hook</tr> attached to sacks to help one heave them. <number>2</number> <tr>crochet hook</tr>. <number>3</number> large <tr>safety pin</tr>. <number>4</number> hook in wrestling. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> put a hook in s.t. to lift it with. <i>Gansúhi kun lisud paggúnit,</i> Use a hook if it&apos;s hard to hold. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> fasten s.t. with a safety pin. <i>Gigansúhan ku na lang ang ákung karsúnis,</i> I just fastened my pants with a safety pin. <number>3</number> hook in wrestling.

<p><form>gansung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>whippletree</tr> of a plow. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> put a whippletree. <i>Nabitik ang kábaw sa kasya kay wà gansúngi,</i> The trace was looped around the carabao&apos;s leg because there was no whippletree fastened to the rope. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a whippletree.

<p><form>ganta</form> <xr>= <sc>GANTANG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>*gantaaw paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b1]</itype> fish with a spear from a boat at night with a torch or lantern. <pos>n</pos> method of fishing this way.

<p><form>gantang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a unit of dry measure equivalent to three liters. <number>2</number> liquid measure of about the same amount. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; c1]</itype> be one <ix>gantang</ix>. <i>Hápit mugantang ang ílang mahurut káda káun,</i> They use up nearly a <ix>gantang</ix> every meal. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> vessel used to measure <ix>gantang</ix>.

<p><form>ganti</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>reward</tr>, <tr>prize</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>natural gift</tr> given by God. <i>Ang ímung kaanyag ganti sa kahitas-an,</i> Your beauty is a gift of God. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; b6(1)]</itype> give a reward, prize. <i>Gigantíhag haluk sa músa ang mananáug,</i> The winner got a kiss from the muse. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> endow with natural talents or qualities. <i>Ang kinaiyáhan nagganti níyag malantip nga utukan,</i> Nature has endowed him with a keen mind. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> win a prize, reward. <i>Nakagantig bakus ang kampiyun,</i> The champion won a belt.

<p><form>ganting</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish.

<p><form>gantsilyu</form> <xr>= <sc>GANSILYU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gantun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bollard</tr>, a mooring post on the wharf.

<p><form>gantuung</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>piled high</tr>. <i>Gantuung kaáyu ang tápuk sa bulingun,</i> The laundry is piled high. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> <tr>loom tall</tr>. <i>Migantuung ang búki digíra sa lawud,</i> The warship loomed high on the ocean.

<p><form>ganus-a</form> <xr>= <sc>KANUS-A</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p><form>gánut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> clear weeds or grass in an area. <i>Naggánut sila sa iskuyláhan,</i> They are clearing the weeds in the school yard. <number>2</number> pull a tooth. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> have s.o. pull a tooth. <i>Magpagánut kug tangu,</i> I will have a tooth pulled. <pos>n</pos> weed-pulling session. <i>Walay gánut rung hápun,</i> There is no yard work this afternoon. <form>-l-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> weeds to be cleared off by pulling.

<p><form>gánuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> drag, pull s.t. s.w. <i>Ganúya ang bábuy sa ihawan,</i> Drag the pig to the <pb n=257>slaughterhouse. <i>Gigánuy ang ákung pangísip sa láing kalibútan,</i> My thoughts were drawn to another world. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for s.t. to draw s.o. tenderly to sleep or bring on a pleasant feeling. <i>Ang LSD nga mugánuy nímu sa pagbáting langitnun,</i> LSD that brings you to a state of heavenly bliss. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. hauling sled consisting only of a platform mounted on runners.

<p><form>gap-ak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> break up lumps by treading on them. <i>Kábaw ang maggap-ak sa pilápil,</i> The carabao breaks lumps of mud in the rice paddy.

<p><form>gapang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6]</itype> for the big toe to be so deformed as to stick outward. <i>Migapang ang kumagkù sa tigúwang nga wà makatilawg sapátus,</i> The big toes of the old man who has never worn shoes are sticking out sidewise. <pos>n</pos> big toe sticking out sidewise. <i>Nagsiwil ang gapang níyang kumagkù,</i> His deformed big toe is sticking out to the side. <pos>n</pos> k.o. mullet.

<p><form>gápas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. medium-sized tree which produces cotton. <number>2</number> prepared cotton for treatment of wounds. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B4]</itype> for rice plants to fail to develop grains. <i>Migapas ang ámung humay tungud sa huwaw,</i> Our rice plants didn&apos;t develop grains due to the drought. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a4]</itype> for cloth to be worn to the point that lint is showing. <i>Ug mugapas (gapasun) ang panaptun, panahun nang ipalit ug bag-u,</i> If the cloth wears, it&apos;s time to buy new clothes. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> cotton fields. <number>2</number> dart of a blow gun (so called from the piece of cotton tied to the end). <number>2a</number> <tr>arrow</tr>. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> full of lint. <form>gapasgápas</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. porgy with insipid cotton-like flesh: <bio>Monotaxis grandoculis</bio>. <form>gapasgapas</form> <xr>= <sc>KADLUM IHÁLAS</sc>.</xr> <xr>see <sc>KADLUM</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gápì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C12; b6]</itype> take sides with s.o. in an argument.

<p><form>gápì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> overcome completely. <i>Siya ang nangúlu sa naggápì sa mga Huks,</i> He led the men who defeated the Huks.

<p><form>gápin</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>side with</tr>, <tr>favor</tr> s.o. in a controversy or quarrel, etc. <i>Ang kuntistant nga íyang gigapínan,</i> The contestant she favored. <form>-ay, -in-ay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2]</itype> take sides with their respective favorites. <i>Pag-áway sa magtiáyun, nagginapinay (naggapinay) ang ílang isig ka ginikánan,</i> When the couple quarreled, their parents took sides with them.

<p><form>gapnud</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>flotsam</tr>, s.t. drifting in the sea.

<p><form>gapù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>driftwood</tr>, twigs or bamboo pieces found beside the seashore. <number>2</number> <tr>weak</tr>, easily broken. <i>Hápit na mahugnù ang taytáyang gapù,</i> The weak bridge is about to collapse. <number>3</number> <tr>sickly</tr>, weak due to old age, brittle-boned. <number>4</number> toothless, hornless in old age. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> be weak. <i>Nagapù (migapù) ang silya kay kanúnay níyang gihiragan,</i> The chair became weak because he kept leaning back on it. <number>2</number> for a body to become sickly. <i>Mugapù ang láwas ug dílì ampíngan,</i> The body will be sickly if not taken care of. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> lose one&apos;s teeth, horn. <i>Nanggápù na si Lúlu,</i> Grandpa is losing his teeth now. <i>Gipanggapúan na ang kábawng landay,</i> The old carabao has lost its horns.

<p><form>gapud<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> weak, easily broken due to age. <i>Gapud na ang ngípun sa tigúwang,</i> The old man&apos;s teeth break off easily<note>[**typo: add period]</note> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B23(1); b6]</itype> be brittle or easily broken due to age. <i>Migapud (nagapud) ang tiil sa dáang lamísa,</i> The legs of the old table are weak. <i>Nagkagapud ang dukumintu nga gitipígan,</i> The old document is getting brittle.

<p><form>gapud<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cut firewood in a woody area. <i>Mugapud aku sa banwa,</i> I&apos;ll cut firewood in the forest.

<p><form>gapud<sub>3</sub>, gápud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> join in, associate with a group. <i>Mugapud ku sa ílang piknik bísag wà ku imbitaha,</i> I&apos;ll go with them on their picnic, even if they don&apos;t invite me. <i>Mga pubri hinúuy ímung gigapúran nga wà kay mapaábut,</i> You prefer to mix with poor people though there&apos;s nothing you can get from them.

<p><form>gapugapu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146; a2]</itype> be rough-skinned due to scars, scales, calluses. <i>Nindut siyag bitíis ugáling kay naggapugapu lang tungud sa daghang úwat,</i> She has shapely legs, only they are covered with scars.

<p><form>gápung</form> <xr>= <sc>GÍPUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gápus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> tie up to restrict motion. <i>Siyay naggápus sa bábuy nga ibaligyà,</i> He tied up the pig to be sold. <i>Gapúsag maáyu ang íyang kamut,</i> Bind his hands securely. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a3]</itype> tie up with preoccupation. <i>Nagápus siya sa trabáhu,</i> He is tied up with his job. <number>2a</number> enslave with sufferings, difficulties, and the like. <i>Nagápus sila sa kawad-un,</i> They are enslaved by poverty. <number>2b</number> <formx>&mdash; ang kwarta</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; a3]</itype> tie up capital. <i>Magápus ang ímung kwarta ug ipalit nímug yútà,</i> Your money will be tied up if you buy land with it. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to tie with.

<p><form>gárà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> do s.t. all the more in response to an admonition or flattery. <i>Ug badlúngun, mugárà hinúun,</i> If you tell him to stop, he does it all the more. <i>Mikaransay pagsamut ang hubug kay migárà nga giabibáhan,</i> The drunk danced all the more because he was egged on by the applause. <form>garàgarà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> make a display of exaggerated behavior. <form>garàgaraun</form> <pos>a</pos> easily moved to do s.t. inappropriate <pb n=258>or beyond one&apos;s capacity. <i>Garagaraun man laging mipalawum nga dì kamaung mulanguy,</i> He was so foolish as to go into deep water when he didn&apos;t know how to swim.

<p><form>gárab</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bragging</tr>, <tr>boastful</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> <tr>brag</tr>, <tr>boast</tr>. <i>Migárab si Lítu kay nakahandrid,</i> Lito started to brag because he got one hundred. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> brag about s.t. <i>Íyang gipagárab ang singsing níyang diyamanti,</i> He brags of his diamond ring. <form>-un</form> <pos>n</pos> boastful person. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, consider boastful.

<p><form>garába</form> <xr>= <sc>GRÁBA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>garábi</form> <xr>= <sc>GRÁBI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>garábu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. aromatic herb often used for spicing s.t. roasted.

<p><form>garáhi</form> <pos>n</pos> garage, place for storage or shelter of cars. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AP; c]</itype> put s.t. into the garage. <i>Igaráhi ang mutursaykul,</i> Put the motorcycle in the garage. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> for public transportation to go in the garage for the night. <i>Mugaráhi na ku kay gabíi na,</i> I&apos;m going to the garage because it&apos;s late. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2C12]</itype> go home, esp. to sleep. <i>Mugaráhi na ku kay katulgun na,</i> I&apos;ll go in now because I&apos;m sleepy. <form>garahian, garahiánan</form> <xr>= <sc>GARÁHI</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p><form>garakgarak</form> <pos>a</pos> rough, uneven surface. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b56]</itype> for a surface to become rough and uneven. <i>Mugarakgarak ang nawung basta mabúlit sa bugas,</i> Your face will become rough if it is covered with acne. <i>Gigarakgarak (gigarakgarakan) lang sa gubyirnu ang karsáda kay ígù ra dyung gigrába,</i> The government just made it a rough road; they only put gravel on it. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> rough, uneven in surface.

<p><form>garal</form> <pos>a</pos> unwittingly stupid. Not doing what others would expect. <i>Garála níya uy. Gisúgù ku níya, nalímut paghátag kwarta,</i> He sure is a dope. He asks me to get s.t. but forgets to give me the money. <form>ka-</form> state of being foolish. <form>sa ímung &mdash;</form> you idiot! (said in a friendly way). <i>Limpiyu sa ímung kagaral. Kahúgaw íni,</i> What do you mean clean? It&apos;s filthy.

<p><form>garamal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> bind, tie tightly. <i>Ayúhag garamal ang bábuy arun dílì makabuhì,</i> Tie the pig well so that it won&apos;t get loose. <i>Garamali ang kahun arun dílì mangayabu ang sulud,</i> Tie the box securely so the contents won&apos;t spill out.

<p><form>garan, gáran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>garand rifle</tr>, .30 caliber M1.

<p><form>garang, gárang</form> <pos>n</pos> bloated, tight feeling in the stomach. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; a4b4]</itype> have gas pains. <i>Garangun (mugarang) ang ímung tiyan ug magpalabi kag káun,</i> You will get a bloated stomach if you eat too much. <i>Garangan ka sa tiyan,</i> You will get a bloated feeling in your stomach.

<p><form>garanggarang</form> <pos>a</pos> rough, uneven in surface. <i>Garanggarang ang ákung nawung sa bugas,</i> My face is all rough with acne. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> for a surface to be, become rough and uneven. <i>Mugaranggarang ang lamísag tadtáran sa karni,</i> The table will get all scratched up if you cut the meat on top of it.

<p><form>garanil<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>granary</tr>, room or house for storing grain. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a2]</itype> make into, add a granary.

<p><form>garanil<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> marking gauge, a carpenter&apos;s tool for drawing a line parallel to the edge of s.t. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> line s.t. with a marking gauge. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a marking gauge.

<p><form>garantisádu</form> <pos>a</pos> having the quality that assures satisfaction. <i>Garantisádung rilu,</i> A watch of guaranteed quality. <i>Garantisádung initsahan. Dì musipyat,</i> He is a sure-fire shot. He can&apos;t miss. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be dependable in quality or quantity.

<p><form>garantíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> collateral on a loan. <number>2</number> guarantee s.t. as asserted. <i>Garantíya sa pridyidir,</i> A guarantee on the refrigerator. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> guarantee a loan. <i>Igarantíya níya ang íyang yútà sa íyang útang,</i> He will use his lands as collateral on his loan. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give assurance that s.t. is as asserted. <i>Akuy mugarantíya sa íyang pagkakasalígan,</i> I&apos;ll stand as guarantee to his trustworthiness.

<p><form>garápa</form> <pos>n</pos> small bottle or vial.

<p><form>garapinyíra</form> <pos>n</pos> rotary type ice cream freezer.

<p><form>garapun</form> <pos>n</pos> glass jar. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B23(1)6]</itype> be a jarful. <i>Hápit mugarapun (magarapun) ang nahurut nílang tubà,</i> They consumed almost a jarful of toddy. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put in glass jars. <i>Igarapun (garapuna) ang pinyátu,</i> Put the peanut brittle in glass jars. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> put in a glass jar. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> do by the jarful.

<p><form>garas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> scratch lightly, put a thin wound in the surface. <i>Tunuk ang migaras sa íyang nawung,</i> It was a thorn that scratched his face. <i>Nagaras ang pintal sa taksi,</i> The paint of the taxi got scratched. <pos>n</pos> light cut. <i>Iúlì nákù nímu ang ímung pawntin pin nga way garas,</i> I will return your fountain pen to you without a scratch.

<p><form>gáray</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>verse</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> write, read a verse. <i>Gigaráyan sa nangharána ang súlu sa gitára,</i> The serenader recited a verse with a guitar solo as a background. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of making verses.

<p><form>garbansus, garbantus</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>KARABANSUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>garbu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pride</tr>. <i>Misinta siya dihang natandug ang garbu,</i> He flared up when his pride was hurt. <i>Garbu sa mga táwu dinhi ang kalimpiyu sa lungsud,</i> The cleanliness of the town is a source of pride for the people. <form>&mdash; sa irù</form> <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s foolish pride, said derisively. <form>pa-, <pb n=259>pasi-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> display s.t. with pride. <i>Nagpagarbu (nagpasigarbu) siya sa bag-ung kutsi,</i> He is showing off his new car. <i>Wà kuy ngálan nga ikapasigarbu,</i> I don&apos;t have a name to boast of. <form>magarbúhun, mapagarbúhun, mapasigarbúhun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> full of pride. <i>Magarbúhun siyang midáwat sa midalya,</i> He received the medal with pride. <number>2</number> haughty in ways and appearance. <form>-sa</form> <pos>a</pos> haughty, stuck up (female). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become haughty. <i>Migarbúsa (nagarbúsa) siyang nakataak sa Amirika,</i> She became haughty after having gone to the States. <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> act in a haughty way. <i>Giginarbusahan ku níya; nakaminus tingáli,</i> She spoke haughtily to me; she probably looks down on me. <form>-su</form> <pos>a</pos> haughty (male).

<p><form>gardába</form> <xr>= <sc>KARDÁBA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gardin</form> <pos>n</pos> flower or vegetable garden. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a garden. <form>-íru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gardener</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> <tr>gardener</tr>. <form>-ing</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>gardening</tr>. <number>2</number> a school subject of gardening in the elementary school.

<p><form>gardiyan</form> <pos>n</pos> guardian of a child. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become the guardian. <i>Nagardiyan ku níya samtang nilangyaw ang íyang mga ginikánan,</i> I became his guardian while his parents were away on a trip.

<p><form>gáring</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>doll</tr>. <number>2</number> religious statue. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> play with a doll. <i>Gustung mugáring ang bátà,</i> The child wants to play with a doll. <number>2</number> <itype>[a]</itype> make a doll. <i>Nindut garíngun ning panaptúna,</i> This cloth would make a pretty doll.

<p><form>garípu</form> <xr>= <sc>GRÍPU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>garisun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>garrison</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC12; b(1)]</itype> establish a garrison.

<p><form>garmint bag</form> <pos>n</pos> garment bag. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> put s.t. in a garment bag.

<p><form>garnalda</form> <xr>= <sc>GIRNALDA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>garnáti<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>GRANÁTI<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>garnáti<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> variety of <ix>balingbing</ix> (<bio>Averrhoa carambola</bio>), sweet and yellow when ripe.

<p><form>gartir</form> <pos>n</pos> elastic band, usually strapped on or sewn to s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b6(1)]</itype> put an elastic band on s.t.

<p><form>garù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> jiggle s.t. back and forth. <i>Ayaw garua ang lamísa kay malúngì nyà ang tiil,</i> Don&apos;t jiggle the table back and forth because the leg might break off.

<p><form>garud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> for a part of the body to get chafed or badly scratched from sliding over a rough surface. <i>Nagarud ang íyang dughan pagdaúrus níya sa káhuy,</i> His chest got badly scraped from sliding down the trunk of the tree.

<p><form>garus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2; ab2]</itype> scratch lightly. <i>Magarus ang sawug ug ímung guyúrun ang síya,</i> The floor will get scratched if you drag the chair.

<p><form>garúti</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> wooden cane used for beating. <number>2</number> <tr>walking stick</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> hit with a cane. <i>Garutíha siya kun magtinuntu,</i> Cane him if he does foolishness.

<p><form>gás</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>kerosene</tr>. <number>2</number> gas fuel for cooking stoves. <form>&mdash; istub, gastub</form> <pos>n</pos> kind of stove that uses cooking gas or kerosene for fuel. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> put in kerosene or gas. <i>Wà magási ang lamparilya maung napálung,</i> They failed to put kerosene in the lamp so it went out. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> use kerosene. <i>Maggás na lang mi kay ikunumíya,</i> We&apos;ll just use kerosene because it&apos;s cheaper. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> money obtained by prostitutes to pay for the barest necessities. <i>Kanang pagpaábang sa ubang mga pampam pára panggás na lang,</i> Some prostitutes sell their bodies for just enough to get the barest necessities.

<p><form>gása<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give a gift. <i>Unsay ákung igása sa ílang kasal?</i> What shall I give them as a wedding present? <pos>n</pos> <tr>gift</tr>, <tr>present</tr>.

<p><form>gása<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>gauze</tr>. <number>2</number> incandescent mantle of pressure lanterns.

<p><form>gasang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b6]</itype> get whitish salt particles on the body. <i>Mugasang ang ákung pánit ug dì ku manghinawnaw humag kalígù sa dágat,</i> My body becomes whitened with salt if I do not rinse myself off after swimming in the sea. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> covered with salt particles.

<p><form>gásang</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>coral</tr>, hard substance made up of the skeleton of polyps. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> place where corals abound.

<p><form>gásap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> lop off the branches from a tree that has fallen or been cut down and cut them into pieces.

<p><form>gasbut</form> <xr>= <sc>HIGASBUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gasgas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> damage s.t. by <tr>scratching</tr> it. <i>Nagasgas ang kílid sa pridyidir,</i> The side of the frigidaire got scratched. <pos>n</pos> <tr>scratch</tr>.

<p><form>gaskit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gasket</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> put gasket on.

<p><form>gaslì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prickly heat</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> have prickly heat. <i>Ulan ang ikalígù kun gasliun ka,</i> Bathe with rain water if you have prickly heat.

<p><form>gaslì<sub>2</sub>, gasling</form> <pos>a</pos> stiff and dry through the heat of the sun. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; c1]</itype> be stiff dried due to the sun&apos;s heat. <i>Ayaw pamad-i nang linadlad arun dílì magasling (mugasling),</i> Do not let the clothes get completely dry so they won&apos;t get stiff. <i>Gaslínga (igasling) pagbulad ang karni arun dì mabahù,</i> Dry the meat till it is stiff so it won&apos;t spoil.

<p><form>gas mask</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gas mask</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> wear a gas mask.

<p><form>gaspang</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having dry and rough skin. <number>2</number> generally unkempt. <number>3</number> coarse in manner. <i>Gaspang ang ímung pagkasulti,</i> You&apos;re coarse in your speech. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN6; b6]</itype> be coarse. <i>Nanggaspang <pb n=260>ang íyang pálad sa mga kúbal,</i> The skin on his palms is rough from the calluses.

<p><form>gaspin</form> <pos>n</pos> kerosene torch made of a slim piece of bamboo or a bottle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> make into a kerosene torch.

<p><form>gastádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for mechanical moving parts to be worn out. <i>Ilísan nátù ang pistun kay gastádu na,</i> Let&apos;s change the pistons because they are all worn out. <number>2</number> having one&apos;s body worn out from sexual activities. <number>3</number> having one&apos;s body worn out from overwork. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> for mechanical parts of the body to get worn out.

<p><form>gastadur</form> <pos>a</pos> extravagant in spending. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> get to be extravagant in spending. <form>-a(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>GASTADUR</sc> (female).</xr>

<p><form>gasti</form> (from <ix>tigas</ix>) <pos>n</pos> toughie (slang).

<p><form>gastruintiraytis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gastroenteritis</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a4]</itype> get gastroenteritis.

<p><form>gastu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> spend money. <i>Nakagastu silag dakù sa dispidída,</i> They spent a large amount of money for the farewell party. <i>Makakuput gánì ug kwarta gastúhun dáyun,</i> Whenever she lays her hands on money, she spends it right away. <number>1a</number> give a banquet on a lavish scale. <i>Gastúhan ku giyud ang ákung kumplianyu,</i> I&apos;ll hold a big dinner for my birthday. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> spend for some undertaking. <i>Ang kumpaníya mauy naggastu sa íyang pagtuun,</i> The company is paying for his studies. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> use time, effort for some undertaking. <i>Gastúha ang ímung kusug sa maáyung katuyúan,</i> Use your strength for good purposes. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> expenditures. <number>2</number> sumptuous feast as entertainment. a requiring great expense. <i>Gastu na kaáyu kun grandi ang kasal,</i> It means a great expense if the wedding is on a grand scale. <i>pára &mdash;</i> <number>1</number> s.t. put out for public use for free. <i>Pára gastu ning puspuru,</i> These matches are for public use. <number>1a</number> player on a team used for minor duties which are not significant enough to warrant the expenditure of a major team member. <number>2</number> for one&apos;s personal use. <i>Kining kutsi pára gastu. Dílì paabángan,</i> This car is for personal use, not for rent. <form>galastúhan, galastuhan, kagastúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> expenses to be incurred. <form>di-</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>DIGASTU</sc>.</xr> <form>-s</form> <xr>= <sc>GASTU</sc>, <ix>n, a</ix>.</xr> <form>-su</form> <pos>a</pos> expensive, requiring lots of money. <i>Gastúsu kaáyu ang pagtinir ug kutsi,</i> It&apos;s very expensive to have a car. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125; B6]</itype> entail lots of expense.

<p><form>gastub</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>GÁS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gasulína</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>gasoline</tr>. <number>2</number> food or drinks to provide a bit of energy (slang). <i>Magkarga tag gasulína,</i> Let&apos;s have s.t. to eat, take a little snort. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> put gasoline into. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b6(1)]</itype> eat s.t. as a snack, or take some liquor for energy. <i>Gasulináhi siya arun mukanta,</i> Give him a little snort so he will sing. <form>-dur(&rarr;)</form> accelerator on a motor vehicle. <form>gasulinahan</form> <pos>n</pos> gasoline station.

<p><form>gatà</form> <pos>n</pos> juice squeezed from coconut meat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> cook s.t. with the juice of coconut meat. <i>Gatai ang mangkù arun lamían ang sabaw,</i> Cook the mackerel with coconut juice so we&apos;ll have a delicious sauce. <form>ginat-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. cooked with coconut juice. <number>2</number> k.o. sweet soup containing sticky rice, corn, taro, and sweet potatoes cooked in coconut juice.

<p><form>gátal</form> <xr>= <sc>GÁTAW</sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr>

<p><form>gatang, gátang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> divide into portions. <i>Naggatang kug nangkà pára ibaligyà,</i> I cut a jackfruit into portions to sell. <i>Gatánga ang sibúyas,</i> Apportion the onions into bunches. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> cut into portions. <i>Ginátang ang pagbaligyag bábuy,</i> They sell the pork by portions.

<p><form>gátas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>milk</tr>. <i>May <corr sic=gatas>gátas</corr> ka pa sa bàbà nga manarátu,</i> You&apos;re still too young (lit. you still have milk on your mouth) to have a sweetheart. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> milk an animal. <i>Naggatas siya sa báka,</i> He is milking the cow. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)6; b]</itype> <tr>secrete milk</tr>. <i>Wà makagatas ang inahan,</i> The mother didn&apos;t lactate. <i>Mamatay ang nati kun dì gatasan ang inahan,</i> The calf dies if the mother doesn&apos;t lactate. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> mix milk into s.t. <number>4</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> bottle-feed an infant. <i>Gigatas na lang níla ang ílang masúsu,</i> They bottle-fed their baby. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> animal which furnishes milk. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> having lots of milk. <form>-an, -an(&rarr;), gatasgatasan</form> <pos>n</pos> descriptive name of fish which exude a highly venomous milky substance from the dorsal spine: <bio>Coryzichthys gangenes</bio> and other species. <form>-un, gatasgatasun</form> <pos>a</pos> murky with whitish substance.

<p><form>gátaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> appear, stick out on a surface. <i>Migátaw ang íyang gúsuk,</i> His ribs stuck out. <pos>n</pos> projection, height. <i>Dayag na ang gátaw sa submarínu sa dágat,</i> You can clearly see the projection of the submarine on the surface of the sea. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. which gets exposed on the surface. <i>Ang balanghuy nga gataw pait ug makahílu,</i> The cassava root that grows out of the ground is bitter and poisonous. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> of the type that sticks out.

<p><form>gatilyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>trigger</tr>.

<p><form>gátu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vise</tr>, mechanical device for holding firmly s.t. being worked. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6(1)]</itype> fasten with a vise. <i>Gatúhi arun sayun paggabas,</i> Fasten it with a vise so it will be easy to saw it.

<p><form>gátu<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>GATILYU</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=261>

<p><form>gátud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make s.t. rough by covering it with cuts. <i>Nagátud ang tabla nga gihímung taparan,</i> The board got an uneven surface because it was used as a chopping board. <form>gatudgatud</form> <pos>a</pos> rough in surface. <i>Gatudgatud na ang punúan sa lubi kay gisigíhan man níyag tigbas,</i> The coconut trunk is rough because he always chops at it with his bolo. <form>gatudgaturun</form> <xr>= <sc>GATUDGATUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gátung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fuel used for cooking. <number>2</number> a big piece of wood used to keep fire or embers burning. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> supply fuel to cook s.t. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> keep a fire burning to supply embers for future fires. <number>3</number> <itype>[APN; b]</itype> add fuel to an emotional situation. <i>Ngánung gatúngan pa nímu ang íyang kasukù?</i> Why do you add fuel to his anger? <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. used as fuel. <number>2</number> s.t. used as drinks. <i>Náa bay maáyung paggátung kay muadtu mi sa bayli,</i> Do you have anything good to warm up the group because we&apos;re going to a dance.

<p><form>gatus</form> <ix>numeral</ix> <tr>hundred</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>TULU</sc>.</xr> <form>-an</form> in groups of a hundred, hundreds. <i>Gatusan ka táwu ang nagláray,</i> People were lined up by the hundreds. <i>Gatusan ka túig,</i> A century. <form>maN-(&larr;)</form> amounting to one hundred. <i>Manggátus ang íyang swildu káda simána,</i> He earns a hundred a week. <form>maN-(&larr;), -in-</form> done by the hundreds. <i>Manggátus (ginatus) ang pagbaligyà sa mangga,</i> They sell mangoes by the hundred. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> do s.t. by the hundred. <form>tag-(&larr;)</form> a hundred each. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a]</itype> give out denominations of one hundred. <form>tagmang-, tag-in-</form> <xr>= <sc>MANG-</sc></xr>, <xr><sc>-IN-</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gaud<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. porgy. <form>gaudgaud</form> <xr>= <sc>GAUD<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gaud<sub>2</sub>, gáud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>row</tr>, propel a boat with an oar at the stern. <i>Makagáud kahà ta hangtud sa daplin?</i> Can we possibly row as far as the shore? <i>Ang linayágan ug way hángin gawrun (gawran) lang,</i> A sailboat is rowed if there is no wind. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> large oar. <form>gauran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>oarlock</tr>.

<p><form>gaugáu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>tease</tr> derisively. <i>Gigaugáu siyang pisut,</i> He was teased derisively because he was uncircumcised. <pos>n</pos> derisive teasings.

<p><form>gáung</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>weary-looking</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> have a weary look on the face. <i>Manggáung ang nawung sa táwung way tulug,</i> A person&apos;s face looks haggard if he has no sleep. <i>Gipanggaúngan sa dagway ang bag-ung minyù,</i> The newly-weds look haggard.

<p><form>gáuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6N; a2]</itype> for the body or part of the body to get completely fatigued. <i>Nanggáuy ang ákung láwas sa paglinanguy tibuuk adlaw,</i> My body became fatigued from swimming the whole day. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> fatigued.

<p><form>gáw</form> <pos>n</pos> entrance to a fish trap (<ix>búbu</ix>) made of woven bamboo, tapering toward the inside like a funnel, such that fish cannot turn around once it has proceeded a certain distance, nor can it get back. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> attach a <ix>gáw</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a <ix>gáw</ix>.

<p><form>*gáwad<sub>1</sub></form> <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>worker</tr>, <tr>employee</tr>.

<p><form>gáwad<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>HI-/HA-</sc>, <pos>v</pos> <i>2</i>.</xr> <form>hi-/ha-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b5c]</itype> deny s.t. to s.o. <i>Muhigáwad ka gánì sa usa, higawári (higawára) na lang ang tanan,</i> If you deny s.t. to one, deny it to all. <i>Walà giyud kuy ihigáwad kanímu,</i> There is nothing I would deny you. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; b4c5]</itype> feel hurt because of a slight. <i>Mahigáwad siyag dì pasak-un sa átù,</i> She will feel slighted if we don&apos;t let her stay here. <i>Higawran kag paryinti kun hakug ka,</i> Your relatives will feel slighted if you are selfish.

<p><form>gawal, gáwal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> stick out from. <i>Naggawal ang dílà sa irù nga naghalhal,</i> The dog is panting, and his tongue is hanging out. <form>pa-</form> show off, boast of. <i>Nagpagáwal siya sa bag-u níyang sapátus,</i> He&apos;s showing off his new shoes. <pos>n</pos> boasting. <form>mapa-un</form> <pos>a</pos> of a boasting, showing off sort.

<p><form>gawang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>door</tr>. <number>2</number> hole in flooring or in a wall. <i>Mabulasut ka sa gawang,</i> You will step into the hole in the floor. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> make an opening in a wall or floor. <i>Gigawangan níya ang bungbung,</i> He made an opening in the wall.

<p><form>gawas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> go out of an enclosure or area. <i>Migawas siya sa balay,</i> He went out of the house. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1P; c]</itype> bring s.t. out. <i>Kinsay naggawas sa mga silya?</i> Who brought the chairs out? <i>Wà níla ikagawas ang igbabaligyà,</i> They weren&apos;t able to display (lit. put out) their goods. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> immediate vicinity outside. <number>2</number> from a foreign country. <i>Karun, mga balità gíkan sa gawas,</i> And now, news from abroad. <number>3</number> state of being free, independent. <i>Yútà nga gawas,</i> A free country. <number>4</number> aside from. <i>Gawas nga gwápa, sapían pa giyud,</i> Aside from being pretty, she is rich. <number>5</number> except. <i>Way láing tugútan gawas nímu,</i> Nobody is allowed to except you. <number>6</number> unless. <i>Dì ku muadtu gawas kun suhúlan,</i> I won&apos;t go unless I&apos;m paid for it. <form>anak sa &mdash;</form> illegitimate child. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c5]</itype> display one&apos;s skills and knowledge for an audience to appreciate. <i>Gialirúngan si Tinù nga nagpagawas sa íyang mga binúang,</i> People gathered around Tino showing off his jokes. <i>Gipagawas na níya ang tanan níyang kaláki apan lúpig gihápun siya,</i> He has emptied his bag of tricks but he still can&apos;t compete. <form>gawsanan, -ánan</form> <pos>n</pos> exit, place one leaves through. <form>ka-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> freedom, liberty. <form>-nun</form> <pos>a</pos> free, not under any control. <i>Kinabúhing gawasnun,</i> A free and <pb n=262>unfettered life.

<p><form>gaway</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tentacles</tr>. <i>Katul ang gaway sa bukya,</i> Jellyfish have itchy tentacles.

<p><form>gawaygáway</form> <pos>n</pos> small tree with alternate pinnate leaves. The bark is used for dyeing and strengthening fishlines. It has a white flower similar to a string bean. The flower and the young fruit are cooked and eaten as vegetables: <bio>Sesbania grandiflora</bio>.

<p><form>gawgaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>starch</tr> made from cassava, corn, buri. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make starch.

<p><form>gáwì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> use s.t. <i>Ambi nang ákung bulpin kay gawíun ku,</i> Give me back my ball-point pen because I am going to use it. <pos>n</pos> character, ways. <i>Pilía ang babáying maáyug gáwì,</i> Choose a girl with good ways about her. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> manner of doing, using s.t., customs. <i>Ang pagsultig kusug súpak sa maáyung kagawían,</i> Talking loud smacks of bad manners.

<p><form>gawù</form> <xr>= <sc>GALÙ<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>g&amacracu;y</form> <xr>= <sc>GÁLAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gayang</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. <tr>bolo</tr> about 18&Prime; long with a straight blade. The back edge curves slightly upward forming a crest near the tip, with a flat end that slants outward so that the end and the bottom form a point.

<p><form>gayhab</form> <xr>= <sc>GALHAB</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gáyì</form> <xr>= <sc>GÁNÌ</sc> (colloquial).</xr>

<p><form>gáyid</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. that serves as a guide. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> guide the way. <i>Gayri mi kay wà mi katultul,</i> Guide us because we don&apos;t know the way. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become a guide. <i>Nagáyid ku niadtu sa ílang ikspidisiyun,</i> I became their guide in their expedition.

<p><form>gayud</form> <ix>short forms</ix>: <bx>dyud, giyud</bx> <number>1</number> <ix>with adjectives</ix>: without doubt. <i>Sukù giyud siya nímu,</i> She&apos;s sure to be mad at you. <number>2a</number> <ix>with verbs</ix>: make it a point to [do]. <i>Úha giyud,</i> Be sure to hit him on the head. <number>2b</number> [so-and-so] will happen for sure, can&apos;t help but happen. <i>Ang talawan, bísag ilútan, mudágan giyud,</i> A coward, even if he is agitated, will be sure to run away. <number>2c</number> <formx>na &mdash;</formx> [so-and-so] happened at last. <i>Salámat, nakapangíhì na giyud ku,</i> Thank heavens. At last I&apos;ve had a chance to urinate. <number>2d</number> <formx>ra &mdash;</formx> [so-and-so] will happen despite anything. <i>Hingpatyan ku ra giyud nang bastúsa,</i> I&apos;ll kill that s.o.b. one of these days for sure. <number>3a</number> <formx>walà &mdash;</formx> never. <i>Wà giyud ku masáyud ánà,</i> I never knew that. <number>3b</number> <formx>dílì &mdash;</formx> never will [do]. <i>Dì giyud ku maglúib nímu,</i> I&apos;ll never betray you. <formx>sa dílì pa &mdash;</formx> certainly before [so-and-so] happens. <i>Bángun sa dílì pa gayud mubanagbánag,</i> Be sure to wake up before daybreak. <number>4</number> <ix>with nouns, pronouns</ix>: it is, was [pronoun] without a doubt. <i>Siya giyud ang kinagwapahan,</i> She is the prettiest. <number>5</number> <ix>with adjectives</ix>: it is [adjective] without a doubt. <i>Lamì giyud kaáyu,</i> It was really delicious, without a doubt. <number>6</number> with forms meaning &lsquo;there is (are), there always be ... for sure&rsquo;. <i>Dúna giyuy táwung kulukuyun,</i> There always will be foolish people. <number>7</number> <ix>with numerals</ix>: [numeral] for sure. <i>Tulu man giyuy íyang gikaun,</i> He ate three whole pieces. <number>8</number> <ix>with words referring to a place</ix>: right at the place. <i>Náa giyud mi sa publasiyun,</i> We are right in town. <number>9</number> <ix>with interrogatives</ix>: exactly [who, when, where, etc.]. <i>Kanus-a man giyud ka gíkan?</i> Exactly when are you leaving? <number>10</number> <ix>with words referring to time</ix>: exactly at [such-and-such] a time. <i>Alas dús giyud tu paglínug,</i> The earthquake was exactly at two o&apos;clock. <i>Karun pa giyud siya muabut,</i> He just arrived a moment ago. <i>Pagkamatay giyud ni Hisus, mingíub ang kalibútan,</i> At the moment Jesus died the world was plunged into darkness. <number>11</number> <formx>&mdash; lang</formx> for no reason except that that&apos;s the way it is. <i>&lsquo;Ngánung ingnun nímu ánag pahimútang?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Gayud lang,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Why did you set it up like that?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;I just did, that&apos;s all.&rsquo; <form>ngánu &mdash;</form> why did it have to be? <i>Ngánu ba giyung gipakatáwu kung bungì?</i> Why did I have to be born a harelip? <form>mau &mdash;</form> that&apos;s the way it is. <i>Mau giyud nang pubri. Mag-antus,</i> That&apos;s the way it is when you&apos;re poor. You suffer.

<p><form>gayúma</form> <xr>= <sc>LUMAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gayun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> get the chance to do s.t. <i>Nakagayun kug haluk níya,</i> I got a chance to kiss her. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> manage, make s.t. not quite suited to the job work, anyway. <i>Naglísud ku kay nagpagayun ku áring daut nga makina,</i> I&apos;m having a hard time. I am trying to make this defective engine run. <form>hi-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> have the chance, time to do s.t. <i>Musulat ku nímu kun makahigayun,</i> I&apos;ll write you when I have the time to. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>time</tr>, <tr>chance</tr>. <i>Wà kuy higayun pagtan-aw ug sini,</i> I don&apos;t have time to go to the movies. <number>2</number> <tr>chance</tr>, <tr>opportunity</tr>. <i>Lihíru ka man giyud. Tagái sad kug higayun nga makadaug,</i> You&apos;re so good at it. Give me a chance to win, too. <number>3</number> <tr>time</tr>, <tr>instance</tr>. <i>Dúnay mga higayun nga pangulbaan ku,</i> There are times when I get so anxious. <number>4</number> <tr>time</tr>, <tr>event</tr>. <i>Ang maung higayun gitambúngan sa mga dagkù sa lungsud,</i> The said event was attended by the important people in the town. <form>hi-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be well-situated in a job, dwelling place, etc. <i>Dì na mi mulálin kay nahigáyun na mi dinhi,</i> We won&apos;t move because we are <pb n=263>well-situated here. <form>pahi-(&larr;), pahi-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <number>1</number> arrange to have s.o. put in a job. <i>Ikapahigáyun ka dáyug trabáhu kay paryinti mu ang bús,</i> It can easily be arranged for you to get a job because you are a relative of the boss&apos;s. <number>2</number> make arrangements for the proper performance of s.t. <i>Ang punirarya ray mupahigáyun sa paglubung,</i> The funeral parlor will take charge of the burial. <number>3</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> give s.o. a chance. <i>Ákù únang gipahigayunan siya, apan kun muusab, ákù siyang kastigúhun,</i> I&apos;m giving him a chance this time, but if he does it again, I&apos;ll punish him. <number>4</number> <xr>= <sc>PA-</sc>.</xr> <form>kahigayúnan</form> opportunity. <i>Ang kahigayúnan kas-a rang mutuktuk sa pultahan,</i> Opportunity knocks only once. <form>ti-, pati-</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>TIGAYUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gáyun</form> <pos>a</pos> inferior in quality or workmanship. <i>Gáyun kaáyung pagkatahì ang ímung karsúnis,</i> Your pants are very poorly tailored. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a2]</itype> be of inferior quality, do s.t. poorly.

<p><form>gáyung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> propel a boat from the stern with a scull. <i>Gayúngi ang búti arun muirug tag diyútay,</i> Scull the lifeboat so we move forward a bit. <i>Gayúngun ta lang nang gilay-úna,</i> Let&apos;s just go that distance by sculling. <form>&mdash; nang &mdash;</form> words said as one takes a baby in the lap standing and letting him lean back and forth. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>scull</tr>. <form>gayunggayung</form> <pos>n</pos> name of a folk dance.

<p><form>gay-ut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> out of shape, wrinkled. <i>Gay-ut na kaáyu ang íyang susu,</i> Her breasts were all flabby. <number>2</number> not up to par. <i>Gay-ut ang íyang dinaganan karun,</i> His running this time was not up to par. <number>3</number> tattered, torn to small bits. <i>Ang íyang gay-ut nga sinínà gilábay,</i> She threw out her tattered dress. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> make s.t. out of shape, get out of shape. <i>Bag-u pa gánì nà nímung gisul-ub nagkagay-ut na man,</i> You have just put that dress on, but it is wrinkled and out of shape already. <number>2</number> be below par, cause to be below par. <number>3</number> tear up until it is no longer usable.

<p><form>gi, gí</form> <xr>= <sc>AGI</sc>, <ix>1, 1a, 1b, 1c</ix>.</xr>

<p><form>gi-</form> <number>1</number> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>-UN<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>I-<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gíak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> stamp the foot heavily on s.t. <i>Giáki ang uk-uk,</i> Stamp on the cockroach.

<p><form>gi-an</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>-AN<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gib-an tik</form> <pos>n</pos> fight characterized by a furious exchange of blows. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2]</itype> have a furious exchange of blows. <i>Ang duha ka buksidur naggib-antik<note>[**note: no space before tik]</note> sa katapúsang hugnà,</i> The two boxers had a furious exchange of blows in the last round.

<p><form>gíbang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> nick a saw or blade. <i>Gáhì kaáyung magíbang ang sundang,</i> The machete won&apos;t easily break. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> nick on the blade of a sharp instrument, broken serration in a saw.

<p><form>gibhang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; b5]</itype> knock a piece off of a whole, make a gap in s.t. <i>Gibhángan (gibhángun) ang kural sa mga buyung,</i> The rustlers will make a hole in the wall (will cause it to have a hole in it). <pos>n</pos> chip, gap, space left when s.t. has been removed from a single piece. <i>Dakung gibhang sa ákung kinabúhì ang íyang pagkawálà,</i> His disappearance left a huge gap in my life. <form>ka-</form> <xr>= <sc>GIBHANG</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p><form>giblang</form> <pos>n</pos> distance between two vertical things. <i>Ang giblang sa duha ka pusti,</i> The distance between the two poles. <pos>a</pos> wide, having a great distance between two vertical things in either side. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a12]</itype> be, become wide. <i>Magiblang ang kalyi ug magtagà ang láray sa lubi,</i> The street will become wide if you cut down the row of coconut trees.

<p><form>gidlak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>glitter</tr>, <tr>sparkle</tr>. <i>Wà makagidlak ang mga bitúun kay nagdag-um,</i> The stars did not sparkle in the sky because it was overcast. <form>gidlakgidlak</form> <pos>a</pos> glittering, sparkling. <i>Gidlakgidlak ang sinínang íyang gisul-ub,</i> She wore a dress that was covered with little sparkling things. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)6]</itype> glitter, sparkle.

<p><form>*gidlay ka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <number>1</number> for clothing to be in tatters. <i>Nagkagidlay ang saput sa makililímus,</i> The beggar was wearing tattered clothes. <number>2</number> be reduced to a miserable condition due to misfortunes, financial set-backs, and the like. <i>Nagkagidlay lagi ku kay gibyáan sa uyab,</i> I&apos;m a miserable wretch since my lover left me. <i>Dì ku makabáyad kay nagkagidlay pa mi,</i> I can&apos;t pay because we are in a desperate financial condition. <number>3</number> be battered in a fight or some other undertakings. <i>Nagkagidlay ku sa ámung tist,</i> I was ruined on that test. <i>Nagkagidlay ang ámung tím,</i> Our team was reamed.

<p><form>gigming</form> <xr>= <sc>GAGMING</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>GAMING</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gigulu</form> <pos><corr sic=a>n</corr></pos> <tr>gigolo</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> be a gigolo.

<p><form>gihang</form> <xr>= <sc>GILHANG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gihápun</form> <number>1</number> still, as before. <i>Nagpabílin gihápun nga Risalista si Iyù Simun,</i> Old Simon still remains a die-hard Rizalist. <number>2</number> still, nevertheless. <i>Bísag unsáun, kang Sirhing kami gihápun,</i> No matter what happens, we are still for Serging. <number>3</number> still the same thing. <i>Balanghuy gahápun, balanghuy lang gihápun karun?</i> We had cassava yesterday. Do we still have cassava today? <form>mau &mdash;</form> as always. <i>Tigúlang na siya apan mau gihápun ambúngan,</i> He is old now, but as always, handsome. <form>sa &mdash;</form> forever, always, at all times. <i>Maingun sa sinugdan, karun, ug sa gihápun, sa mga katuígan ngatanan,</i> As it was in the beginning, <pb n=264>is now, and ever shall be, world without end.

<p><form>gihay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> petal. <i>Ang gihay sa rúsas pula,</i> Rose petals are red. <number>2</number> shred, strip, tear off s.t. <i>Usa ka gihay sa íyang sinínà nahabilin sa alambri,</i> A piece of her dress was left on the wire. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab4]</itype> tear s.t. into strips, shreds. <i>Gihayun níya ang papil,</i> She will tear the paper into strips. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be reduced to shreds. <i>Nagkagíhay ang íyang pangatarúngan sa abtik nga panuksù,</i> His reasoning was reduced to shreds by the intelligent questioning.

<p><form>gihì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> slice a portion off a hunk of meat or fish. <i>Gigihian nákug gamay ang gaway sa tabuguk,</i> I cut a small slice from the octopus&apos; tentacles. <number>2</number> make an incision in meat or fish. <i>Gihii ang karni nga igsusugba,</i> Make incisions on the meat to be broiled. <pos>n</pos> slice taken off a hunk of meat or fish.

<p><form>gíhu</form> <xr>= <sc>GÍSUK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gika-</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>I-<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gíkan</form> <number>1</number> from [such-and-such] a place. <i>Miabut siya gíkan sa Hapun,</i> He arrived from Japan. <number>2</number> from [such-and-such] a time. <i>Nat&umacracu;g siya gíkan sa buntag,</i> He slept from morning on. <number>3</number> having just finished doing or being s.t. <i>Gíkan akung nalígù,</i> I&apos;ve just come from my bath. <number>4</number> from, against an adversity. <i>Luwasun ku ikaw gíkan sa kauláwan,</i> I&apos;ll save you from shame. <number>5</number> originating from. <i>Ang táwu kunu gíkan sa ungguy,</i> Man is said to have descended from the apes. <form>&mdash; karun</form> from now on, henceforth. <i>Gíkan karun, wà nay sinisíni,</i> From now on, no more movies. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> <tr>depart</tr>. <i>Mugíkan ku ugmà pára Amirika,</i> I&apos;ll leave tomorrow for the United States. <i>Ug gikánun nátug sayu,</i> If we make it an early departure. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12S3; b6]</itype> <tr>originate from</tr> s.t. <i>Kanang sugáa naggikan sa parúla,</i> That light comes from the lighthouse. <i>Ang íyang sakit nagagikan sa pagpúnayg panigarilyu,</i> His sickness comes from excessive smoking. <i>Halayung dápit ang ákung gigikánan,</i> I come from a far place. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> see off on a trip. <i>Akuy mupagíkan níya sa piyir,</i> I&apos;ll see her off at the wharf. <form>-um-</form> due to. <i>Gumíkan sa ímung kadangag nawálà ang rilu,</i> Because of your carelessness you lost the watch. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12S3]</itype> be due to. <i>Ang báhà naggumíkan sa pagpúril sa lasang,</i> Floods are due to deforestation. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ancestral origin</tr>. <i>Putiun siya kay katsílà ang íyang kagíkan,</i> He is white because his ancestors were Spaniards. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>parents</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>origin</tr>, <tr>primary source</tr>. <i>Ang garbu mauy ginikánan sa tanang salà,</i> Pride is the root of all sin.

<p><form>gílak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>glitter</tr>, <tr>sparkle</tr>. <i>Masúlaw ang gílak sa íyang mga aláhas,</i> The glitter of her jewelry was dazzling. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>glitter</tr>, <tr>sparkle</tr>. <i>Migílak ang íyang mga mata,</i> Her eyes glittered. <number>2</number> shine in popularity, prominence. <i>Si Ilbis naggilak gihápun sa íyang kabantug,</i> Elvis still is shining in his popularity. <form>gilakgilak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146]</itype> have a sparkling brilliance. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sparkling</tr>.

<p><form>gilang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> make crosswise or diagonal incisions into s.t. <i>Gilanga (gilangi) ang isdà únà pritúha,</i> Make incisions in the fish before you fry it.

<p><form>gil-as</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>warm</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b4]</itype> feel warm. <i>Ug mugil-as ang panahun, paghúkas, arun dì ka gil-asan,</i> If the weather gets hot, take off your shirt so you won&apos;t feel hot. <number>2</number> <itype>[A123P; b4]</itype> feel restless, uneasy. <i>Gigil-ásan ang íyang ginikánan sa dúgayng pagpinaábut kaníya,</i> Her parents were restless waiting for her. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>heat</tr>. <number>2</number> feeling of restlessness. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> ill at ease. <i>Magil-ásun siya nga miatúbang sa bisíta,</i> She was ill at ease as she received her visitor.

<p><form>gílaw</form> <pos>n</pos> steady flow of light from s.t. glowing, gleaming. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN]</itype> glow, gleam. <i>Migílaw ang úling nga nagbaga,</i> The red coals glowed. <i>Naggilaw sa kaháit ang ákung pinútì,</i> My bolo is gleaming with sharpness. <form>gilawgilaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> sparkle.

<p><form>gilay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> cut a slit in the ear of an animal for purposes of identification. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>a</pos> having a slit cut in the ear.

<p><form>gilayun</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>DÁYUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gilhang</form> (from <ix>lihang</ix>) <pos>n</pos> fissure, slit, gap where two long things join. <i>Taas ang gilhang sa ílang pangidarun,</i> There is a large difference in their ages. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B456; c1]</itype> have a narrow gap, slit. <i>Naggilhang lang nang ímung ngípun,</i> Your teeth are spaced wide apart. <i>Gilhanga (igilhang) pagsira ang pultahan arun makalìlì ta,</i> Don&apos;t close the door all the way so we can peep. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> make a gash on s.t. to have an opening. <i>Gilhangi ang isdang asinánan,</i> Make a gash in the fish we will salt.

<p><form>gílis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> tear or cut into long straight strips. <i>Ang hángin mauy nakagílis sa dáhun sa ságing,</i> The strong wind tore the banana leaf into strips. <i>Gigílis sa kusug nga pambut ang dágat,</i> The pump boat cut a straight swath into the sea. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> a piece stripped off of s.t. &dagger;

<p><form>gilit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>razor blade</tr> (from the brand name Gillette). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> cut with a razor blade. <i>Dì maputul nang hilúha ug dì gilitun,</i> That string won&apos;t break if you don&apos;t cut it with a razor blade.

<pb n=265>

<p><form>gil-it</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> for a tiny portion of s.t. to stick out from behind or inside s.t. that conceals it. <i>Migil-it na ang adlaw sa subangan,</i> The sun has emerged from the east. <i>Igil-it ang tumuy sa ímung dílà,</i> Stick out the tip of your tongue.

<p><form>gil-ud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> break s.o.&apos;s bones. <i>Gil-urun (gil-uran) ta ka run,</i> I&apos;ll break your bones.

<p><form>giluk</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>tickling sensation</tr>. <i>Giluk kaáyu kun gitíkun ta sa íluk,</i> It is very titillating to be tickled in the armpits. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B6; b4]</itype> <tr>tickle</tr>, feel s.t. tickling. <i>Migiluk ang ákung ilung,</i> My nose itched. <i>Pwirting kinatáwa kay gigilukan (gigigkan, gigidkan) siya,</i> She laughed hard because it tickled. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> <form>&mdash; ang kamut, tiil</form> have a compulsion to touch s.t. or move the feet. <i>Maggiluk ang kamut sa kiriwan,</i> A kleptomaniac has itchy hands. <i>Naggiluk ang ákung tiil. Kaáyung ibayli,</i> My feet itch. How nice it would be to dance. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> intense tickling. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b4]</itype> tickle intensely. <form>pa-</form> <itype>[A; b]</itype> tickle s.o. <i>Kaáyu giyud nímu pagigkan,</i> How nice it would be to tickle you. <form>gigkánun, ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> ticklish, sensitive to tickling.

<p><form>gím</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>game</tr>, <tr>sports competition</tr>. <i>Giuswag ang gím tungud sa ulan,</i> The game was postponed due to the rain. <number>2</number> end of a game according to an agreement. <i>Mangundang ta sa wà pay gím,</i> Let&apos;s quit before the end of the game. <number>2a</number> game of mahjong starting from the deal till the time one of the players goes mahjong. <pos>a</pos> game, showing spirit and enthusiasm, even under unpropitious conditions. <i>Gím nà siya kay bísag way hílig, mukanta kun hangyúun,</i> She is game because she will sing if you ask her to even if she doesn&apos;t want to. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B236; a12]</itype> for a game to end. <i>Migím (nagím) na lang wà pa kuy puntus,</i> The game ended without my having contributed a point. <i>Gíma na arun mangulì ta,</i> Make it a game so we can go home. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> get to be game. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> a play to finish the game. <i>Panggím ning sirbíha,</i> This serve is the game point.

<p><form>gimat<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> ugly, plain. <i>Gimat nang panaptun ímung gipílì,</i> You chose an ugly cloth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b12]</itype> get to be ugly. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be covered with dirt. <i>Nagkagímat ang nawung sa bátà,</i> The child&apos;s face was covered with dirt.

<p><form>gimat<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>tattered</tr>, <tr>in shreds</tr>. <i>Gimat ang sinínà sa makililímus,</i> The beggar has a tattered dress on. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be in tatters.

<p><form>gímaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <number>1</number> emerge, for a small portion of s.t. to stick out above a surface or behind a concealment. <i>Migímaw ang simud sa mga isdà ibabaw sa túbig,</i> The snout of the fish emerged from the surface of the water. <i>Ang mga turuk nanggímaw na,</i> The sprouts are pushing out of the ground now. <number>2</number> come to light, be revealed. <i>Ang kinaíya sa táwu bísan unsáun pagtábun, mugímaw gayud,</i> One&apos;s true character will surely come out no matter how carefully it is concealed. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2P]</itype> show oneself in a place. <i>Wà na mugímaw (mupagímaw) nang mangingilad,</i> That swindler never showed himself again. <pos>n</pos> visible portion of s.t. partially hidden.

<p><form>gim-aw</form> <xr>= <sc>GÍMAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>giming</form> <xr>= <sc>GAMING</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gímuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S3]</itype> make a slight movement in place. <i>Migímuk ang bátang natúlug dihang gipáak sa namuk,</i> The sleeping baby stirred when a mosquito bit him. <i>Naggimuk ang mga úlud sa patay nga irù,</i> Worms are wriggling over the dead dog&apos;s body. <pos>n</pos> action of stirring. <i>Way gímuk ang baryu kun magabíi,</i> The village is completely quiet at night.

<p><form>gim-ut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> barely enough in space. <number>2</number> short of time, money. <number>3</number> expression of distaste, annoyance on the face. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> be barely enough in space. <i>Mugim-ut (magim-ut) ang pasilyu kung hidaghanan sa táwu,</i> The passageway will be congested if there are too many people who pass in it. <number>2</number> be short of time or money. <i>Mugim-ut (magim-ut) ang ímung iskidyul ug daghang sabdyiks ímung kuháun,</i> Your schedule will be very tight if you take too heavy a load. <i>Gigim-útan ang kabus sa íyang kahimtang,</i> The poor man is in a tight financial situation. <number>3</number> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> for the face to get an expression of distaste or anger. <i>Migim-ut (nagim-ut) ang íyang nawung kay gibahuan,</i> She wrinkled up her face because she smelled s.t. bad.

<p><form>gina-</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PAGA-UN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gina-an</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PAGA-AN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ginábut</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>GÁBUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ginahapun</form> <xr>= <sc>GINHÁPUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>Gínang</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Mrs</tr>. <i>Siya si Gínang Riyis,</i> This is Mrs. Reyes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> call s.o. &lsquo;Mrs.&rsquo;.

<p><form>ginansiya</form> <xr>= <sc>GANANSIYA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gínga</form> <xr>= <sc>GÚNGA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gingà</form> <xr>= <sc>GINGÌ</sc>, <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number>.</xr>

<p><form>gingging<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> tweak the ears or pull the hair on the side of head upwards with the thumb and forefinger. <i>Ginggíngun ku nang ímung dunggan ug pabuyag ka,</i> I will tweak your ears if you are naughty.

<p><form>gingging<sub>2</sub></form> pet name given to boys and girls.

<p><form>ginggun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. cloth of plain weave, usually blue-colored, coarser than the Indianhead cloth, used commonly for ordinary wear because of its durability. <number>2</number> coloration of horses: a white field sometimes with a tinge <pb n=266>of grey covered with black speckles. <number>2a</number> <pos>a</pos> horse of this coloration.

<p><form>gingì</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> spaces between toes and fingers. <number>2</number> slits or openings in walls, roofs, and the like. <number>3</number> small nooks, corners, crevices, creases in s.t. or parts of a body. <i>Gingì sa hunàhúnà,</i> Crevices of one&apos;s mind. <i>Gingì sa líug,</i> Crease in the neck. <number>4</number> part of a broken branch, a part of a bunch or hand of fruit. <i>Usa ka ginging úbas,</i> Part of a bunch of grapes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> break into parts, as branches and bunches of fruit. <i>Migingì siyag sanga sa bayábas,</i> He broke a guava branch into pieces. <form>gingìgingì</form> <xr>= <sc>GINGÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ginhápun</form> usual, normal in behavior, said in contexts referring to the unusualness of certain behavior. <i>Katingad-an kay dílì ginhápun nga maulahi siya,</i> It&apos;s surprising because it&apos;s not usual for her to be late. <i>Ginhápun ba siya nga maghúbug?</i> Is it normal for him to get drunk?

<p><form>ginháwa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>breath</tr>. <i>Nabugtúan siya sa ginháwa sa alas tris,</i> He expired at three o&apos;clock. <form>táman sa &mdash;</form> as much as one could. <i>Midágan siyag táman sa ginháwa,</i> He ran away as fast as he could. <number>2</number> appetite for eating. <i>Maáyu siyag ginháwa maung tambuk,</i> He has a good appetite. That&apos;s why he is fat. <form>pára sa &mdash;</form> for the purposes of food. <i>Mamuhì ta pára sa átung ginháwa,</i> Let&apos;s raise animals for food. <form>subra sa &mdash;</form> excess food. <i>Iláwug sa bábuy ang subra sa ginháwa,</i> Feed the leftovers to the pigs. <number>3</number> cookies, small cakes. <number>4</number> one&apos;s feelings. <i>Nagláin ang ákung ginháwa,</i> I feel lousy. <i>Kulbà kaáyu ang ákung ginháwa,</i> I was terribly frightened. <number>4a</number> <ix>used as subject for an instrumental passive verb or instrumental noun</ix>: feel like. <i>Maáyung ihílak ang ákung ginháwa,</i> I feel so much like crying. <i>Nahadluk ku. Igdadágan ang ákung ginháwa,</i> I was afraid. I felt like running away. <form>mau na sa &mdash;</form> have spent the limit of one&apos;s strength. <i>Mau na sa ginháwa nákung pugung arun dì ku makabakyaw,</i> I controlled myself as much as I could to keep from hitting her. <form>walà sa &mdash;</form> not take s.t. to heart. <i>Wà ra sa íyang ginháwa bísag kasab-an,</i> She doesn&apos;t take it to heart if she is cussed out. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S3S; c]</itype> <tr>breathe</tr>. <i>Dalia kay nagginhawa pa,</i> Quick, she is still breathing. <i>Nakabayad na ku sa mga útang. Makaginhawa na ta,</i> I&apos;ve paid the debts. Now we can breathe. <i>Iginháwa ang dautang hángin gíkan sa bágà,</i> Breathe out the bad air from the lungs. <form>&mdash; ug luag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123S]</itype> breathe a sigh of relief. <i>Nakaginhawa siyag luag pagkasáyud nga apindiks ra diay,</i> He breathed a sigh of relief upon finding out it was just appendicitis. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>breathing</tr>. <form>ginhawáan, ginhawaan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>entrails</tr>. <i>Gidugùdugù níla ang ginhawáan sa bábuy,</i> They made the entrails of the pig into blood stew. <number>2</number> insides. <i>Dihà diay nati sa ginhawaan,</i> There was a calf in the stomach. <number>3</number> mood, disposition. <i>Nagdáut ang ákung ginhawáan kay nag-áway mi,</i> I am in a bad mood because we had a quarrel. <number>4</number> capacity to withstand sickening, nauseating circumstances. <i>Húyang siyag ginhawaan kay madismáyug makakitag dugù,</i> She has a weak stomach because she faints when she sees blood.

<p><form>Gíning</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Miss</tr>. <i>Kini si Gíning Santus,</i> This is Miss Santos. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> call s.o. &lsquo;Miss&rsquo;.

<p><form>gínit</form> <pos>n</pos> the cloth-like sheath, growing off the sides of the base of coconut palm fronds, protecting the young frond and the blossom.

<p><form>ginlaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); b6]</itype> <tr>shine</tr>, <tr>glitter</tr>. <i>Muginlaw ang úru ug mainitan,</i> Gold will glitter in the sun. <i>Nagginlaw ang íyang brilyanti,</i> Her diamond is glittering. <i>Naginlaw ang sawug sa plurwaks,</i> The floor shone with the floor wax. <pos>a</pos> <tr>glittering</tr>, <tr>glossy</tr>. <pos>n</pos> glitter, <tr>gloss</tr>.

<p><form>ginsud</form> <xr>= <sc>AGÍNUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ginta</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> distance of one point to another ahead or above it. <i>May gintang dyis mitrus ang balay sa karsáda,</i> The house is set back ten meters from the road. <number>2</number> distance beyond a certain point. <i>Ayaw itúpung sa ngilit. Butangig ginta,</i> Don&apos;t build it flush to the edge. Let it overhang. <number>3</number> distance given as an advantage in a race. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B456; c]</itype> <number>1</number> overlap or extend beyond s.t. <i>Taas na ang byábas kay miginta na sa atup,</i> The guava tree is tall because it has grown higher than the roof. <number>2</number> give s.o. an advantage in a race. <i>Gigintáhan siyag lima ka mitrus,</i> He was given a five-meter advantage.

<p><form>gintang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>GINTA</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> distance the sun is above the horizon. <number>3</number> difference in age. <i>Diyis anyus ang gintang sa magtiáyun,</i> The married couple has a ten-year difference in age. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>GINTA</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for the sun to travel a certain distance. <i>Udtu na kay taas nag gigintángan ang adlaw,</i> It&apos;s late because the sun has risen high.

<p><form>ginting</form> <pos>n</pos> deep scallops or serrations on the edge of s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB46; c1]</itype> cut the edge or border of s.t. into deep scallops. <i>Nagginting ang tápay sa manuk,</i> A cock&apos;s comb <corr sic=in>is</corr> serrated. <i>Gigintíngan níya ang sidsid sa íyang sinínà,</i> She made scallops at the lower edge of her dress. <form>gintingginting</form> <pos>n</pos> one of a series of V-shaped segments on the outer edge of s.t., usually for decoration. <form>gunting nga &mdash;</form> pinking shears. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6(1)]</itype> make a V-shaped <pb n=267>scallop on the edge of s.t.

<p><form>gin-u</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small shiny cowry with a color combination of yellow and green.

<p><form>ginuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>move</tr>, <tr>stir</tr>. <i>Ayaw ginuka ang bátà arun dílì magmata,</i> Do not stir the baby so that it won&apos;t wake up.

<p><form>gin-ut</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> stuffy and airless. <i>Gin-ut kaáyu dinhi kay daghang táwu,</i> It&apos;s stuffy here because there are lots of people. <number>2</number> for the nose to be stuffed or chest to be tight. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b4]</itype> <note>[**typo: <number>1</number>]</note>be stuffy and airless. <i>Gin-utan aku áning sinínang naylun,</i> I feel hot in this nylon shirt. <number>2</number> for the nose to be stuffed or the chest to feel tight. <i>Nagin-ut ang dughan sa gihúbak,</i> The asthmatic had a tight feeling in his chest.

<p><form>ginúu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lord</tr>, <tr>God</tr>. <i>Ginúu ku, unsa kahay ákung nalimtan?</i> Oh Lord, what could I have forgotten? <number>2</number> <ix>term of address for gentleman</ix>: <tr>Mr</tr>., <tr>Sir</tr>. <i>Ginúu Magsaysay,</i> Mr. Magsaysay. <number>3</number> most feared and influential head in a place. <i>Kanang ismaglir mauy ginúu íning baryu,</i> That smuggler is the lord of this barrio. <form>way &mdash;</form> <tr>Godless</tr>. <i>Way ginúu nang tulisána. Dílì malúuy nga mupatay sa íyang gitulísan,</i> That robber doesn&apos;t fear God. He kills his victims without mercy.

<p><form>gíp</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gift</tr>. <form>-rap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> gift-wrap. <i>Giprap-*un ba ni?</i> Shall we gift-wrap this?

<p><form>gipak</form> <pos>n</pos> a piece broken off from a whole. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12]</itype> break s.t. into pieces. <i>Naggipak kug káhuy nga isugnud,</i> I am breaking off pieces of wood for firewood. <i>Nagkagipak ang búkid sa gidinamíta kini,</i> The mountain gradually got broken up into small chunks as it was dynamited.

<p><form>gipakig-an</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PAKIG-AN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gipang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> lump of s.t. <i>Usa ka gipang kan-un,</i> A lump of food. <number>2</number> s.t. chopped off or broken off from the bunch. <i>Usa ka gipang káhuy,</i> A piece of wood broken off from the tree. a having a chipped off edge. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> get separated, broken off or apart. <i>Ákung gipangun ang mga sáhà sa palmíra kay itanum,</i> I&apos;ll break off the shoots of the potted palm to plant. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB126; b5]</itype> chip off the edge. <i>Nagípang ang bàbà sa básu nga napangkà,</i> The mouth of the glass chipped when it was bumped against s.t. <form>-únun</form> <pos>a</pos> s.t. ready to break off, e.g. shoots for replanting.

<p><form>giping</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> break things in a bunch apart, for things in a bunch to become separated. <i>Si Nánay ang migiping (naggiping) sa ságing,</i> Mother was the one who broke off the bunch of bananas. <i>Nagiping na ang mga tudlù sa bátang nakúhà,</i> The baby that was miscarried had its fingers and toes parted. <i>Gipingun ku ning úbas,</i> I&apos;ll separate this bunch of grapes.

<p><form>giprap</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>GÍP</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>giplud, gípud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> break off a tooth or serration. <i>Kinsay naggípud sa gabas?</i> Who broke the teeth of the saw? <i>Nagkagipud ang íyang ngípun,</i> His teeth are breaking off. <number>2</number> break s.o.&apos;s bones. <i>Giplúran ta ka sa mga tiil ug mulakaw ka,</i> I&apos;ll break your legs if you go out. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> for teeth or serration to be broken off.

<p><form>gípung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> take glowing embers and put them together to keep them going. <i>Gipúnga (igípung) ang bága arun dílì mamatay,</i> Put the embers together so the fire won&apos;t burn out.

<p><form>gip-ut</form> <xr>= <sc>HA-</sc>.</xr> <form>ha-</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> narrow in space or passageway. <i>Hagip-ut nga agiánan,</i> A narrow passageway. <i>Hagip-ut ang ámung kwartu,</i> We have a small, narrow room. <number>2</number> tight in financial situation, mode of living. <i>Hagip-ut kaáyu mi run. Dílì mi makahátag,</i> We&apos;re in a tight situation now. We can&apos;t contribute. <i>Hagip-ut na kaáyu ang panahun,</i> We have very little time left. <number>3</number> for clothes not to be quite enough. <i>Hagip-ut kaáyu ning panaptúna,</i> This cloth is too narrow. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> be, become narrow in space or passageway. <i>Muhagip-ut (mahagip-ut) na ning agiánan ug ímung butangag daghang bangkù,</i> The passageway will become narrow if you put lots of benches in it. <number>2</number> for a situation to become difficult, for time to get short.

<p><form>gíra</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>war</tr>. <number>2</number> trivial matters talked about in a conversation that&apos;s supposed to be important. <i>Unsáun pagsugut nga gíra may giisturyáhan?</i> How could she accept him when they kept talking about the weather instead of what was on their minds? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C2; c]</itype> be at war. <i>Kun makiggíra ta sa Tsína, ihían lang ta,</i> If we wage war against China, they can win just by urinating on us. <number>2</number> <itype>[a2]</itype> go to war over s.t. <i>Maátù lang ang Sába kun giráhun,</i> Sabah will be ours only if we go to war for her. <number>3</number> <itype>[a2]</itype> quarrel with, make war on a member of the family. <i>Gigíra siya sa íyang asáwa kay dúgayng mipaúlì,</i> His wife went on the warpath against him because he came home late. <form>&mdash; patánì</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>civil war</tr>. <number>2</number> all-out quarrel among people residing together. <i>Gíra patánì sa Munti,</i> Riot in the Muntinlupa prison. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; a2]</itype> have a civil war. <i>Naggíra patánì ang managsúun báhin sa kabílin,</i> The brothers and sisters are fighting to the death over the inheritance. <form>di-, bapur di-, barku di-, búki di-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>warship</tr>.

<pb n=268>

<p><form>giráwut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> fire s.o. from his job. <i>Gigiráwut siya kay tapulan,</i> He was fired because he was lazy. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b3]</itype> get out of a place or position due to pressure, threats, and the like. <i>Mugiráwut ku sa ámù kay kuyaw,</i> I&apos;ll leave our place because it&apos;s a dangerous place. <i>Unsay ímung gigirawtan? Gamayg swildu?</i> Why did you quit? Low pay?

<p><form>girdul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>girdle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> wear a girdle.

<p><form>girilya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>guerilla</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> become a guerilla fighter. <i>Naggirilya ang mga kalakin-an sa panahun sa ukupasiyun,</i> The men became guerillas during the Japanese occupation. <form>girilyíru, girilyista</form> <xr>= <sc>GIRILYA</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p><form>giring</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ruffle</tr>. <form>giringgiring</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> shallow scallops or serrations, ruffles. <number>2</number> slightly crazy. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a shallowly scalloped border. <i>Giringgiringa ang ímung paggunting arun arti tan-áwun,</i> Scallop the edges so it will look artistic. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> look like a scalloped edge. <i>Kabakhawan nga migiringgiring sa ílang luyu,</i> A mangrove swamp that looked like a scalloped edge in back of them. <number>3</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> become crazy. <i>Nagkagiringgiring siya kay kanúnayng mapasmu,</i> He is becoming crazy because he often goes hungry.

<p><form>girípu</form> <xr>= <sc>GRÍPU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>giríra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>heroine</tr>, <tr>woman warrior</tr>. <i>Si Hwána di Arku bantúgang giríra,</i> Joan of Arc was a famous woman warrior. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a woman warrior.

<p><form>girnalda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wreath</tr>, <tr>garland</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make a wreath, garland. <i>Háin man ang mga girnaldáhun?</i> Where are the things for the wreath? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> wear or place a wreath.

<p><form>gisa, gisal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> fry s.t. with little oil and usually together with s.t. else. <form>-du(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>fried</tr>.

<p><form>gisantis</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>green peas</tr>. <number>2</number> dog as food (humorous slang&mdash;so called because dog meat is commonly prepared with peas).

<p><form>gisaw</form> <xr>= <sc>GUSAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gísì</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>tear</tr> s.t. <i>Naggísì siyag panaptun arun ibáat sa samad,</i> She tore off a strip of cloth to bandage the wound. <i>Nagísì ang íyang kasingkásing sa ílang panagbúlag,</i> It tore her all up when they broke up. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make a slight cut or laceration. <i>Gigisían ang inahan sa primírung pagpanganak,</i> The mother had some lacerations during her first delivery. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tear</tr>, <tr>laceration</tr>. <i>May gisì ang ímung karsúnis,</i> Your pants have a tear in them. <form>gisìgisì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> tear s.t. to shreds. <i>Gigisìgisì níya ang sulat sa blakmílir,</i> She tore the blackmailer&apos;s letter into pieces. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> all ripped up.

<p><form>gísing<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>GÍSUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gísing<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>AGIGÍSING</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gislang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. snapper.

<p><form>gisnga</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN; b6]</itype> for the nose to bleed. <i>Nanggisnga (migisnga) ang íyang ilung,</i> His nose bled. <i>Gisngahi nang tawhána sa ilung,</i> Give that man a bloody nose.

<p><form>gist</form> <pos>n</pos> honored guest at an official function. <form>&mdash; ispíkir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>guest speaker</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be a guest speaker.

<p><form>gísu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lime</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> make chalk. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>whitewash</tr>. <i>Gisúhan nátù ang bungbung,</i> Let&apos;s whitewash the walls.

<p><form>gísuk</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to various trees which furnish second-class hardwood. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> make s.t. of <ix>gísuk</ix>. <i>Gigísuk námù ang halígi arun lig-un,</i> We used <ix>gísuk</ix> wood for our posts to make them strong.

<p><form>gísung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> shake into consciousness. <i>Gisúnga ang gwardiya arun magmata,</i> Shake the guard so he will wake up. <number>2</number> shake plants or children on Holy Saturday to assure that they will grow well. <pos>n</pos> <tr>Holy Saturday</tr> (the day before Easter), so named from the shaking of growing things done on that day.

<p><form>giswid</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> stretch the body, move it around with a wriggle. <i>Mibángun siyag migiswid,</i> He got up and stretched. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> free oneself of financial problems. <i>Wà kuy kwartang ikagiswid nákù sa mga útang,</i> I don&apos;t have any money to free myself of my debts.

<p><form>gít</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gate</tr>. <form>&mdash; kras</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> crash the gate. <i>Gigitkrásan ang ámung parti,</i> There were gate crashers at our party. <form>&mdash; krásir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gate crasher</tr>.

<p><form>gitára</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>guitar</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> play the guitar. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a guitar. <form>gitarista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>guitar player</tr>, <tr>accompanist</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> become a guitarist.

<p><form>gitgit<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. swallow: <bio>Artamus leucorhynchus</bio>. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. kite with a swallow&apos;s tail.

<p><form>gitgit<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> variety of <ix>kalípay</ix>.

<p><form>gitì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>clitoris</tr> (coarse). <form>&mdash; sa ímung (íyang) ina</form> <xr>= <sc>BILAT SA INA</sc> (coarse).</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>BILAT</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> the thing that is irksome (coarse&mdash;said in extreme annoyance). <i>Ang nakagitì nímu mau nga tihik ka,</i> What&apos;s wrong with you is that you&apos;re stingy.

<p><form>gítib</form> <xr>= <sc>GITLIB</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gítik</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; a1]</itype> <tr>tickle</tr>, <tr>titillate</tr>. <i>Ang naggítik (nanggítik) nakakatawa usab tungud sa inagik-ik sa gigítik,</i> The way she squealed as she was being tickled made the fellow that was tickling her laugh. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> stab s.o. with a slender pointed instrument (slang). <i>Ang gigítik níya sa ayispik namatay,</i> The person he stabbed with the ice pick died. <number>3</number> pluck a musical instrument. <i>Ang sista nga íyang <pb n=269>gigítik,</i> The guitar he is playing. <pos>n</pos> tickling. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>titillating</tr>. <i>Ang íyang magitíkung huwaphúwap nakapadásig nákù,</i> Her titillating caresses excited me. <form>gitkánun, giktánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>ticklish</tr>, sensitive to tickling.

<p><form>gitinggiting</form> <xr>= <sc>GINTINGGINTING</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>GINTING</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gitlì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for a tiny portion of s.t. to come into view before the whole shows itself. <i>Migitlì na ang únang bidlísiw sa adlaw,</i> The first rays of the sun started to peep out.

<p><form>gitlib</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> start to appear on a surface by showing a tiny portion. <i>Migítib na ang binhì,</i> The seed has started to sprout. <i>Mihubag ang lagus nga gigitíban sa panúuk,</i> The gums swelled where his wisdom tooth was making its appearance.

<p><form>gitpas</form> <pos>n</pos> ticket allowing one free admission. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b]</itype> use a gate pass. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b]</itype> get a gate pass. <i>Nakagitpas ku ganína,</i> I was able to get a gate pass a while ago.

<p><form>gitugitu</form> <xr>= <sc>NGITUNGITU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gítung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tang</tr>, the small projecting part of a blade that is fitted into the handle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make a tang, provide with a tang.

<p><form>giuk, gíuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> remove grain from rice stalks with the feet. <i>Gigiuk níla ang humay,</i> They threshed the rice.

<p><form>gíut</form> <pos>a</pos> tight with barely enough space because of closeness, proximity in distance. <i>Gíut ang mga káhuy niánang bungtúra,</i> The trees are dense on that hill. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c]</itype> squeeze into a narrow space, be closely packed. <i>Mugíut lang ta bísan punù sa mga táwu,</i> We will just squeeze in even if it&apos;s filled with people. <i>Gigíut níla sa láta ang mga papílis,</i> They squeezed the papers into the can.

<p><form>giwang</form> <pos>n</pos> fissure, narrow crack. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make a fissure in. <i>Giwangi ang ilisánan kay manglìlì ta,</i> Make a slit in the dressing room so we can peep inside.

<p><form>giwánun</form> <pos>n</pos> fresh-water spring near the seashore, tasting a bit salty.

<p><form>giwatay</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>badly torn</tr>; <tr>tattered</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> get badly torn, tear s.t. to shreds. <i>Naggiwatay ang mga ituy sa linadlad,</i> The puppies tore the laundry into shreds. <i>Nagkagiwatay ang íyang bisti,</i> Her dress was all tattered and torn.

<p><form>gíwit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a1]</itype> torn into shreds. <i>Nagkagíwit na giyud kaáyu ang mga kurtína,</i> My curtains are torn to pieces from use. <form>giwitgiwit</form> <pos>a</pos> badly torn, tattered. <i>Giwitgiwit intáwun kaáyug sinínà ang makalilímus,</i> The beggar&apos;s clothes are in tatters. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> be, become badly torn.

<p><form>gíya</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> lead the way, guide s.o. to a place. <i>Ang kumpas mauy maggíya sa barku,</i> The compass guides the ship. <i>Gigyáhan silag Manúbù,</i> They were guided by <pos>a</pos> Manobo tribesman. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>guide</tr>. <number>2a</number> tie rod of the steering system of a motor vehicle. <number>2b</number> steering cable in a boat which connects the steering wheel and the rudder. <number>3</number> a line with a ball of rope on one end and the other attached to the towline of a ship. When the ship docks it is tossed to the wharf so as to bring the boat&apos;s towline with it.

<p><form>giyan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> crave s.t. one is addicted to. <i>Gigiyan na kug kapi kay naánad na,</i> I&apos;m addicted to coffee because I&apos;m used to it.

<p><form>gíyaw</form> <pos>n</pos> glitter of s.t. dark violet in color, such as some rosary beads.

<p><form>gláb</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>gloves</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>boxing gloves</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear gloves.

<p><form>gladiyúla</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gladiola</tr>.

<p><form>glú</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>glue</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>glue</tr>. <i>Glúhi ang librung bawnun,</i> Put glue on the books to be bound.

<p><form>glurya</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>DUMINGGU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gluryúsu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>glorious</tr>, <tr>delightful</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become glorious. <i>Magluryúsu ang táwu ug way kaguúl,</i> A person becomes glorious when he has no worries. <form>&mdash; nga mistiryu</form> <pos>n</pos> the glorious mysteries, one of the three series of mysteries in the Holy Rosary.

<p><form>Gn.</form> abbreviation for <ix>Gíning</ix>, &lsquo;Miss&rsquo;.

<p><form>Gng.</form> abbreviation for <ix>Gínang</ix>, &lsquo;Mrs.&rsquo;

<p><form>grába</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gravel</tr>. <form>-du</form> <pos>a</pos> paved with gravel. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> pave with gravel. <i>Grabadúhun (grabadúhan) sa gubyirnu ang mga karsáda,</i> The government will pave the roads with gravel. <form>-dur(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> one who hauls and shovels gravel. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56; a2]</itype> work as a gravel hauler. &dagger;

<p><form>grabansus</form> <xr>= <sc>KARABANSUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>grábi</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> in serious condition. <i>Grábi siya, dì tingáli kaugmaan,</i> He is serious. He might not live till tomorrow. <number>2</number> done in too great a degree, being in too great a degree. <i>Grábi ra nang ímung pasíaw,</i> You prank too much. <i>Grábing dimalása. Gipanítan ku sa madiyung,</i> It&apos;s a very unlucky day for me. I lost in mahjong. <number>3</number> expression showing one&apos;s disgust, dismay over s.o.&apos;s failure to do s.t. which he should have done, or avoid s.t. which he could have avoided doing. <i>Grábi sad kag nalímut nga gahápun pa man tu,</i> How could you ever forget when it was just yesterday. <i>Grábi! Bisag diyuy wà ka?</i> Good heavens. You haven&apos;t got anything at all? Not even half a centavo? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> become worse. <i>Nagkagrabi ang íyang sakit kay wà tambali,</i> His sickness is getting worse and worse because he didn&apos;t treat it. <number>2</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> for s.t. to be overdone. <i>Higrabihan nímug nusnus ang sílak, maung napánas,</i> You rubbed the shellac too much, so that it got worn <pb n=270>off. <number>3</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> get s.t. more than any one else. <i>Sa tanang gikastígu siyay nagrabihan,</i> He got the heaviest punishment of all of them. <form>grabihan</form> <pos>a</pos> not given to conversation, unsmiling. <i>Míngaw ikaúban bayhána kay grabihan,</i> It&apos;s no fun to go with her because she doesn&apos;t respond to people. <form>grabihun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>snobbish</tr>, refusing to have to do with people deemed inferior. <i>Lisud duúlun ang táwung grabihun,</i> It&apos;s hard to approach a snobbish person.

<p><form>grádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>rating</tr>, <tr>grade</tr>. <i>Nahagbung siya kay mabag grádu,</i> He failed because he got low grades. <number>2</number> level or stage of education. <i>Tirsíru grádu ra ku kutub,</i> I only went as far as third grade. <number>3</number> educational attainment. <i>Way grádu ang ámung mutsatsa,</i> Our maid has no schooling at all. <number>4</number> grade of a lens. <i>Pílay grádu ímung kibídu?</i> What&apos;s the grade of your eyeglasses? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b1]</itype> give a grade, rating. <i>Gigradúhan siyag ip kay absinti,</i> He was given an F because of his absences. <i>Gradúhan kug i ang maáyung ripurt,</i> I&apos;ll give an A to a good report. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain a grade or rating. <i>Kas-a pa ku makagrádu (makagradu) ug i,</i> I got an A only once. &dagger;

<p><form>graduwar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>graduate</tr>. <i>Abugasíya ang íyang gigraduwaran,</i> He finished law. <number>2</number> pass from one particular stage or condition to another. <i>Hápit na siya mugraduwar sa pagkaulitáwu kay kaslun ugmà,</i> He is about to graduate from his bachelorhood because he will be married tomorrow. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> be removed from a basketball game after a number of fouls. <i>Migraduwar siya human sa ikalimang páwul,</i> He was disqualified after his fifth foul. <form>graduwáda</form> <xr>= <sc>GRADUWÁDU</sc> (female).</xr> <form>graduwádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> graduate, esp. college graduates. <i>Graduwádu ray madáwat áning trabahúa,</i> Only those with a college degree will be considered for this job. <number>2</number> one who is experienced in doing or being s.t. <i>Graduwádu nà sa pagkakalma,</i> He has proven himself cool-headed. <i>Graduwádu sa pangáwat,</i> He is an experienced thief. <form>graduwasyun, graduwisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> graduation, commencement exercises.

<p><form>graduwit</form> <xr>= <sc>GRADUWAR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gráhi</form> <xr>= <sc>GARÁHI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gramatika</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>grammar</tr>.

<p><form>grámu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gram</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B256]</itype> be one gram. <i>Wà ra mugrámu (magrámu) ang kúwang sa timbang sa karni,</i> The shortage in the meat didn&apos;t even amount to a gram.

<p><form>grámus</form> <xr>= <sc>GRÁMU</sc> (plural).</xr>

<p><form>grána</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>dye</tr>. <i>Gigranáhan nákug asul ang sayal,</i> I dyed the skirt blue. <pos>n</pos> <tr>dye</tr>.

<p><form>granáda</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr><corr sic=pomegrenate>pomegranate</corr></tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>hand grenade</tr>.

<p><form>granáti<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>deep red color</tr>.

<p><form>granáti<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>GARNÁTI<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>grandi</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>IN-GRANDI</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <formx><corr sic=busung>búsung</corr> &mdash;</formx> complete and thorough <ix>búsung</ix> (divine punishment) without let-up. <i>Búsung grandi, gábà hiniral na nà kay nagtúman sa gustu,</i> What has happened is the divine punishment they brought on themselves because they had to do just as they pleased.

<p><form>granil</form> <xr>= <sc>GARANIL<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>graníti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>center punch</tr>, <pos>a</pos> pointed tool, usually with conical tip, used to mark a hole to be drilled. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> use a center punch on s.t.

<p><form>granstan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>grandstand</tr>. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> take a seat in the grandstand. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> spend for a grandstand ticket. <i>Wà kuy kwarta nga ikapanggranstan,</i> I have no money to buy a grandstand seat.

<p><form>gránu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>grains</tr>. <i>Mas pínu ang gránu sa asúkar kay sa kámay,</i> Refined sugar has finer grains than brown sugar. <number>2</number> texture of a surface. <i>Ang pánit sa Hapun pínug gránu,</i> Japanese have fine-textured skin. <number>3</number> <tr>grain</tr>, <tr>texture</tr> of wood. <number>4</number> <formx>&mdash; maldítu</formx> inflamed pimple, usually on the face. <i>Gihilantan siya kay nahubag ang gránu maldítu sa íyang nawung,</i> She got a fever because the pimple on her face got infected.

<p><form>grap<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> graft, wealth obtained dishonestly through political connections. <form>&mdash; ug (an) kurapsiyun</form><corr sic=","></corr> Graft and corruption. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> take graft.

<p><form>grap<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> graft for a plant. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put a graft on a plant.

<p><form>grap<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>graph</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a graph. <i>Grapa (igrap) ang lakaw sa íyang hilánat,</i> Make a graph of the course of his fever.

<p><form>grápa</form> <xr>= <sc>GARÁPA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>grapinyíra</form> <xr>= <sc>GARAPINYÍRA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>grapupunu</form> <pos>n</pos> spring operated phonograph.

<p><form>grása</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>grease</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> grease s.t. <i>Gigrasáhan níya ang bíring sa ligid,</i> He lubricated the wheel bearings. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1245; b8]</itype> get grease on it. <i>Higrasahan (nagkagrása) hinúun ang ákung púlu,</i> My shirt got grease on it (got grease all over it). <form>grasáhun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>greasy</tr>, <tr>oily</tr>.

<p><form>grasya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> grace or blessing, usually from God. <i>Grasya sa Diyus nabúhì ku,</i> Thank God, I survived. <number>2</number> a person&apos;s trait or act which causes joy or satisfaction to s.o. else. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> receive the grace of God. <i>Gigrasyahan siya sa Diyus maung nabúhì,</i> God showed His grace on him and he lived. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> give others joy or satisfaction in dealing with them. <i>Íyang gipagrasyahan ang usa ka sapían pinaági sa pagsirbi ug maáyu niíni,</i> He worked his way into the good graces of a wealthy man by serving him well.

<pb n=271>

<p><form>grasyáda</form> <pos>n</pos> female working student in an exclusive girls&apos; school. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6]</itype> be a <ix>grasyáda</ix>.

<p><form>grasyas</form> <number>1</number> expression of profound and humble thanks. <i>Grasyas, sinyur, sa ímung panábang,</i> Thank you, master, for your help. <number><corr sic=3>2</corr></number> expression uttered when one belches. <i>Grasyas, nabusug ku,</i> Thanks be to God. I&apos;m full. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> give profound thanks. <i>Manggrasyas ta sa Diyus sa íyang kadagáyà kanátù,</i> Let us give thanks to God for the blessings He has bestowed on us.

<p><form>grasyúsa</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>graceful</tr> (female). <pos>n</pos> k.o. soft white bread with a rather flat taste. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B25; c1]</itype> be graceful.

<p><form>grasyúsu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>graceful</tr> (male). <pos>n</pos> the clown or fool in plays. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B25; a]</itype> <number>1</number> be graceful. <number>2</number> be the clown in a play.

<p><form>grátis</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>free</tr>, <tr>gratis</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> be given away free. <i>Igrátis (gratísun) níla ang sampul,</i> They are giving the samples away free. &dagger;

<p><form>grawundid</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>short-circuited</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become short-circuited.

<p><form>gráwun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>grounding</tr> in electrical wiring. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> be short-circuited. <i>Dúnay wayir nga way tabun maung migráwun (nagráwun),</i> Some of the wire is not covered so it got short-circuited. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> connect with the ground so as to make the earth part of the circuit. <i>Grawni arun makusug ang radiyu,</i> Ground it so the radio will come in clear.

<p><form>gráwun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> area on which a building is put. <i>Dakù ug gráwun ang Trid Iskul,</i> The Trade School has a large playground.

<p><form>gríd</form> <pos>n</pos> grade given in school.

<p><form>grídir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>road grader</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> go over s.t. with a grader.

<p><form>grín</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>green color</tr>. <number>2</number> lewd talk or story. <i>Gilamian ku sa íyang isturyang grín,</i> I liked his green stories. <form>&mdash; drágun</form> <xr>= <sc>BULBUL</sc>, <i>n2</i>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[BN]</itype> turn green. <i>Migrín (nagrín, nanggrin) ang mga layang sagbut nga giuwanan,</i> The withered grass turned green after the rain. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> add green color to s.t. <i>Grínig gamay ang ímung tabuntábun,</i> Put a little green on your eyelids. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear green clothes.

<p><form>gríps</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>grapes</tr>.

<p><form>grípu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>faucet</tr>. <i>Way túbig ang grípu,</i> There&apos;s no water (lit. in the faucet).

<p><form>gris, grís</form> <pos>n</pos> a coarse cotton cloth which is plain woven and with a gray color. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear <ix>grís</ix>.

<p><form>grispul</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>graceful</tr> in movement. <i>Grispul siyang misáyaw,</i> She danced gracefully. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> be, do s.t. gracefully.

<p><form>grumíti</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>crew of a ship</tr>. <number>2</number> member of a ship&apos;s crew. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; c1]</itype> become a member of a ship&apos;s crew.

<p><form>grúpu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>group</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; ac3]</itype> form, be a group. <i>Makiggrúpu ta níla arun madaghan ta,</i> Let&apos;s have them in the group so there will be lots of us. <i>Grupúha ang mga bátag pakan-a,</i> Group the kids and feed them. <i>Maáyu siyang ikagrúpu kay aligrihun,</i> It&apos;s good to have him in the group because he is jolly. <form>grupugrúpu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C; a]</itype> form into groups. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC; b(1)]</itype> play <ix>grupugrúpu</ix>. <pos>n</pos> game of hide and seek played by several teams, wherein a whole team is &lsquo;it&rsquo; and all the members of a team must come in free. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> fellow group member.

<p><form>grusiri</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>grocery store</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make, operate a grocery store.

<p><form>grusiríya</form> <xr>= <sc>GRUSIRI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>grútu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>grotto</tr> where a saint&apos;s statue is placed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a2]</itype> make a grotto.

<p><form>gu</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>MARTS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gú</form> <pos>n</pos> green traffic light. <form>&mdash; signal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>green light</tr> in traffic, sign permitting s.o. to proceed doing s.t. <i>Dì pa mabaligyag wà pay gú signal,</i> We can&apos;t sell it if we don&apos;t get the go-signal. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B236]</itype> for the go-signal to be given to vehicles. <i>Wà pa gánì magú (mugú) nanglábay na ang mga trák,</i> It isn&apos;t even the green light yet and the trucks have started.

<p><form>guang</form> <pos>n</pos> large clod, usually in a plowed field.

<p><form>gub.</form> abbreviation for <ix>Gubirnadur</ix> &lsquo;governor&rsquo;.

<p><form>gúb</form> <xr>= <sc>GULUB</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>guba</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> swarm over s.t. to consume it. <i>Gigubhan sa mga manuk ang binlad,</i> The chickens swarmed over the rice being dried. <i>Gigubhan sa mga bisíta ang litsun,</i> The visitors swarmed over the roast pig.

<p><form>gubà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> destroy, wreck, put out of order. <i>Ang tambuk naggubà sa ímung pigúra,</i> Fat is ruining your figure. <i>Nagkagubà ang báy nga wà puy-i,</i> The house is getting dilapidated because it hasn&apos;t been occupied. <i>Gub-a ang payag,</i> Tear the hut down. <number>2</number> ruin plans, life, and the like. <i>Nagubà ang ákung plánung madátù,</i> My dream to become rich was ruined. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; ang nawung</formx> <itype>[B126]</itype> <tr>grimace</tr>. <i>Nagubà ang íyang náwung mu rag nakakaug aslum,</i> He grimaced as though he had eaten s.t. sour. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> cultivate virgin land. <i>Ang ákung mga apuhan mauy únang migubà íning yutáa,</i> My ancestors were the first to cultivate this land. <pos>n</pos> damage done, mechanical defect. <i>Dakug gubà ang kutsi maung giubirh&ucaron;l,</i> The car sustained heavy damage so it was overhauled. <pos>a</pos> damaged, broken down, dilapidated. <i>Gubà ang tulay,</i> The bridge is out of order. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> pieces of materials from s.t. demolished. <form>ma-un(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>destructive</tr>. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> of a broken-down, dilapidated sort.

<pb n=272>

<p><form>gubàgubà</form> <pos>v</pos> vase shells, k.o. small univalves with rough, grey exteriors, furnishing edible meat.

<p><form>gubana</form> <xr>= <sc>GWAYABANU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gúbat</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>war</tr>. <number>2</number> trivial matter talked about in a conversation that is supposed to be important. <i>Unsáun níya pag-amural nga gúbat may giisturyáhan,</i> How could he proceed with his courtship when she kept talking about everything but what he was trying to get at. <form>&mdash; patánì</form> <tr>civil war</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C2; c]</itype> be at war. <i>Naggúbat ang duha ka násud,</i> The two nations are at war. <number>2</number> <itype>[a2]</itype> fight over s.t. <i>Dílì kinahanglan gubátun ang Matsug Kimuy,</i> There&apos;s no need to go to war over Matsu and Quemoy. <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>warrior</tr>, <tr>combatant</tr>. <form>paN-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>battlefield</tr>.

<p><form>gubhay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a strand of hair. <number>2</number> the warp threads in weaving.

<p><form>gubin</form> <pos>n</pos> encumbrance, annoyance, s.t. that takes one&apos;s attention away from one&apos;s purpose. <i>Wà silay gubin kay way anak,</i> They don&apos;t have problems because they have no children. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> be an encumbrance, annoyance. <i>Ayaw dad-a ang bátà kay magubin ka unyà,</i> Don&apos;t take the children because they will encumber you. <i>Wà ku gubini sa ímung pag-istar,</i> I don&apos;t consider your visit an annoyance.

<p><form>gubirnadur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>governor</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2b3]</itype> be, make a governor. <i>Siyay átung gubirnadurun kay maáyung táwu,</i> We&apos;ll make him governor because he&apos;s a good man. <i>Pangwarta mauy íyang gigubirnaduran,</i> He ran for governor to make money. <form>-íya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>governorship</tr>, <tr>office of the governor</tr>.

<p><form>gubirnu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>government</tr>. <form>&mdash; militar</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>military government</tr>.

<p><form>gubirnur</form> <xr><sc>= GUBIRNADUR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gúbuk</form> <pos>n</pos> fat of beef or carabao meat.

<p><form>gúbul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3c]</itype> <tr>grumble</tr>, <tr>complain</tr> under one&apos;s breath. <i>Ayawg igúbul sa manidyir ang nahitabù,</i> Don&apos;t go complaining to the manager about what happened. <pos>n</pos> grumbling or grumbling sounds.

<p><form>gubut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tangled</tr>. <i>Gubut ang íyang buhuk nga gitís,</i> Her hair was all tangled because it had been teased. <number>2</number> <tr>disorderly</tr>, <tr>topsy-turvy</tr>. <i>Panghípus kay gubut ang kwartu,</i> Straighten out your room because it&apos;s all in disorder. <number>3</number> full of trouble and ill feeling. <i>Gubut ang ílang panimuyù kay way pagsinabtanay,</i> Their family life is full of trouble because there&apos;s no understanding. <form>&mdash; ang hunàhúnà</form> <tr>troubled</tr>, confused mind. <i>Dì ku mahinultul kay gubut ang ákung <corr sic="hunáhúnà">hunàhúnà</corr>,</i> I don&apos;t know what to do because my mind is confused and troubled. <form>&mdash; ug pálad</form> for a woman to have her life bothered by too many suitors. (Lit. Having palms with lines criss-crossing each other in <pos>a</pos> disorderly way.) <pos>n</pos> trouble, discord. <i>Arun way gubut angáyun mug hátag,</i> So there won&apos;t be any trouble each of you will be given an equal share. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>entangle</tr>, be tangled up. <i>Ayaw gubta ang iskuhídu kay dúgay husáyun,</i> Do not tangle up the fine abaca fiber because it takes time to comb it out. <number>2</number> put into disorder. <i>Nagubut ang balay kay nagdúlà ang mga bátà,</i> The house is in a mess because the children were playing in it. <number>3</number> <itype>[A3P; ab3(1)]</itype> create trouble among several people. <i>Gubta ang ílang míting arun maundang,</i> Make trouble in their meeting so it will break up. <i>Ang pirmi nílang kagubtan mau ang kwarta,</i> Money is what they always quarrel about. <i>Gisalída na ang gikagubtang sini nga law-ay,</i> They are showing the obscene film that was the cause of so much controversy. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B145]</itype> be in utter confusion. <i>Naggubut ang ákung hunàhúnà tungud sa ámung panagbángì,</i> My mind is troubled because of our quarrel. <i>Nagkagúbut ang hílu,</i> The thread is completely tangled up. <pos>n</pos> commotion due to a fight. <i>Nanambù mi arun pagtan-aw sa gúbut,</i> We looked out of the window to watch the commotion. <form>gubutgúbut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>squabbles</tr>, <tr>fights</tr> over s.t. trivial. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C3]</itype> for there to be squabbles or fights over s.t. trivial. <i>Ug maggubutgúbut ang míting,</i> If there are squabbles in the meeting. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>troubled</tr>, <tr>confused state</tr>. <number>2</number> major hostilities such as war, revolution. <i>Namakwit mi panahun sa kagúbut,</i> We evacuated during the war. <form>magubtánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> full of disorder. <number>2</number> bring disorder. <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>troublemaker</tr>, disturber of the peace.

<p><form>gubyirnu</form> <xr>= <sc>GUBIRNU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gud<sub>1</sub></form> short for <xr><sc>UGUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>*gud<sub>2</sub></form> <form>&mdash; syát, nayit</form> good shot, good night. <xr><ix>see also</ix> <sc>MÁNI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gugma</form> <pos>n</pos> love. <i>Krás lang nà dì gugma,</i> That&apos;s not love. That&apos;s just a crush. <i>Gugma sa inahan,</i> A mother&apos;s love. <i>Dakù ang gugma níya sa pagpangabáyù,</i> He has a great love for horseback riding. <form>hi-</form>/<form>ha-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B123; a12]</itype> love s.o. <i>Makahigugma kahà kag disgrasyáda?</i> Can you love a girl that is no longer a virgin? <i>Higugmáun ku ikaw kanúnay,</i> I will love you always. <number>2</number> like s.t. <i>Mahigugma kung mukáun ug úbas,</i> I love to eat grapes. <number>3</number> <itype>[a3b8]</itype> learn to love s.o. <i>Sa nadúgay nahagugma ra siya nákù,</i> As time went on, she learned to love me. <i>Ang íyang dagway mahagugmaan lámang sa inahan,</i> Only a mother <pb n=273>could love that face. <form>higugmaay, hinigugmaay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> <tr>be in love</tr>. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>loved one</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>sweetheart</tr>. <form>mahigugmáun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>loving</tr>, <tr>affectionate</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>fond of</tr>. <i>Mahigugmáun siyag sáyaw,</i> She is fond of dancing. <form>gugmagugma</form> <pos>n</pos> matters regarding love and courtship. <i>Kun maglikay ka sa gugmagugma matigúlang kang dalága,</i> If you avoid love affairs you&apos;ll become an old maid. <form>gugmahánun</form> <pos>a</pos> pertaining to love. <i>Gisinsur ang gugmahánun nílang isína kay hílas,</i> Their love scene was censored because it was obscene.

<p><form>gúgu</form> <xr>= <sc>BALÚNUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gugul, gúgul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> spend money on, appropriate money. <i>Ug gugulan nang baláya ug kinsi mil, gwápu giyud,</i> If you spend fifteen thousand on that house, it will be beautiful. <number>2</number> spend time, effort. <i>Wà kuy panahung igúgul (gugúlun) sa binúang,</i> I have no time to spend on foolishness. <pos>n</pos> amount allotted for s.t. <pos>a</pos> entailing great expense. <i>Gúgul kaáyu ning magsunudsúnud ta sa múda,</i> It&apos;s very expensive to keep going with fashions. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>spendthrift</tr>.

<p><form>gúgul<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>GULGUL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gúgul<sub>3</sub>, guguls</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sunglasses</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear sunglasses.

<p><form>guhà</form> <xr>= <sc>GIHÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>guhab, gúhab</form> <xr>= <sc>GALHAB</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>guhang<sub>1</sub>, gúhang</form> <pos>n</pos> toddy made from the buri palm.

<p><form>guhang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> hole which penetrates to the back or other side. <i>May dakung guhang ang ímung sinínà,</i> Your dress has a big hole. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; b6(1)]</itype> make a hole. <i>Giguhangan sa mga prísu ang bungbung ug ígung agían,</i> The prisoners made a hole in the wall big enough (for them) to pass through. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> full of holes. <i>Nagkagúhang ang atup nga wà libwási,</i> The roof was full of holes because it never was repaired.

<p><form>guhay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab4]</itype> tear s.t. into strips or shreds. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> slice a large fish for drying. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> strip torn off of s.t. <number>2</number> slice from a dried fish.

<p><form>gúhit</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a line on a drawing. <number>2</number> <tr>design</tr>, <tr>drawing</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>line</tr>, draw lines on. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a design, draw pictures. <form>guhitguhit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>doodle</tr>. <pos>n</pos> <tr>doodle</tr>.

<p><form>gúhù</form> <xr>= <sc>GULHÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>guitguit</form> <pos>n</pos> layers of dirt on the body, teeth. <i>Ang guitguit sa íyang líug katamnan ug sibúyas,</i> You could plant onions in the layers of dirt on his neck. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN; b6]</itype> become covered with layers of dirt. <i>Ang íyang ngípun giguitguitan (nangguitguit) sa talìtì,</i> His teeth are thick with tartar.

<p><form>gukam</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>clumsy</tr>. <i>Gukam kaáyu siyang manlihuklihuk,</i> She moves clumsily. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> have difficulty in carrying more than one can hold. <i>Nagkagúkam siyag dala sa mga libru,</i> She had great difficulty carrying all of the books.

<p><form>gukan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; b4]</itype> for the breast to be flowing over with milk. <i>Maggukan ang súsu basta subra ug gátas ang inahan,</i> If the mother has too much milk it tends to drip out. <i>Gigukanan na ang bag-ung nanganak,</i> The new mother&apos;s milk is already flowing.

<p><form>gúkang</form> <xr>= <sc>GUKAM</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>guknat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> set out to go s.w. <i>Sayu nga miguknat ang magdadaru sa báy arun magdáru,</i> The farmer left the house early to go plowing.

<p><form>gukù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <tr>bent</tr>, <tr>bowed</tr>, <tr>crouched</tr>. <i>Migukù si Tim arun dílì masungkù,</i> Tim bent low so he would not bump his head. <i>Nagukù (migukù) na siya sa pagsinulat,</i> He has become stoop-shouldered from too much writing. <pos>a</pos> <tr>hunched</tr>, bent over.

<p><form>gukud, gúkud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2SC2; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> run after, give chase. <i>May irung naggukud,</i> There&apos;s a dog running after us. <i>Gukdun tag patrul ning ímung drinayban,</i> A police car will chase us if you keep on driving like this. <number>2</number> pursue s.o. to get revenge; <tr>persecute</tr>. <i>Gigukud ni Níru ang mga Kristiyánus,</i> Nero persecuted the Christians. <i>Gigukud sa baláud ang pagdinamíta,</i> Dynamite fishing is illegal. <i>Gigukud si Buy sa gunting,</i> Boy is badly in need of a haircut (being chased by the scissors). <i>Gigukud ka sa sabun,</i> You are badly in need of a bath (soap is chasing you). <number>3</number> <itype>[A12; b4(1)]</itype> catch up with s.o. after chasing him. <i>Diin ka higukdi?</i> Where did they catch up with you? <pos>n</pos> <tr>chase</tr>. <form>gukdánay, ginukdánay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> chasing one another. <form>magukdánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>persecuting</tr>, <tr>vindictive</tr>. <form>gukdunun</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. chased. <i>Daghan siyag uyab kay gukdunun kaáyug babáyi,</i> He has lots of girl friends because he has a strong appeal to women.

<p><form>guk-ung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> be sitting or perched s.w. where one is easily visible. <i>Dakung táwu nga nagguk-ung sa paril,</i> A large man perched on the wall.

<p><form>gúl</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> goal in a game. <number>2</number> basketball ring. <number>3</number> the opposite area in checkers to which the pieces are moved. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> make a goal. <i>Wà mi makagúl,</i> We didn&apos;t make any goals. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> move a checker piece to the opposite side.

<p><form>gúla</form> <pos>a</pos> for food not to be cooked well such that some parts of it are still raw. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; c1]</itype> be <tr>half-cooked</tr>. <i>Nagúwa pagkalútù nang bibingka,</i> That rice cake is only half-baked. <pb n=274><i>Daghang sustansya ang atay nga guwáhun (igúwa) paglútù,</i> Pork liver cooked rare is nourishing.

<p><form>gulà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> go out from. <i>Migulà ku sa kwartu,</i> I went out of the room. <i>Gulaa (gul-a) nang hubug nga nagsábà sa gawas,</i> Go out after that drunk that&apos;s making noise outside. <number>1b</number> <itype>[B456]</itype> be sticking out. <i>Birahi nang ímung kamisun kay migulà,</i> Pull up your slip because it&apos;s showing. <number>1c</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> bring s.t. out. <i>Kinsay naggulà sa bátà nga tugnaw run?</i> Who brought the child out? It&apos;s chilly. <i>Iguwà ang irù,</i> Take the dog out. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b3]</itype> quit a job, position. <i>Dì ka makagulà tungud sa kuntrátu,</i> You can&apos;t quit because of the contract. <i>Ang kagamay sa swildu mauy ákung gigulaan,</i> The small salary made me quit the job. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> have emission during orgasm. <i>Migulà ang ákù pagkakità sa iyáha,</i> I had an ejaculation when I saw hers. <i>Kasagáran únang gul-an ang laláki,</i> Usually the man is the first to have orgasm. <number>3a</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> <tr>menstruate</tr>. <i>Wà ku gul-i rung buwána. Simbaku mabdus ku,</i> I missed my period. God forbid I&apos;m pregnant. <number>4a</number> <itype>[B2456]</itype> come out the winner. <i>Sa sinádu migulà siyang numiru únu,</i> In the senate race he came out first. <number>4b</number> <itype>[B2456]</itype> appear, materialize, turn out. <i>Pagkudak nákù sa dalága, aswang ang migulà,</i> When I photographed the girl, a witch is what turned out in the picture. <number>5</number> <itype>[B2456]</itype> appear in a publication. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> outside of an enclosure. <i>Daghang táwu sa gulà,</i> There are many people outside. <number>1a</number> outside the bedroom or kitchen, usually the living room. <i>Pahulata sa gulà ang bisíta,</i> Have the visitor wait in the living room. <number>2</number> issue or instalment<note>[**typo:installment]</note> of a publication. <i>Mugulà ang ímung sugilánun sunud gulà,</i> Your story will be published in the next issue. <number>3</number> outcome, result of s.t. <i>Hípi ang gulà nímu ug magpataas ka sa ímung buhuk,</i> If you let your hair grow long, a hippie is what will result. <number>4</number> role in a play or presentation. <i>Unsa may guwà nímu sa dráma?</i> What is your role in the play? <form>sulud &mdash;</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> keep coming in and out. <i>Huy! Musulud gulà ka lang mu rag tag-íya,</i> Hey! You just come in and out as if you were the owner here. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <number>1a</number> allow to go out. <i>Pagul-a ang bátà arun mangíhì,</i> Let the child go out to urinate. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> display, present s.t. to the public. <i>Nagpagulà siyag drámang minúrus,</i> He presented a Moslem play. <i>Wà ikapagulà ang tinda kay nag-ulan,</i> The goods were not displayed because it was raining. <number>1c</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> use knowledge or other resources to meet a particular situation. <i>Ug makig-áway siya, pagul-i siya sa ímung dyúdu,</i> If he picks a fight with you, try out your judo on him. <number>1d</number> issue a notice, order, etc. <i>Nagpagulà ang prisidinti ug kasugúan báhin sa piliay,</i> The president issued an order about the elections. <i>Ikapagulà ku lang ang ákung hunàhúnà kun kinahanglánun,</i> I give out my opinion only when necessary. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> fire from job, position. <i>Pagulaun ka kun magtinápul ka,</i> You will be fired if you are lazy. <form>-anan(&larr;), gul-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>exit</tr>. <form>kagul-unun</form> <pos>a</pos> on the verge of going out. <form>tali-</form> <pos>n</pos> about to go out.

<p><form>*gúlà ka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B14; b3]</itype> be in commotion. <i>Nagkagúlà ang mga táwu tungud sa súnug,</i> The people were in a commotion because of the fire. <i>Gikagwáan sa mga bátà ang mga rigálu,</i> The children were all excited about the presents.

<p><form>gulam</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> small, esp. when compared to other things like it. <i>Ang búla sa bisbul gulam kay sa búla sa supbul,</i> The ball used for baseball is slightly smaller than the ball for softball. <number>2</number> young and small. <i>Gulam pa ku paghalin ni Lúla,</i> I was still small when Grandma died. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> become reduced in size. <form>gulamgulam</form> <xr>= <sc>GULAM</sc>, <i>1</i>.</xr>

<p><form>gulaman, guláman</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> agar-agar, an edible gelatinous substance derived from seaweeds. <number>2</number> dessert prepared from this gelatin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make <ix>guláman</ix>.

<p><form>gúlang</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>old</tr> in age. <i>Miritayir siya kay gúlang na,</i> He retired because he&apos;s old. <i>Dalágang gúlang,</i> Old maid. <number>2</number> <tr>mature</tr>. <i>Tub-a ang ságing kay gúlang na,</i> Cut the banana down because the fruits are mature. <number>3</number> for syrup to be thick enough or steel to be properly tempered. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> <tr>grow old</tr>. <i>Mugúlang (magúlang) ka ug dalì ug hingári kag pangísug,</i> You will grow old fast if you always get angry. <form>&mdash; sa hiktanan</form> grow old and still not be married. <number>2</number> <itype>[B23]</itype> for fruit to become mature. <i>Wà makagúlang ang kakaw kay gibugtuk,</i> The cacao fruits didn&apos;t mature because they were infested with pests. <number>3</number> <itype>[B23(1); c1]</itype> for iron or sugar to come out with the requisite consistency or hardness. <i>Dúgayng nakagúwang ang giítus námung asúkal, hidaghanan ra sigúru sa túbig,</i> The sugar we were making into syrup took a long time to harden. It probably had too much water in it. <i>Unsa kahay makagúwang (makapagúwang) ug dalì sa puthaw?</i> What can we do to hasten the tempering of the steel? <form>a-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> title for an old man or woman. <number>2</number> old man or woman. <i>Palikírung agulang,</i> An elderly philanderer. <form>ma-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> elder brother, sister. <number>2</number> older than s.o. <i>Magulang siya nákug <pb n=275>dyis anyus,</i> He is ten years older than me. <number>3</number> <pos>a</pos> little more than s.t. compared to. <i>Ang ímung tíngug magulang lag diyútay sa hagawhaw,</i> Your voice is just a little louder than a whisper. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2456]</itype> get to be a little older, more than. <form>ka-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>age</tr>. <number>2</number> consistency of syrup, temper of steel. <form>kama-an, kinama-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> eldest among a given group. <number>2</number> <tr>first-born</tr>. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; nga buling</formx> the topmost layer of dirt in s.t. that is very dirty. <i>Kuháa lang ang kinamagulángang buling sa hábul kay bug-at labhan,</i> Just wash out the topmost layer of dirt in the blanket because it is hard to wash. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>elderly</tr>. <form>ti-</form> <pos>a</pos> old in age. <i>Usa ka tigúwang,</i> An old man (woman). <pos>n</pos> term used to refer to one&apos;s parents when they are not young. <i>Hustu ang ímung mga tigúlang sa pagdilì nímu sa paglangyaw,</i> Your folks are right, forbidding you to go abroad. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> grow old. <i>Kining magkatigulang na ta, magkahanap ang átung panan-aw,</i> As we grow old our vision gets dim. <form>hini-(&rarr;)</form><note>[**moved up (&rarr;)]</note> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do s.t. in a way that old folks are wont to do. <i>Día, naghinigulang mig tabì,</i> Here we are, gossiping like a bunch of old folks. <form>pakati-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> act, treat like an old man. <form>pakati-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> stay s.w. till one&apos;s old age. <form>tuluti-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> older than anyone else in a group. <i>Akuy uináhan dinhi sa upisína kay aku ra may tutiguwang dinhi,</i> I&apos;m considered a mother here in the office because I am the oldest among us here. <form>kati-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> old folks. <i>Masukù ang mga katigulángan sa mudirnung paági,</i> The old folks hate the new ways. <number>2</number> <tr>ancestors</tr>. <form>kati-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s old age. <i>Mau rag wà siyay katigulangun,</i> She never seems to grow old. &dagger;

<p><form>gulasíman</form> <xr>= <sc>ULASÍMAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>*gúlat</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>GULPI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>guldígir</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>gold digger</tr>, woman who goes out with men to get money from them. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; b1]</itype> be, become a gold digger.

<p><form>guldin syáwir</form> <pos>n</pos> small flowering tree: <bio>Cassia fistula</bio>.

<p><form>gulgul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> cut s.t. with a blade using a back and forth motion. <i>Gulgúla nag<note>[**typo:nang]</note> líug sa manuk,</i> Slash the chicken&apos;s throat now. <form>gulgulánan</form> <pos>n</pos> throat of animals or fowl.

<p><form>gulhab<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>GALHAB</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gulhab<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> thundering, roaring in voice. <i>Abut sa walug ang gulhab níyang tíngug,</i> His thundering voice reaches the valley.

<p><form>gulhù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; cP6]</itype> appear by coming out from, in back of, or inside s.t. <i>Migúhù ang búwan luyu sa pangánud,</i> The moon emerged from behind the clouds.

<p><form>gúli</form> (from <ix>lígù</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>bath</tr> (slang). <i>Nanimáhù ka lang pan-us sa ímung pagkawalay gúli,</i> You smell because you didn&apos;t take a bath. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> take a bath (slang). <i>Hulata ku kay mugúli pa ku,</i> Wait for me; I still have to take my bath. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> bathe s.o. (slang).

<p><form>gulímuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>wriggle</tr>, move incessantly in place, for many things to give the impression of moving about in place. <i>Ámung gilantaw ang mga táwung naggulímuk sa plása,</i> We looked at the people moving about in the plaza. <number>2</number> have a creeping, tingling sensation as if little bugs were crawling over one. <i>Migulímuk ang ákung kaunúran,</i> My flesh tingled.

<p><form>gúlis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> tear along the grain into long strips. <i>Gigúlis níya ang bulad núkus,</i> He tore the dried squid into long pieces. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> make a long, slender scratch mark. <i>Si Nína ang migulis sa ákung nawung,</i> Nena was the one who scratched my face. <pos>a</pos> shredded into long strips, scratched. <i>Gulis nga sinínà,</i> A dress torn to shreds. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> long strip. <number>2</number> long, slender scratch. <i>Dúnay gulis ang sámin,</i> The mirror has a scratch on it.

<p><form>*gulíyang ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> confusion of ideas, sounds, and motion. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1456; b3]</itype> be in wild confusion. <i>Hurimintádu ang gikaguliyángan sa mga táwu,</i> The people were in a panic because of a man that ran amok. <number>2</number> be in great disorder, topsy-turvy. <i>Nagkagulíyang lang ang balay kay way binatunan,</i> The house is in a mess because there&apos;s no maid.

<p><form>gulpi</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> be done in great numbers at one time. <i>Gulpi nang isdáa makúhà kay timputimpu man nà,</i> That fish is caught in great quantity because it comes in seasonally. <number>2</number> be done in great force or intensity. <i>Gulpi mangasábà ang ámung ámu,</i> Our boss scolds us very harshly. <i>Gulpi nga pagkaigù ang íyang suwang,</i> His chin was hit very hard. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. in large quantity at one time. <i>Ayaw gulpíha pagkúhà kay muángal ang tag-íya,</i> Don&apos;t take a lot because the owner won&apos;t like it. <number>2</number> do s.t. with great intensity or force. <i>Ayaw gulpíha pagbúnal ang bátà,</i> Don&apos;t beat the child severely. <i>Nagulpihan ra nímu paghugut ang grípu,</i> You closed the faucet too tight. <form>&mdash; digúlat</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <tr>boastful</tr>, <tr>braggart</tr> (slang). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become boastful.

<p><form>gulub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> slice a piece or part of s.t. with a single motion. <i>Siyay naggulub sa kúgun,</i> She cut down the saw grass. <i>Guluban tika sa inasal,</i> I&apos;ll slice a piece of the roast pig for you. <pos>n</pos> a piece or a part cut off of s.t. with a single motion. <i>Duha ka dagkung gulub sa kík ang nahurut,</i> They consumed two large slices of cake. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab]</itype> have <pb n=276>s.o. cut s.t. off. <i>Magpagulub siya sa íyang buhuk,</i> She will have her hair cut short.

<p><form>gulubgulub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> mumble words unintelligibly, usually in dissatisfaction. <i>Súkul gihápun nang maggulubgulub ug kasab-an,</i> If you mumble when you are scolded, it is still an act of defiance.

<p><form>gulunggulung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>baby&apos;s rattle</tr>.

<p><form>gulut</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> crease or long indentation in <pos>a</pos> surface. <i>Gulut sa líug,</i> A crease in the neck. <number>1a</number> a portion of bread broken off at an indentation in the crust. <i>Usa ka gulut pán,</i> A hunk of bread. <number>2</number> incision made in meat. <number>3</number> a piece, slice, or part of s.t. <i>Usa ka gulut nga isdà,</i> A slice of fish. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[ABN; b5]</itype> get creases or become filled with folds. <i>Migulut ang íyang tiyan sa katambuk,</i> His stomach become creased with fat. <number>1a</number> become wrinkled. <i>Nagulut ang íyang sinínà,</i> Her dress got wrinkled. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> make an <tr>incision</tr> in s.t. <i>Kinsay migulut sa lamísa nga bag-ung pinintálan?</i> Who made a cut on the newly painted table? <i>Guluta (guluti) ang isdang asinun,</i> Cut an incision into the fish to salt it. <number>3</number> <itype>[AB; ab5c1]</itype> slice into pieces. <i>Naggulut ku sa karni nga lat-an,</i> I was cutting the meat into pieces to stew it. <pos>a</pos> <tr>scarred</tr>, <tr>wrinkled</tr>. <i>Gulut nga kapáyas,</i> A scarred (wrinkled) papaya.

<p><form>gulwà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> go out, come out in a hesitant or forced manner. <i>Dì mugulwà ang kágang ug náay táwu,</i> The land crab won&apos;t come out if there are people around. <i>Dì makagulwà ang nánà sa hubag ug dì pislítun,</i> The pus in the boil will not come out if you don&apos;t squeeze it.

<p><form>gúma</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>rubber</tr>. <i>Punúan sa gúma,</i> Rubber tree. <number>2</number> rubber tire. <i>Hiyúsi ang gúma sa awtu,</i> Deflate the tires of the car. <number>3</number> stuff, put in cloth to give weight. <number>4</number> <xr>= <sc>DI-</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>DI-</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A123P; b4]</itype> be filled with excitement or eagerness for s.t. <i>Gumáhan ang mga bátà ug náay bag-ung sinínà,</i> The children get filled with excitement over new clothes. <i>Gigumáhan kaáyu siya pag-adtu sa parti,</i> She was all excited about going to the party. <form>gumagúma</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> wear rubber shoes on an inappropriate occasion or place. <i>Gumagumáhan lang nímu ang simbahan,</i> You&apos;re wearing tennis shoes to church. <form>di-</form> <number>1</number> of rubber. <number>2</number> rubber shoes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> wear rubber shoes. <form>gumáhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rubber plantation</tr>. <form>gumáhun</form> <pos>a</pos> for cloth to have s.t. mixed in it to give it weight. <i>Panaptung gumáhun,</i> Weighted cloth.

<p><form>gumbul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b3c]</itype> complain to express dissatisfaction over s.t. <i>Gisúsi na kun unsay gigumbúlan sa miaklas,</i> They investigated the strikers&apos; complaints. <pos>n</pos> <tr>complaint</tr>. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of complaining. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> get to be a grumbler.

<p><form>gúmù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> clutch s.t. with the palm of one&apos;s hand and squeeze. <i>Gigúmù níya ang kwarta,</i> He clasped the money tightly in his hand. <i>Gumúun ku nang ímung simud kay tabian ka,</i> I&apos;ll squeeze your snout with my hand because you talk too much. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>crumple</tr>. <i>Makagúmù kag sín?</i> Can you crumple a sheet of galvanized iron with your hands? <number>3</number> hold on tight to money, keep it carefully. <i>Himúa siyang tisuríra kay maáyung mugúmù ug kwarta,</i> Make her the treasurer because she is very careful with money. <pos>a</pos> tight with money. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>crumpled</tr>, <tr>creased</tr>, <tr>rumpled</tr>. <i>Gumù ang íyang gisul-ub,</i> She was wearing a crumpled dress.

<p><form>gumudgumud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3c]</itype> <tr>grumbling</tr> under one&apos;s breath. <i>Dílì maáyung maggumudgumud kun kasab-an,</i> It&apos;s no good to mumble when you are scolded.

<p><form>gúmuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB126; a12]</itype> tangle string, thread, etc. up. <i>Ang bakasi mauy naggúmuk sa íyang pasul,</i> The small black eel got itself entangled in his line. <i>Magúmuk giyud nang alundris ug ímung padwáan sa bátà,</i> That ball of sewing thread will surely get all tangled up if you let the child play with it. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> all tangled up.

<p><form>gúmun</form> <pos>n</pos> ball of entangled fiber, hair, and the like. <i>Ang bangag sa labábu nahut-ag gúmun sa buhuk,</i> The spout in the wash basin got plugged up with a ball of hair. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make <pos>a</pos> ball of entangled fibers. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; c]</itype> get entangled in sin, intrigues, etc. <i>Ang táwung naggúmun sa súgal,</i> A man deeply hooked to gambling. <i>Ang mga mulupyù nagúmun sa pulitikanhung intríga,</i> The inhabitants are entangled in the political intrigues. <i>Ayawg igúmun ang ímung kaugalíngun sa útang,</i> Don&apos;t let yourself get entangled in debts.

<p><form>gumunhap</form> <pos>n</pos> difficult problem. <i>Gumunhap sa kinabúhì,</i> A difficult problem in life.

<p><form>gum-us</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>wrinkled</tr>, <tr>crumpled</tr>. <i>Gum-us ang sinínà,</i> The shirt is wrinkled. <number>2</number> for hair to be disorderly, tangled. <i>Gum-us ang íyang buhuk,</i> She has tangled hair. <number>3</number> for a woman to be unchaste. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>wrinkle</tr>, <tr>crumple</tr>. <i>Ayawg gum-úsa ang papil,</i> Don&apos;t crumple the paper. <number>2</number> disarrange hair. <number>3</number> dishonor a woman by making love to her. <i>Akuy mugum-us ánang istriktang dakù,</i> I&apos;ll deflower that professional virgin. <pos>n</pos> wrinkle in cloth, paper, and the like.

<p><form>gum-ut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>GUM-US</sc>, <pos>a</pos> <i>1</i>.</xr> <number>2</number> sullen in expression. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>GUM-US</sc>, <pos>v</pos> <i>1</i>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[B46]</itype> be <pb n=277>sour faced. <i>Maggum-ut dáyun nang íyang hitsúra kun supákun,</i> He gets a sour expression when s.o. opposes him. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>GUM-US</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <form>sa-</form> <xr>= <sc>SAGUM-UT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gúna</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> weed with a bolo. <i>Gunáha nang sagbut sa nataran,</i> Chop out the weeds in the yard. <pos>n</pos> action of weeding. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> short dull bolo with a blunt end used for weeding. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> hit with a bolo. <form>gunahun</form> <pos>n</pos> weeds to be removed.

<p><form>gunà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>crack</tr>. <i>May gunà ang básu,</i> The glass has a crack in it. <number>2</number> weak spot in an elastic band.

<p><form>gunas</form> <pos>n</pos> grain texture, surface structure of wood.

<p><form>gúnat</form> <pos>n</pos> texture of meat. <i>Pínu ang gúnat sa manuk kay sa báka,</i> The texture of chicken meat is finer than that of beef.

<p><form>gunaw, gúnaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB23(1); a]</itype> <number>1</number> melt, dissolve s.t. <i>Usa ra ka bumba ang migúnaw sa isla,</i> One bomb was enough to obliterate the island. <i>Mugúnaw (magúnaw) ang kandílà kun idangdang mu sa kaláyu,</i> A candle will melt if you place it near a fire. <i>Naggúnaw siyag tinggà nga himúung pamatu,</i> He melted some lead to make into a sinker. <i>Igúnaw (gunáwa) sa túbig ang pulbus nga gátas,</i> Dissolve the powdered milk in water. <number>2</number> disappear as if melted. <i>Usáhay anhà ra sa piskalíya magúnaw ug mamatay ang kásu,</i> Sometimes the cases dissolve in the fiscal&apos;s office and meet their end.

<p><form>gundyà</form> <xr>= <sc>GANÍNA</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p><form>gúnga</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2; c1]</itype> for the nostrils to spread apart, make them spread apart. <i>Migúnga ang íyang ilung kay dúna siyay natimahuan,</i> His nostrils spread because he smelled s.t. <pos>n</pos> amount the nostrils are dilated. <pos>a</pos> for the nostrils to be large. <form>gungahun</form> <pos>a</pos> having large nostrils.

<p><form>gunggung<sub>1</sub></form> <corr><number>1</number> </corr><pos>n</pos> grunts (<bio>Theraponidae</bio>) similar in appearance to the <ix>bugáung</ix> but very small. <number>2</number> name given to slow-witted persons.

<p><form>gunggung<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> broil small dried fish by putting them in a dish with embers and shaking the dish back and forth.

<p><form>gunggung<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3; b6]</itype> for a wound to swell. <i>Dì makagunggung ang samad ug tambálag maáyu,</i> The wound won&apos;t swell if it is treated carefully.

<p><form>gúngì</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> break s.t. off of s.t. <i>Gigúngì níya ang mga butúnis sa íyang dintru,</i> He plucked the buttons off his shirt. <i>Gungían ta kag sanga,</i> I&apos;ll break a branch off for you. <i>Magúngì nang daplin sa kahun ug ímung ibundak,</i> The edge of that box will break off if you hurl it down. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a]</itype> pick s.t. out with a small stick or midrib. <i>Kwarta ang íyang igúngì sa ákung barugánan,</i> He will use money to pry me loose from my stand. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cut into small slices, segments. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> small sticks or slivers. <number>2</number> midrib of palm. <number>3</number> s.t. small and pointed that can be broken off like the tooth of a comb.

<p><form>*gúngis</form> <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> have grown old in a place, position, or job. <i>Suhítu siya kay nanggúngis na sa katungdánan,</i> He knows the ropes because he has been in that job all his life. <form>&mdash; sa hiktanan</form> become a spinster (lit. grow old in the place one is tied up). <i>Nanggúngis nang bayhána sa hiktanan tungud sa kapilian,</i> That woman became a spinster because of her choosiness.

<p><form>gúngut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; aP]</itype> <number>1</number> pierce into s.t. and remain immobile there. <i>Migúngut ang udiyung sa bukubuku,</i> The dart was stuck firmly into his back. <number>2</number> be stuck so that it can&apos;t move. <i>Nakagúngut na ang mga sinumpayan sa silya,</i> The joints in the chair have set. <number>3</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> be fixed, immobile. <i>Ang íyang mga mata migúngut sa kisami,</i> His eyes were fixed to the ceiling.

<p><form>gunhub</form> <xr>= <sc>GUN-UB</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gúnit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S3S; b]</itype> hold on to s.t. to keep it from falling. <i>Guníti pag-áyu arun dì muhilus,</i> Hold it well so it won&apos;t slip. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A123S]</itype> <formx>ígù rang &mdash; sa dalunggan</formx> barely get a passing grade. <number>2</number> <itype>[C; c]</itype> hold hands. <i>Makiggúnit giyud siya kun manlákaw mi,</i> She insists on holding hands with me when we go out. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> hold s.t. so as to keep it. <i>Kinsa may naggúnit sa átung trupi?</i> Who is holding our trophy? <number>4</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get to touch. <i>Bisan usa ka dakù sa íyang swildu dì ku kagúnit,</i> I can&apos;t get my hands on even one penny of his salary. <number>5</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> handle or play s.t. skillfully. <i>Kamau kang mugúnit sa sista?</i> Do you know how to play the guitar? <number>5a</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> handle s.t. <i>Maáyu siyang mugúnit sa íyang nigusyu,</i> He handles his business well. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b]</itype> <number>1</number> hold fast onto s.t. to keep from falling. <i>Panggúnit arun dì ka mahúlug,</i> Hold on tight so you won&apos;t fall. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; sa dalunggan</formx> hold on to your hats. <i>Panggúnit sa dalunggan. Magpahaybul ta,</i> Hold on to your hats. We&apos;re going to put on the gas.

<p><form>gúns</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>goon</tr>, <tr>hired thugs</tr>.

<p><form>gunstabulári</form> (from <ix>gúns</ix> plus <ix>kunstabulári</ix>) <pos>n</pos> goons dressed in constabulary uniforms in the pay of politicians during elections.

<p><form>*gunsung</form> <xr>= <sc>*GANSANG</sc>.</xr> <form>gunsunggunsung</form> <xr>= <sc>GANSANGGANSANG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>guntang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cut or divide meat with a chopping motion. <i>Nagguntang ku sa kanding nga kaldiritáhun,</i> I&apos;m cutting the goat <pb n=278>into pieces to make goat stew.

<p><form>gunting</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>scissors</tr>. <number>2</number> scissors in game of <ix>pik</ix> (hammer, scissors, paper). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cut with scissors. <i>Guntínga kining kupun,</i> Just cut this coupon out. <form>gigukud sa &mdash;</form> badly in need of a haircut (chased by the scissors). <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> have a haircut. <i>Uy, nagpagunting ang hípi,</i> Hey! The hippie is getting a haircut. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> scissors position in sexual intercourse. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <number>1</number> swim, sail at an angle into the waves. <i>Ang lantsa nagginunting sa balud,</i> The launch sailed at an angle into the waves. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> assume the scissors position.

<p><form>guntudguntud</form> <pos>a</pos> coarsely <tr>rough</tr> and <tr>uneven</tr>. <i>Guntudguntud kaáyu ang simintu gawas sa bungbung,</i> The wall has a rough finish on the outside. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b]</itype> for a surface to be coarsely rough and uneven. <i>Magguntudguntud ang dálang aspaltúhun ug dì pa agían sa pisun,</i> An asphalted road is rough and uneven before it has been steamrollered. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <xr>= <sc>GUNTUDGUNTUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gunù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> small fish with silvery sides of mullet-like appearance: <bio>Allanetta forskali</bio> and <bio>Pranesus duodecimalis</bio>. <number>2</number> name given to a slow-witted person.

<p><form>gun-ub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> make s.t. collapse, come tumbling down on itself. <i>Nagun-ub ang túri paglínug,</i> The tower collapsed when there was an earthquake. <number>2</number> ruin one&apos;s plan, peaceful life, and the like. <i>Ang gíra migun-ub sa ámung panimuyù,</i> The war shattered our peaceful way of life.

<p><form>gunuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make <pos>a</pos> <tr>move</tr>, <tr>stir</tr>. <i>Ayawg gunuka ang bátang natúlug,</i> Don&apos;t stir the sleeping child. <i>Wà lang maggunuk ang kapulisan. Gihiphípan tingáli,</i> The police did not move a muscle. No doubt they were bribed. <pos>n</pos> <form>walay &mdash;</form> <number>1</number> <tr>motionless</tr>. <number>2</number> completely unconcerned about some need (failing to move <pos>a</pos> muscle).

<p><form>gunung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small bolo about 12&Prime; long with an even outward-curved cutting edge and an equally even outward-curved top edge coming to a point at the tip.

<p><form>gunurya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gonorrhea</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> get gonorrhea.

<p><form>gupak</form> <xr>= <sc>GIPAK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gúpak</form> <xr>= <sc>PALAKPALAK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gupang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> lump of food or soil. <i>Usa ka gupang kan-un,</i> A lump of food. <number>2</number> piece taken off of s.t. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B6]</itype> in lumps, become a lump. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> break up, cut s.t. into pieces or break a piece off. <i>Kinsay naggupang sa kík?</i> Who broke a piece off the cake? or Who broke the cake into pieces? <i>Gigupang ang lindug sa lubi,</i> The coconut log was cut up into pieces.

<p><form>gúpuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; a12]</itype> <tr>break into pieces</tr>. <i>Makagúpuk ug lubi nang íyang pinislitan,</i> His iron grip can crush a coconut shell. <i>Nagúpuk ang básu nga ákung gilabak,</i> I threw the glass down hard and it broke to pieces.

<p><form>gupun</form> <pos>n</pos> minor character in folk play whose role is to provoke laughter.

<p><form>guput</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> tie s.t. around the ends of bamboo, sticks, rattan, and the like which have been woven or fashioned into s.t. in order to hold it together. <i>Gupti ang daplin sa nígu arun dì mabuskad,</i> Wind s.t. around the edges of the winnowing tray so it won&apos;t come undone. <pos>n</pos> s.t. tied around the edges of s.t. woven of bamboo, rattan, etc. to hold it together.

<p><form>gúra</form> <pos>n</pos> <pos>a</pos> cap with a short visor. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear such a cap. <i>Naggúra ang mga hiníti,</i> Jockeys wear caps with visors.

<p><form>gurámi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gourami</tr>, a fresh-water food fish: <bio>Osphronemus goramy</bio>.

<p><form>guratsa</form> <xr>= <sc>KURATSA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gurayan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small anchovy.

<p><form>guray-ut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dilapidated</tr>, worn-down structure, <tr>shabby</tr>, ragged in dress. <i>Guray-ut nga barungbárung,</i> A dilapidated shanty. <i>Guray-ut ug pamisti nga makililímus,</i> A shabbily dressed beggar. <number>2</number> exhausted look. <i>Guray-ut ug panagway,</i> Worn-out face. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> get to be dilapidated, shabby. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> get an exhausted look on the face. <i>Ngánung nagguray-ut gud nang dagway mu? Gibwágan ka?</i> Why do you look so haggard? Did your girl friend break up with you? <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> frowning, tired-looking face.

<p><form>gurdu</form> <xr>= <sc>DYAKPAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gurùgurù</form> <pos>n</pos> irregular, rough <tr>wrinkles</tr> in the skin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46N]</itype> for the face to be deeply <tr>wrinkled</tr>. <i>Nanggurùgurù ang nawung sa tigúwang,</i> The old woman&apos;s face is covered with wrinkles.

<p><form>gurumíti</form> <xr>= <sc>GRUMÍTI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gurung</form> <pos>n</pos> large pile of unthreshed rice.

<p><form>gurunggurung</form> <xr>= <sc>GARANGGARANG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>*gúrut</form> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> clean a field of standing, dry grain stalks by cutting them with a machete or similar knife attached to a sled-like device drawn by a water buffalo. <i>Dì ta makapagúrut ug náa pay mga tuud sa uma,</i> We can&apos;t cut the grain stalks with a sled having blades attached to it if there are still tree stumps in the field. <pos>n</pos> implement for the <ix>pagúrut</ix>.

<p><form>gurutgurut</form> <pos>a</pos> rough and covered with fine wrinkles. <i>Gurutgurut kaáyu ang ákung mga kamut tungud sa kadúgay nga pagpanglaba,</i> My hands got all wrinkled from washing clothes so long. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> get to be rough <pb n=279>and covered with fine wrinkles. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having a wrinkled face.

<p><form>gúruy</form> <xr>= <sc>GÚYUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>guryun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. sparrow: <bio>Passer montanus</bio>.

<p><form>gusa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b6]</itype> have a tight feeling in the stomach from s.t. one ate. <i>Mugusa ímung tiyan ug dì ka kahilísan,</i> Your stomach will feel tight if you have indigestion. <i>Gigushan ku sa tantung káun,</i> I got a tight stomach because I ate too much. <pos>n</pos> condition of having a very tight stomach.

<p><form>gusà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146; b3]</itype> for a child to be restless, fussy. <i>Ang kaínit mauy nakagusà (nakapagusà) níya,</i> The heat caused him to be fussy.

<p><form>gusab, gus-ab</form> <xr>= <sc>GUS-AP</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gúsang</form> <pos>n</pos> delicacy made of ground, roasted corn or rice mixed with sugar and dry coconut pounded in a mortar. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make <ix>gúsang</ix>. <form>-in-</form> <xr>= <sc>GÚSANG</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p><form>gusánu</form> <pos>n</pos> thread of a screw. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> thread. <i>Naggusánu ku ug bára pára gam-ung pirnu,</i> I am threading an iron bar to make into a bolt. <i>Gusanúhi ug pínu arun musakar áring twirka,</i> Make a fine thread on it so it will fit this nut.

<p><form>gus-ap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> chew to pieces. <i>Gus-ápun nang baskit sa ituy,</i> The puppy will chew up that basket.

<p><form>gusar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> have s.t. for one&apos;s benefit and use. <i>Ang giprindáhan mauy mugusar sa yútà,</i> The holder of the mortgage enjoys the use of the land. <i>Láing istudiyanti ang naggusar sa librung ákung giabángan,</i> Another student made use of the book I rented.

<p><form>gusaw</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to mullets (<bio>Mugilidae</bio>) that are less than a foot in length.

<p><form>gusbat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> for soft materials to have a good-sized hole in them. <i>Nagusbat ang samput sa íyang karsúnis,</i> The seat of his pants got torn. <i>Nagkagusbat ang ílang atup nga nípà,</i> Their thatched roof is getting full of holes. <pos>n</pos> large tear or hole in soft material. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> full of holes.

<p><form>gúsì</form> <xr>= <sc>GÍSÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>guslà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be very hungry (coarse). <i>Kadtung giguslà habhab na,</i> If you&apos;re so damn hungry, go on eat. <pos>n</pos> strong feeling of hunger (coarse).

<p><form>guslab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> destroy things by chewing them to pieces. <i>Giguslab sa irù ang hapin sa bátà,</i> The dog chewed the baby&apos;s diaper.

<p><form>gusnik</form> <pos>n</pos> a structure or a pipe shaped like a goose neck.

<p><form>gustu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>liking</tr>, <tr>desire</tr>. <i>Matúman ang gustu sa hárì,</i> The king&apos;s desire will be fulfilled. <pos>a</pos> like, want. <i>Gustu kug kík,</i> I like cake. <i>Gustu kang mamatay?</i> Do you want to die? <i>Ang gustu níya buhátun,</i> What he wants to do. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> <tr>like</tr>, <tr>want</tr>. <i>Kun nakagustu ka níya, pangulitawhi,</i> If you like her, court her. <i>Gikagustuhan (gikagustuan, nagustuhan, nagustuan) siya sa ginikánan sa babáyi,</i> The girl&apos;s parents liked him. <form>kuntra &mdash;</form> against one&apos;s will. <i>Kuntra gustu ang íyang pagsugut,</i> She agreed to it against her will. <form>gustuhay, gustuay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C13]</itype> come to like one another. <i>Sa pagkadúgay nagkagustuhay na sila,</i> After a while they came to like each other. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> let have one&apos;s own ways and whims. <i>Nagpagustu silag dít kay layù ang ginikánan,</i> They dated without restraint because their parents are away. <i>Pagustui lang ang bátà,</i> Give the child his way. <form>pasi-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b5]</itype> allow s.o. to have his own choice. <i>Pasigustua (pasigustuhi) siya kun unsang kursúha kuháun,</i> Give him the choice on what study to take. <form>kagustúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wishes</tr>, <tr>desires</tr>. <i>Ang ákung pagpangasáwa kagustúhan ni Máma, dì ákù,</i> My marriage is mother&apos;s wish, not mine.

<p><form>gúsu</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>GÚSUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gusù</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible algae with a yellow-greenish color, usually made into a salad. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> have <ix>gusù</ix>. <form>gusùgusù</form> <xr>= <sc>PUBRING KÁHUY</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PUBRI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gúsud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b(1)]</itype> <tr>sprout</tr>, come out as if <tr>sprouting</tr>. <i>Manggúsud nag maáyu ang mga bugas sa íyang náwung,</i><note>[**nawung]</note> Pimples are coming out all over her face. <i>Nanggúsud ang singut,</i> Beads of perspiration are forming. <i>Nagusúran ang tanum ug mga dáhun,</i> The plant is sprouting leaves.

<p><form>gúsuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rib</tr>. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> hit in the ribs. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> place the rib cage is found.

<p><form>gúsus</form> <pos>n</pos> in a novena recited to ask a favor of a saint, the verses lauding the accomplishments of the saint invoked. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> recite this portion of the novena.

<p><form>*gusúsu</form> <form>mistiryu &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> joyful mystery, one of the mysteries of the Holy Rosary.

<p><form>gút</form> <xr>= <sc>GULUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gutab</form> <xr>= <sc>GUTLAB</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gutad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> chop s.t. not very hard into pieces using heavy strokes. <pos>n</pos> piece chopped off of s.t. <form>gutadgutad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> chop up into pieces. <i>Gutadgutara nang kalbásà,</i> Chop the squash up into pieces.

<p><form>gutang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B46; a4b4]</itype> develop cracks in the calluses of the feet from going barefoot. <i>Gigutang (gigutangan) ang mga bakwit kay wà maánad ug tiniil,</i> The evacuees developed cracks in the soles of their feet because they were not accustomed to going barefoot. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> make a slash, incision in s.t. <i>Gutangun (gutangan) ku unyà nang agtang mu,</i> I&apos;ll slash your forehead. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> cracks in the <pb n=280>calluses of the feet. <number>2</number> <tr>a slash</tr>, <tr>incision</tr>.

<p><form>gútas</form> <pos>n</pos> <pos>a</pos> bitter, black medicinal liquid taken for stomach ailments and also used as an abortifacient. <form>&mdash; amargas</form> <xr>= <sc>GÚTAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gutay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> tear completely into shreds. <i>Mugutay siyag papil nga iadurnu,</i> She will cut paper into shreds to use as decorations. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1PB; c1]</itype> for cloth or paper to weaken to the point that it falls to pieces, cause it to do so. <i>Mugutay ang papil ug bas-un,</i> The paper will weaken if you wet it. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> torn to shreds. <number>2</number> weakened to the point of falling apart.

<p><form>gutgut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> cut, mark s.t. with a slicing motion. <i>Putla ring písì gutgúta lag kutsilyu,</i><note>[**note: kutsílyu]</note> Cut this rope with <pos>a</pos> knife. <number>2</number> make <pos>a</pos> sawing motion on s.t. <i>Kaáyu níyang mugutgut sa byulin,</i> He plays the violin very well. <pos>n</pos> instrument used in using a slicing motion on s.t.

<p><form>gutì<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>GUTLÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gutíba</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. seashell.

<p><form>gutlab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> <number>1</number> cut a long slash into. <i>Nagutlab ang ákung karsúnis nga nasángit sa lansang,</i> My pants got a long slash in them because they got caught in the nail. <number>2</number> cut s.t. with a single long slashing stroke. <i>Gutlaba na lang ang baat,</i> You might as well just cut the string. <i>Sa íyang pagsibsib, nagutlaban ang kamátis.</i> As he was sickling, he accidentally cut some tomato plants down.

<p><form>gutlì</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>brittle</tr>, breaking off easily. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b5]</itype> break off, pick s.t. tiny or soft with the fingers. <i>Ákung gutlían (gutlíun, gutlíhun) ang may udlut sa mga tanum,</i> I&apos;ll pick off the ends of the young shoots.

<p><form>gutling</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>moment</tr>, <tr>second</tr>, period of time shorter than <ix>gutlù</ix>.

<p><form>gutlù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>minute</tr> of time. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; nga lúhà</formx> <tr>teardrop</tr>. <i>Manaligdig ang pila ka gutlung lúhà sa pawíkang iháwun,</i> A sea tortoise will shed a few tears when it is about to be slaughtered. <number>3</number> lines on the inner parts of the fingers.

<p><form>gutlub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> chop s.t. long down, or into pieces. <i>Gutba ang lubi,</i> Cut down the coconut tree. <pos>n</pos> a piece cut off of s.t. long. <form>gutlubgutlub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> chop s.t. long into pieces. <i>Gutlubgutluba ang tangígi,</i> Cut the Spanish mackerel into pieces.

<p><form>gútù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> chop s.t. long into pieces. <i>Gutúa ang tubu,</i> Chop the sugar cane into small pieces. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> a piece cut off of s.t. long.

<p><form>gutub<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. salt-water fish with a silvery hue with a tinge of yellow at the sides and somewhat bluish green back, having a pointed homocercal tail fin and with an even snout, growing to 10&Prime;.

<p><form>gutub<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>GUTLUB</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gut-ub</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. owl.

<p><form>gutubgutub<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>GUTLUBGUTLUB</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gutubgutub<sub>2</sub></form> (from <ix>lagutub</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make a low throbbing, booming sound from the distance. <i>Naggutubgutub ang makina sa púsu sa layù,</i> The water pump was chugging away in the distance. <pos>n</pos> low, throbbing, chugging sound. <i>Gutubgutub sa kasingkásing,</i> Throbbing of the heart.

<p><form>gutuk</form> <pos>a</pos> filled to the point that it is tight. <i>Gutuk na ang ákung tiyan,</i> My stomach is filled to bursting. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> become tight from being too full. <i>Migutuk ang súsu sa bag-ung nanganak,</i> The breasts of the new mother became turgid. <i>Gutkun (igutuk) pagsulud ang humay,</i> Fill the rice sacks so full that they are tight. <form>gutukgutuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B14]</itype> have hardened portions in it. <i>Naggutukgutuk ang ságing kay gitabagnul,</i> The bananas have hard spots because they got infected with fruit rust.

<p><form>gutukgutuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> make a popping noise such as that emitted by food being boiled when the water is nearly gone. <i>Naggutukgutuk na ang linung-ag. Hápit na muhubas,</i> The rice is popping. The water is just about gone.

<p><form>gútum</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>hunger</tr>. <i>Namatay siya sa gútum,</i> He died of hunger. <number>2</number> famine. <i>Gútum karun búsà pagdagínut,</i> We&apos;re having a famine, so cut down consumption. <pos>a</pos> be intensely hungry. <i>Tána kay gútum kaáyu,</i> Let&apos;s go, I&apos;m starving. <formx>patay &mdash;</formx> so poor as not to have any food. <i>Patay gútum na mi. Wà na diyuy malung-ag,</i> We&apos;re dead broke. We haven&apos;t got a thing for dinner. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a4]</itype> <tr>be hungry</tr>. <i>Gigútum ka na?</i> Are you hungry yet? <number>2</number> <itype>[b4(1)]</itype> have severe hunger pangs, be over-hungered. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>GÚTUM</sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr> <pos>a</pos> <tr>hungry</tr>. <i>Mikáun siya sáma sa táwung gutum,</i> He ate like a starved man. <form>ka-(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>GÚTUM</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <form>kagutmánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>famine</tr>. <form>gulutman, gutmánun</form> <pos>a</pos> easily getting hungry. <form>la-(&rarr;)</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>LAGUTUM</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gútus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> walk some distance. <i>Maggútus na lang ta kay wà man giyuy sakyanan,</i> We have to walk because there&apos;s no transportation.

<p><form>gútut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; cP]</itype> for a small portion to be sticking out from behind or beneath s.t. <i>Migútut na ang bátà, tawga ang midwayip,</i> The baby is coming out. Call the midwife. <i>Iniglanguy igútut lag diyútay ang úlu sa túbig,</i> In swimming raise your head just a little above the water. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> show up at an appointed meeting or affair. <i>Way Husi nga migútut sa parti,</i> No Jose showed up at the <pb n=281>party.

<p><form>gúud</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> lower portion of a mature bamboo stem which is thick, strong, and durable. <number>2</number> piece of bamboo from that portion. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> gather thick bamboo stems. <form>guúrun</form> <pos>a</pos> thick and short. <i>Guúrun ug tudlù,</i> Having thick, stubby fingers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become thick and stubby.

<p><form>guuk</form> <pos>n</pos> fat on the back of a cow at the hump or, by analogy, fat on the nape of a person&apos;s neck. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN]</itype> develop fat at the lower portion of the nape. <i>Ang tangkúgù níyang nangguuk,</i> His neck with a big bulge of fat at the nape.

<p><form>guul</form> <pos>a</pos> provoking sorrow and worry. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; ab3c5]</itype> be worried and sad. <i>Ngánung dílì siya maguul nga himamáyi man ang bána,</i> Why shouldn&apos;t she be sad when her husband runs after women. <i>Ang ákung gikagul-an (gikaguul) nga wà siya mananghid,</i> What I am upset about is that he left without permission. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> a sad, worried feeling. <i>Mihílak sa túmang kaguul,</i> She burst into tears in her deep sadness. <form>kagul-ánan</form> <pos>n</pos> deep sorrows combined with worry. <i>Mga kagul-ánan sa kinabúhì,</i> The sorrows one counters in life. <form>magul-ánun</form> <pos>a</pos> worried and sad. <form>maka-r-</form> <pos>a</pos> very saddening.

<p><form>gúum</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> force s.o.&apos;s mouth shut. <i>Igúum (guúma) ang bàbà arun dì siya kasyágit,</i> Shut his mouth tight so he can&apos;t shout. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> repress feelings. <i>Igúum (guúmun) na lang nákù ang ákung kahiubus,</i> I&apos;ll just swallow my feelings of hurt pride.

<p><form>guun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> withhold s.t. or prevent s.o. from doing s.t. <i>Dílì aku makaguun basta makakitag pagkáung lamían,</i> I cannot restrain myself if I see good food. <i>Gigun-an sa Sintral Bangk ang ímung aplikasyun,</i> The Central Bank sat on your application.

<p><form>guut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> tight, fitted tight. <i>Guut ang kálù nákù,</i> The hat is too small for me. <number>2</number> <tr>tight</tr>, <tr>stuffed</tr>. <i>Guut ákung ilung,</i> My nose is stuffed up. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> become tight. <i>Miguut ang singsing nákù,</i> The ring got to be too small for me. <number>2</number> get tight and stuffy. <i>Nagguut ang ákung dughan sa kaguul,</i> My chest tightened with a feeling of sorrow.

<p><form>gúwa</form> <xr>= <sc>GÚLA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gúwing</form> <pos>n</pos> the action of going out for a date or some activity. <i>Ása ang gúwing nátù nga ispúting man ta?</i> Where are you going that you&apos;re all dressed up?

<p><form>guyabana, guyabanu</form> <xr>= <sc>GWAYABANU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>guyam-ut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for lots of things in a small area to be all in disorder, topsy-turvy. <i>Guyam-ut íning ímung kwartu, uy!</i> My, but your room is in disorder! <number>2</number> badly crumpled. <i>Pasahi nang ímung sinínà, guyam-ut kaáyu,</i> Press your dress. It is all crumpled. <number>3</number> for the face to be all distorted because of anger or distaste. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> <number>1</number> for a place to get all disorderly with lots of things. <number>2</number> get all crumpled, creased. <number>3</number> for the face to get completely distorted. <i>Gisakitan kag tiyan nga nagguyam-ut man nang ímung hitsúra?</i> Your face is all distorted. Do you have a stomach ache?

<p><form>guy-ang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> break s.t. into pieces. <i>Naguy-ang ang kík kay natukuran nákù,</i> I accidentally leaned on the cake and it fell into pieces. <i>Ákung guy-ángun ning plátu ug maglágut ku,</i> I will smash this plate into pieces if I get angry.

<p><form>guyku</form> <pos>a</pos> disabled part of the body. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> for the body or a part of the body to be completely disabled. <i>Nagguyku ang íyang buktun kay mituwas ang bukug,</i> His hand hung limp because he had a broken arm.

<p><form>guyud</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small white shrimp with one large claw.

<p><form>gúyud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>draw</tr>, <tr>tow</tr>. <i>Ang bátà naggúyud ug traktrák,</i> The child is pulling a toy truck. <i>Guyúrun tikaw ug dì ka muuban,</i> I&apos;ll drag you if you don&apos;t come along. <number>2</number> invite a partner to dancing. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> rope used in trawling or towing. <number>2</number> runners of a sled. <form>guyuran</form> <pos>n</pos> sled consisting of a platform without sides mounted on runners. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> boats which are pulled along by another large boat. <i>Púlù ming kagúyud ánang dakung lantsa,</i> There were ten of us in boats towed by the large launch. <form>sa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; c]</itype> trailing behind. <i>Nagsaguyud ang kápa sa rayna,</i> The queen&apos;s cape is dragging behind. <i>Ayaw isagúyud ang inyung bakyà kay sábà,</i> Don&apos;t drag your wooden slippers because they&apos;re noisy.

<p><form>guyuguyu</form> <pos>n</pos> larva of the mosquitoes.

<p><form>guyungguyung</form> <pos>n</pos> sand bugs up to 2&Prime; in length which burrow into the sand beneath shallow waters. They come in white, brown, and gray colors, and are eaten broiled.

<p><form>gwabana</form> <xr>= <sc>GWAYABANU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gwantis</form> <pos>n</pos> gloves with slits for the fingers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear gloves.

<p><form>gwánu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>guano</tr>, excrement of cave-dwelling birds and bats used as fertilizer.

<p><form>gwápa</form> <pos>a</pos> <xr>= <sc>GWÁPU</sc> (said of women).</xr>

<p><form>gwapíta</form> <xr>= <sc>GWAPÍTU</sc> (female).</xr>

<p><form>gwapítu</form> <pos>a</pos> cute and good-looking little lad.

<p><form>gwápu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>handsome</tr>, <tr>good-looking</tr>. <i>Gwápu siya, baklà lang,</i> He is handsome, only he&apos;s a fairy. <number>2</number> beautiful, nice to look at (of things in general). <i>Gwápu ang talan-áwun dinhi,</i> The scenery here is beautiful. <number>3</number> of <pb n=282>good quality. <i>Gwápu ang mga d&amacracu;n sa Lusun,</i> Luzon has good roads. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> be beautiful, do s.t. in a beautiful way.

<p><form>*gwarda</form> <form>&mdash; kusta</form> coast guard or member thereof. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56; a2]</itype> be, make s.o. a member of the coast guard. <form>&mdash; munti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>forest ranger</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56; a2]</itype> be a forest ranger.

<p><form>gwardiya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>guard</tr>. <number>2</number> guard position in a basketball game. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>guard</tr>, keep watch. <i>Ang ámù gigwardyahan ug mga irù,</i> Our house is guarded by dogs. <form>&mdash; kusta</form> coast guard. <form>&mdash; sibil</form> <pos>n</pos> police militiamen during the Spanish times. <form>-du(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> well-guarded. <i>Gwardiyádu ang dalága sa amahan,</i> The daughter is well-guarded by her father.

<p><form>gwarnasiyun</form> (from <ix>gwarni</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>harness</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> harness a horse.

<p><form>gwarni</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> tie a string or rope around s.t. several times, each time at a right angle to the previous time. <i>Gwarníhi ug maáyu ang paldu arun dílì mawagwag ang manútus,</i> Tie a rope all around the bale so that the hands of tobacco won&apos;t get scattered. <number>2</number> lock s.o. in one&apos;s arms or lock s.o.&apos;s arms to restrain motion. <i>Gigwarníhan ku siya. Wà siya kalíhuk,</i> I locked his arms and he couldn&apos;t move. <pos>n</pos> rope or string tied all around s.t.

<p><form>gwatsi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>petty lie</tr>. <i>Nabuku ang íyang gwatsi kay dihay nakakità,</i> He was exposed because there was a witness. <number>2</number> mischievous act or story to arouse laughter. <pos>a</pos> one who puts up an act, tells stories. <i>Gwatsi batáa pasakitsákit arun atimanun,</i> This child is a faker. He plays sick to get attention. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> resort to trickery to make s.o. believe s.t. <i>Gwatsíhi siyang mangiskwíla ta arun makagawas ta,</i> Tell him that we&apos;re going to school so we can go out. <form>-nangga</form> <xr>= <sc>-NANGGU</sc> (female).</xr> <form>-nanggu</form> <pos>n</pos> one who tells petty lies. <form>-ra, -ru</form> <xr>= <sc>GWATSINANGGA</sc>, <sc>-U</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gwayabanu</form> <pos>n</pos> soursop, a k.o. small cultivated tree bearing large, pear-shaped, spiny fruits, very juicy, soft and fibrous, eaten as is: <bio>Anona muricata</bio>.

<p><form>gyíra</form> <xr>= <sc>GÍRA</sc>.</xr>


</body>
</text>
</TEI.2>
