<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN" [

<!ENTITY larr       CDATA "&#x2190;"            -- leftwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY rarr       CDATA "&#x2192;"            -- rightwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY glots      CDATA "&#x0294;"            -- glottal stop -->

<!ENTITY amacr      CDATA "&#x0101;"            -- a with macron -->
<!ENTITY imacr      CDATA "&#x012B;"            -- i with macron -->
<!ENTITY umacr      CDATA "&#x016B;"            -- u with macron -->

<!ENTITY mgrave      CDATA "m&#x0300;"            -- m with grave -->

<!ENTITY amacrgra   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0300;"    -- a with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY imacrgra   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0300;"    -- i with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY umacrgra   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0300;"    -- u with macron and grave -->

<!ENTITY amacracu   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0301;"    -- a with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY imacracu   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0301;"    -- i with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY umacracu   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0301;"    -- u with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY Umacracu   CDATA "&#x016A;&#x0301;"    -- U with macron and acute -->

<!ENTITY amacrcir   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0302;"  -- a with macron and circumflex -->
<!ENTITY imacrcir   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0302;"  -- i with macron and circumflex -->
<!ENTITY umacrcir   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0302;"  -- u with macron and circumflex -->

<!ENTITY acaron     CDATA "a&#x030C;"           -- a with caron -->
<!ENTITY ucaron     CDATA "u&#x030C;"           -- u with caron -->
<!ENTITY icaron     CDATA "i&#x030C;"           -- i with caron -->

<!ENTITY schwa      CDATA "&#x0259;"            -- schwa (turned e) -->

<!ENTITY prime      CDATA "'"            -- prime -->
<!ENTITY Prime      CDATA "''"            -- double prime -->

]>

<!--

Step one

[X] Run pgpp.pl
[X] Fix page-breaks
[X] Fix hi tags (back to i tags)
[X] Insert p tags
[X] Run catpars.pl

Step two

[ ] tag pos: n v
[ ] tag pos: a
[ ] tag sense numbers (split of from b tags, look for /<b>word [0-9]</b>/ case
[ ] verify &apos;real&apos; italics (not samples), look for /[a-z] italics>/ case
[ ] verify meaning numbers followed by sub-head-word or phrase <b>[0-9] word</b> case
[ ] italics and bolds midword. E.g. A<i>ng</i>
[ ] remove redundant tags near commas.
[ ] handle sup tags
[ ] verify starred entries (sub-entry immediately after headword)
[ ] handle [**proofer notes]
[ ] handle quotes. look for " &apos;", etc.
[ ] Renumber pages.

Step three

Iterate:
    [X] Run WCED-uptag1.pl
    [ ] Run uptag.pl
    [ ] Verify output for anomalies and fix in source

Step four

[X] Run WCED-uptag1.pl
[ ] Integrate result into WCED-body-0.3

-->

<TEI.2 lang=en>
<teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
        <titleStmt>
            <title>A Dictionary of Cebuano Visayan</title>
            <author>John U. Wolff</author>
        </titleStmt>
    </fileDesc>
    <profileDesc>
        <langUsage>
            <language id=en>English</language>
            <language id=en-US>English (United States)</language>
            <language id=ceb>Cebuano</language>
        </langUsage>
    </profileDesc>
</teiHeader>
<text>
<body>


<div1>
<head>ADDENDA</head>

<p id=21002>Forms marked with a dagger have already been entered in the main portion of the dictionary, and what is listed here should be studied in conjunction with the main entry.


<p id=21003><form>&dagger;ab-ab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for a fire to be <tr>blazing</tr>. <i>Miab-ab (naab-ab) na ang káyu pag-abut sa bumbíru,</i> The fire was already ablaze when the firemen arrived. <pos>a</pos> <tr>chewed up</tr>, <tr>eroded</tr>, <tr>festering</tr>, <tr>blazing</tr>.

<p id=21004><form>abansádu</form> <pos>a</pos> be close to the roadway. <form>&mdash; sa buling</form> <pos>a</pos> not showing dirt, masking stains well. <i>Abansádus buling ang kalsúnis nga itum,</i> Black pants don&apos;t show dirt. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> be, become close to the roadway. <i>Maabansádu ang inyung balay kun padak-an ang kalsáda,</i> Your house will be close to the road if they widen it.

<p id=21005><form>abansáwu</form> <xr>= <sc>ABANSÁDU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21006><form>&dagger;abri</form> <form>&mdash; birat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> yield to a man under threat (humorous&mdash;from the pidgin Japanese for <ix>abríhi ang bilat</ix> used during the Japanese occupation). <i>Abri birat (miabri birat) na lang si Kulása kay gitiúnan mag ribulbir,</i> Colasa surrendered herself because they were pointing a revolver at her.

<p id=21007><form>abrisíti, abrisyíti</form> <xr>= <sc>ABRASÍTI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21008><form>&dagger;ábung<sub>1</sub></form> <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <i>2</i> being in a state where s.t. is likely to happen to one. <i>Ayaw mug panaway sa kaminyúun kay abung pa mu,</i> Don&apos;t scorn marriage because it won&apos;t be long before you, too, will be married. <i>Ang tigúwang abung sa kamatáyun,</i> Old folks are in the state where death is likely to overtake them. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> for an event to <tr>approach</tr>. <i>Nag-abung na ang Pasku,</i> Christmas is approaching.

<p id=21009><form>ábung<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the drunken feeling one gets from eating tainted food. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> get this feeling. <i>Giábung ku human makakaun sa dubuk nga tulíngan,</i> I got dizzy after eating the tainted tuna.

<p id=21010><form>&dagger;abut</form> <form>(&larr;)</form> a variety of grain that gives a big yield or k.o. soil that yields well. <i>Ábut kaáyu ang basakan kay sa kamad-an,</i> Rice paddies yield more than the uplands. <form>pa-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> expected delivery date for a mother. <i>Karung simanáha ang paábut sa ákung asáwa,</i> Our baby is due this week.

<p id=21011><form>&dagger;abyadur &mdash; sa lubi</form> <pos>n</pos> palm toddy gatherer (humorous).

<p id=21012><form>adbinturar</form> <xr>= <sc>ABINTURAR</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21013><form>&dagger;adlaw &mdash; gabíi</form> doing s.t. all the time. <i>Adlaw gabíi ang ákung trabáhu,</i> I work day and night. <form>may &mdash; rang magabíi</form> the day will come when the tables will be turned (lit. the day will come that will turn to night). <i>Ímu kung gidaugdáug kay ábi pubri man ku, apan may adlaw rang magabíi,</i> You are stepping all over me because I am poor, but the day will come when the tables are turned. <form>-an(&rarr;), hiN-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> the share of palm toddy given to the owner of the tree, reckoned as the amount gathered on one particular day of the week.

<p id=21014><form>adlib<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> deliver s.t. <tr>extemporaneously</tr> without any script. <i>Kinahanglan sa usa ka anawunsir nga maáyu muadlib,</i> It&apos;s necessary for an announcer to be good at <tr>ad-libbing</tr>. <i>Giadlíban na lang níya ang lima ka minútus,</i> He just filled in the five minutes by ad-libbing.

<p id=21015><form>&dagger;admirar</form> <form>admiradur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>admirer</tr>. <i>Daghan siyag admiradur kay gwápa man,</i> She has lots of admirers because she is beautiful.

<p id=21016><form>&dagger;adult pur &mdash;</form> for adults only (movie).

<p id=21017><form>adupt&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> adopt a form of government. <pb n=1142><i>Kun unsang matánga sa kagamhánan ang aduptahun kanà mag-agad lang unyà sa plibisítu,</i> It depends on the plebiscite as to what form of government will be adopted.

<p id=21018><form>&dagger;adwána</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> place where the customs house is located or the port area near the customs house. <i>Didtus adwána dunggù ang bapur,</i> The ship docked near the customs house.

<p id=21019><form>ág &mdash; lang</form> <tr>anything and everything</tr>. <i>Ág lay kan-un sa bábuy,</i> Pigs eat anything and everything. <i>Ág lang trabáhu ang íyang gidatug kanákù,</i> She dumped whatever she had to do on me.

<p id=21020><form>&dagger;ágak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>guide</tr> s.o. in doing things. <i>Musúkul kus kásu ug dúnay muágak nákù,</i> I&apos;ll put up a fight in court if I have legal counsel. <i>Agákun tikaw sa pag-atiman sa tanum,</i> I&apos;ll show you how to tend the plants.

<p id=21021><form>&dagger;agálun paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> for a long-lost thing to be found again by its owner or for a thing long sold by its owner to find its way back to him. <i>Nangagáwun ang ákung singsing nga narimáti kay aku ra gihápuy nakapalit sa pagsubasta,</i> My ring must consider me its master, because after I pawned it and failed to redeem it, I still got it back at the auction.

<p id=21022>&dagger;<i>agaw ig-(&larr;) ug ikatrayinta idús ug tungà</i> (humorous) one&apos;s fiancee (lit. thirty-second and a halfth cousin).

<p id=21023><form>agay-ay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B346]</itype> for liquid to <tr>trickle</tr> down very slowly from a source. <i>Nag-agay-ay ang túbig sa punúan sa káhuy,</i> The water is trickling very slowly down the trunk of the tree. <pos>n</pos> slow <tr>trickling</tr> of water. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> slow <tr>trickling</tr> of liquid. <number>2</number> water which has trickled out.

<p id=21024><form>&dagger;ági (&rarr;) anhà mag-</form> it will <tr>inevitably</tr> be so. <i>Anhà giyud ka mag-agi sa latigu kay buyágun ka man,</i> It looks like you&apos;re going to have to get whipped. You&apos;re so naughty. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ab]</itype> go over s.t. with an instrument. <i>Paagia kug kadiyut sa ákung sinínà,</i> Let me just press my dress a second time. <i>Gipaagian ku na ang mga hábul nga gisiun,</i> I have already run the torn sheets through the sewing machine. <form>pa-(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>PA-</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr>

<p id=21025><form>&dagger;agpas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>5</number> <itype>[c]</itype> for medicine to cure an ailment. <i>Dílì maagpas (maagpasan) sa binisayà ang sakit sa bágà,</i> Folk medicine cannot cure a lung disease.

<p id=21026><form>agribyádu</form> <xr>= <sc>AGRABYÁDU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21027><form>&dagger;agwáda</form> <form>agwadahan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the pole carried on the shoulder with a can on each end. <number>2</number> the cans used to convey water. <number>3</number> the place where one fetches water. <number>4</number> the families to whom water is delivered by the carrier.

<p id=21028><form>&dagger;agwádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>2</number> for dough not to be baked through. <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> come out not baked through. <i>Ang kakúlang sa síga mauy nakapaagwádu sa bibingka,</i> The rice cake came out half-cooked because the fire was too low.

<p id=21029><form>ahan</form> <xr>= <sc>KAYHÀ</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p id=21030><form>&dagger;ahaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be without, <tr>lack</tr>. <i>Hala, níay mil arun dì ka maahaws igalastus syudad,</i> Here is a thousand pesos so you won&apos;t lack spending money while you are in the city.

<p id=21031><form>akadímik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>academic supervisor</tr>, the second highest official of a public school, next to the superintendent. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be, become an academic supervisor.

<p id=21032><form>akawunting</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>accounting</tr> as a subject in schools.

<p id=21033><form>alabádu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> clasp the hands on one&apos;s breast. <i>Ug mualabádu ang párì, sunud pud,</i> If the priest clasps his hands on his breast, do the same. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> say one&apos;s final prayers at the point of death. <i>Nag-alabádu na ang bitayun,</i> The doomed man is saying his final prayers.

<p id=21034><form>alahíbi</form> <xr>= <sc>ALHÍBI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21035><form>&dagger;álam</form> <form>may (walay) (&rarr;)</form> <corr sic=educated>uneducated</corr> (having no education). <i>Lisud ang pangimplíyu ug wà kay alam,</i> You&apos;ll have a hard time finding a job if you have no education.

<p id=21036><form>&dagger;alarma</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> be <tr>alarmed</tr> about s.t. <i>Nagkaalarma ang mga táwu sa kahimtang sa násud,</i> The people are getting <tr>concerned</tr> about the condition of the nation.

<p id=21037><form>alastar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> for an anchored boat to get loose and drift away. <i>Nagkaalastar na ang ímung sakayan,</i> Your boat is getting loose and is drifting away.

<p id=21038><form>albumina</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>albumen</tr>. <form>albuminahun</form> <pos>a</pos> containing albumen.

<p id=21039><form>alibanta</form> command to <tr>heave</tr> s.t. <i>Únu, dus, tris, alibanta!</i> One, two, three, heave!

<p id=21040><form>alibay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> drape s.t. over the shoulders. <i>Alibayan ta kag tualya arun dì ka tugnawun,</i> I&apos;ll drape a towel over your shoulders so you won&apos;t feel cold.

<p id=21041><form>&dagger;alirdyik</form> <number>3</number> having an aversion to s.t. <i>Alirdyik kaáyu ku sa hílak,</i> I <tr>hate</tr> crying. <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become <tr>averse</tr> to s.t.

<p id=21042><form>alis</form> <tr>get out</tr>, <tr>scram</tr> (colloquial). <i>Alis dihà bi. Akuy naglingkud dihà,</i> Get out of my chair.

<p id=21043><form>ális</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wake</tr> of a boat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> produce a wake. <i>Muális ug maáyu ang ispidbut ug pakusgan,</i> The speedboat produces high waves in its wake when it runs fast.

<p id=21044><form>aliyunyun</form> (from <ix>yunyun</ix>) <pos>n</pos> an insect similar to a spider, of light dirty-brown color, having long spindly legs, so called because it moves its body up and down when it is disturbed.

<pb n=1143>

<p id=21045><form>almahadun</form> <xr>= <sc>ALMUHADUN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21046><form>alpabit</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>alphabet</tr>.

<p id=21047><form>&dagger;álup</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[B24]</itype> for one&apos;s popularity to wane. <i>Miálup na ang bitúun ni Súsan Rúsis,</i> Susan Roces&apos; popularity has waned.

<p id=21048><form>alupaup</form> <xr>= <sc>ALUP-UP</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21049><form>amamaylu</form> <xr>= <sc>TABILUS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21050><form>amara</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>brandish</tr> a weapon in a fighting stance or in anger. <i>Misibat siya pagkakità sa íyang kuntra nga nag-amara ug pinútì,</i> He got out of there when he saw his enemy waving a sword.

<p id=21051><form>amatung</form> <pos>n</pos> large boulder or pile of rocks formed into a boulder found in shallow waters, usually slightly exposed even at high tide.

<p id=21052><form>&dagger;ambak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> go, <tr>climb down</tr>. <i>Mihínay siyag ambak sa káhuy,</i> He climbed out of the tree slowly. <number>2a</number> <tr>go out</tr> of a house. <i>Bisag gabíi na, muambak gihápun ka?</i> It&apos;s already night. Don&apos;t tell me you&apos;re going out! <number>2b</number> get, bring off a vehicle. <i>Anhi ra ku dinhi ambak,</i> I&apos;m getting off here. <i>Iambak ra ang ákung dala,</i> Take my baggage off. <number>3</number> <itype>[B6]</itype> for the seam between the shoulder and the sleeve to fall below the shoulder line. <i>Ipausab nang sinínà kay miambak ang tahì sa abagahan,</i> Let them redo that dress because the shoulder seam falls below the shoulder line. <pos>a</pos> shoulder seam falling below the shoulder line. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> edge of an area that drops off. <i>Ang ambakan sa intabládu,</i> The edge of the stage.

<p id=21053><form>&dagger;ambas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[AC]</itype> for two or more persons or things to arrive at almost the same time. <i>Nag-ambas ug abut ang sulat ug ang tiligráma,</i> The letter and the telegram arrived almost at the same time.

<p id=21054><form>&dagger;ambisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> way of playing mahjong where one doesn&apos;t open as soon as he has mahjong but rather tries to parley his holdings into s.t. that gives a better return. <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[AP; b]</itype> play one&apos;s hand in this way. <i>Mumadyung na tà ku, apan wà lang kay nag-ambisiyun (nagpaambisiyun) kug syíti páris,</i> I could have gone mahjong, but I didn&apos;t because I was holding out for seven pairs. <number>2a</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> make it an <ix>ambisiyun</ix> hand. <form>-ar</form> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>AMBISIYUN</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr> <form>-adu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>ambitious</tr>. <i>Ambisiyunádu kaáyu ning batáa nga makahuman sa íyang pagtuun,</i> This child is very ambitious to finish his studies. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be, become ambitious.

<p id=21055><form>ambisyúsa</form> <xr>= <sc>AMBISYÚSU</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=21056><form>ambríla kat</form> <pos>n</pos> style of skirt with several triangular pieces flaring to the hem and narrow at the waist, roughly resembling an umbrella. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a dress in this style. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear a dress in this style.

<p id=21057><form>amimispis</form> <xr>= <sc>PISPIS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21058><form>&dagger;amin</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>admit</tr> a wrong or mistake one has done and be held responsible. <i>Kun aminun nímung tanang nabitabù, maminusminus pa ang ímung sintinsiya,</i> If you admit everything, your sentence will be reduced. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>kill</tr> (humorous). <i>Akuy muamin ánang hingusig nga irù,</i> I&apos;ll put an end to that noisy dog. <pos>a</pos> <tr>dead</tr>.

<p id=21059><form>&dagger;amping -in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. one must guard. <number>2</number> genitalia of a virgin (euphemism).

<p id=21060>&dagger;<form>amù</form> <form>maáyu pay amù náa pay duha ka dakù sa lubut</form> poor as a church mouse (lit. a monkey is better off because at least he has two centavo pieces on his buttocks).

<p id=21061><form>amurítis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lovesickness</tr> (humorous). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a4]</itype> be affected with &lsquo;amoritis&rsquo;. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lovesick</tr>.

<p id=21062><form>Ámuy<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Amoy Chinese</tr>.

<p id=21063><form>amuy-ámuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> pacify, <tr>appease</tr> one&apos;s anger. <i>Amuy-amúya (amuy-amúyig) kindi ang bátà ug maghilak,</i> Appease the child with a piece of candy when it cries. <pos>n</pos> act of appeasing, pacifying.

<p id=21064><form>amyat</form> <pos>a</pos> looking down on others and being <tr>pretentious</tr>. <i>Amyat nang bayhána. Dílì makighuyhúy nátù,</i> That woman is <tr>stuck up</tr>. She won&apos;t go around with us. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become stuck up and pretentious. <i>Lagmit ang kadátù makaamyat (makapaamyat) sa usa ka asáwa,</i> Usually wealth makes a wife think too highly of herself. <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> behave in a <tr>conceited</tr> and <tr>affected</tr> way.

<p id=21065><form>an</form> <xr>= <sc>ANG</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p id=21066><form>&dagger;anak</form> <pos>n</pos> <form>&mdash; sa salà, pagpakasalà</form> <tr>illegitimate child</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa pagkaulitáwu</form> a man&apos;s child before his marriage. <form>&mdash; sa pagkadalága</form> a child born to a woman before her marriage. <form>&mdash; sa Táwu</form> <tr>Jesus Christ</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa Diyus</form> <tr>Jesus Christ</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa sakramintu</form> <tr>legitimate child</tr>.

<p id=21067><form>&dagger;andir &mdash; gráwun</form> <pos>a</pos> done <tr>in secret</tr>. <i>Andir-gráwun ang mga kalihúkan sa mga kaáway nátù,</i> Our enemies carried out their activities in secret. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> do s.t. <tr>secretly</tr>. <form>&mdash; wit</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>underweight</tr>. <i>Andir wit kaáyu ning batáa kay níwang,</i> This child is very underweight because he is thin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become underweight.

<p id=21068><form>&dagger;ángal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> reveal a secret (slang). <i>Muángal siya sa pulis kun dì nátù bahínan,</i> He will sing to the police if we do not give him a share.

<p id=21069><form>anghuy</form> <xr>= <sc>ANHUY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21070><form>&dagger;angka</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3a</number> <itype>[A23P; b3]</itype> change one&apos;s mind, <tr>back out</tr> of an agreement. <i>Dì ku muangka. Ang sábut, sábut,</i> I will not back out. An <pb n=1144>agreement is an agreement. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make s.o. quit or change his mind. <pos>n</pos> s.t. to make one change his mind. <i>Ingun sa paangka ang ílang gipangáyù nga bugay,</i> They asked for that bride price just to get him to back out.

<p id=21071><form>&dagger;anislag -un</form> <pos>n</pos> a rooster feather coloration of shiny, light gold with streaks of dark brown.

<p id=21072><form>&dagger;ánit</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> strip of leather attached to the ends of the rubber strips of a slingshot used to cradle the stone. <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> attach the sling to the slingshot. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> shave the head bald. (&rarr;) <pos>a</pos> shaved bald.

<p id=21073><form>&dagger;ansuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> get sick from getting oneself wet after sexual intercourse. <i>Gíkang mugámit dì siya muhíkap ug túbig kay mahadluk ansúyan,</i> He doesn&apos;t go near water after sexual intercourse for fear of getting sick.

<p id=21074><form>antidit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> <tr>antedate</tr>, assign an earlier date to a document than the true date. <i>Antidítun (iantidit) lang nátù ang aplikasiyun kay ulahi na,</i> Let&apos;s put an earlier date on the application because it is too late.

<p id=21075><form>antititanus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>anti-tetanus injection</tr>.

<p id=21076><form>&dagger;antiyúhus &mdash; ug bíka</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> miss seeing s.t. too big to be overlooked (lit. wearing glasses made of potsherds).

<p id=21077><form>antrak, antraks</form> <pos>n</pos> a big boil without a head, usually growing on the breast, the nape of the neck, or at the back. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123; b5]</itype> have a big boil of this sort.

<p id=21078><form>&dagger;anyil &mdash; sa lubut</form> <pos>n</pos> a patch of blue skin found at the tip of the vertebral column of infants.

<p id=21079><form>apart&acaron;r</form> <pos>a</pos> located <tr>far</tr> from s.w. <i>Apart&acaron;r kaáyu ang ámung balay sa mirkádu,</i> Our house is very far from the market. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be, become far from s.w. <i>Apartaha (iapart&acaron;r) pagtúkud ang inyung balay sa karsáda,</i> Build your house far from the road. <form>-du</form> <xr>= <sc>APART&Acaron;R</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21080><form>&dagger;apikt&acaron;r -du(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>affected</tr> by s.t. <i>Apiktádu kaáyu ang mga ginikánan sa mga bátang magbinúang,</i> The parents are very much affected if their children misbehave. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be affected. <i>Maapiktádu ang tibuuk láwas sa bísan unsang sakit nga átung batíun,</i> The whole body is affected by any sickness one has.

<p id=21081><form>&dagger;apindiks</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> <tr>appendix</tr> of a book.

<p id=21082><form>aplikisyun</form> <xr>= <sc>APLIKASIYUN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21083><form>aprísir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>appraiser</tr>.

<p id=21084><form>apsaydawun kik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>upside-down cake</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make upside-down cake.

<p id=21085><form>aptudit</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>au courant</tr>, <tr>up-to-date</tr> on events. <i>Aptudit kaáyu ning bayhána sa mga tabì,</i> That woman is au courant when it comes to gossip. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be au courant.

<p id=21086><form>apunt&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>record</tr>, <tr>list down</tr> s.t. <i>Ang iskúrir mauy miapunt&acaron;r sa iskur sa nagbaskit,</i> The score-keeper recorded the score of the teams playing basketball. <i>Iapunt&acaron;r unya kiring ákung giútang,</i> List down the things I am getting on credit.

<p id=21087><form>arangka<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; b3]</itype> engage in a noisy <tr>quarrel</tr>. <i>Gubut kaáyug mag-arangka na ang bana ug ang íyang abubhuang asáwa,</i> All hell breaks loose when the husband and his jealous wife quarrel.

<p id=21088><form>arast&acaron;r</form> <xr>= <sc>ALAST&Acaron;R</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21089><form>*araw-áraw</form> <form>paN-</form> <pos>a</pos> for one&apos;s daily and ordinary use (slang). <i>Pang-araw-áraw níya ang ílang mutsatsa, ang íyang uyab panagsa ra níya dulgi,</i> He has his maid for ordinary, everyday intercourse, and only rarely his fiancée.

<p id=21090><form>&dagger;arbul<sub>2</sub></form> <form>&mdash; di</form> <xr>= <sc>ARBUR DI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21091><form>arbur di</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Arbor Day</tr>.

<p id=21092><form>aríba<sub>4</sub></form> shout of encouragement to a player or performer. <i>Aríba, Kutya, usa na lang ka puwint,</i> <tr>Come on</tr>, Cotia, you only need one more point.

<p id=21093><form>ar-ip si</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for the <tr>Rehabilitation Finance Corporation</tr>, now known as the <tr>Development Bank of the Philippines</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make a loan with the R.F.C.

<p id=21094><form>&dagger;árit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sexual intercourse</tr> (slang). <form>pala-</form> <pos>a</pos> having a great capacity for sexual intercourse.

<p id=21095><form>&dagger;aríya<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>5a</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for a boat to begin moving away from the wharf. <i>Miaríya na ang barku pag-abut námù sa pantalan,</i> The boat had started to move away when we arrived at the wharf. <number>6</number> <itype>[B4]</itype> start to <tr>give way</tr>, <tr>collapse</tr>. <i>Miaríya ang payag nga nadaghanan sa táwu,</i> The hut was so full of people it started to collapse.

<p id=21096><form>armunída</form> <xr>= <sc>ALMUNÍDA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21097><form>arsínik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>arsenic</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> poison with arsenic.

<p id=21098><form>arsupu</form> <pos>n</pos> word-play on <ix>arsubispu</ix> (humorous).

<p id=21099><form>asam-asam</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> dare do s.t. difficult, beyond one&apos;s capacity to do. <i>Mag-asam-asam kag pangusína nga dì gánì ka kamaung muháling?</i> Do you dare cook when you don&apos;t even know how to kindle a fire? <number>2</number> dare do s.t. one doesn&apos;t have a right to do. <i>Nag-asam-asam man siyag lingkud sa uluhan sa lamísa, dì nauláwan siya?</i> He had the nerve to sit at the head of the table. So he was put to shame.

<p id=21100><form>&dagger;asáwa asawaasáwa, uluasáwa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>common-law wife</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> be, become; have a common-law wife.

<p id=21101><form>asáyin</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>assign</tr> s.o. to a position. <i>Giasáyin ku sa paniktikag bakì,</i> I was assigned to the backwoods. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> assign s.o. work. <i>Wà kuy humwurk nga giasayin,</i> I was <pb n=1145>not assigned any homework. <form>-min</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>assignment</tr> to a job. <number>2</number> assignment to do work.

<p id=21102><form>asimbul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>assemble</tr> a contrivance, machine. <i>Asimbul na ang radiyung ákung gipalit kay dì ku maantígung muasimbul,</i> I bought an assembled radio because I don&apos;t know how to assemble one.

<p id=21103><form>asimbul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> <tr>assemble</tr> together in a place. <i>Didtu ang parid mag-asimbul sa plása,</i> The parade assembled in the plaza.

<p id=21104><form>&dagger;asinda asindíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> owner of salt beds (humorous). <form>asindíra</form> <xr>= <sc>ASINDÍRU</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=21105><form>&dagger;asiráwu &mdash; ug buhuk</form> having wiry hair.

<p id=21106><form>asirkásu</form> <xr>= <sc>ASIKÁSU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21107><form>&dagger;asist&icaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <tr>attend</tr> a function, meeting. <i>Asistiran (asistihan) ug banda ang ílang kasal,</i> There will be a band in attendance at their wedding.

<p id=21108><form>&dagger;atay</form> <number>4</number> <formx>&mdash; sa abu</formx> the whitest part of the ashes made into lye, used as medicine to treat indigestion. <number>5</number> <formx>&mdash; sa súkà</formx> the accumulated dregs of vinegar that form into a soft, slippery mass. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> for vinegar to form a soft, slippery mass. <i>Dì pa aslum ang súkà ug dì pa muatay,</i> Vinegar is not sour before it has formed a soft, slippery mass.

<p id=21109><form>atitaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)4]</itype> for a boil to come to a good, clear head. <i>Tusdíka ang buthanan sa hubag ug muatitaw na,</i> Prick the boil when it comes to a well-formed head. <pos>a</pos> having a sharply defined head.

<p id=21110><form>&dagger;atras</form> <number>4</number> <tr>stern</tr>, rear of a boat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1a</number> for a boat to back up.

<p id=21111><form>&dagger;atsa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> grade in the seventies (so called because a figure 7 looks like an axe).

<p id=21112><form>atsak</form> <xr>= <sc>ATSAY<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=21113><form>átut</form> <xr>= <sc>ÁTUD</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21114><form>awagan</form> <xr>= <sc>ULAGAN</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ÚLAG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21115><form>&dagger;awhag</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>urge</tr> to do s.t. <i>Ang awhag nga lawasnun,</i> (Sexual) urges of the body.

<p id=21116><form>ay-ar it</form> <pos>n</pos> a recently introduced variety of <tr>rice</tr>, the IR-8 miracle rice.


<p id=21117><form>báag<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>BÁLAG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21118><form>báag<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a small preparation of food for a get-together. <i>Ug dúnay báag sa inyu muadtu ku,</i> I&apos;ll go to your house when you have a little eating party. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> attend a small eating party.

<p id=21119><form>&dagger;baang, báang (&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the mouth opened to eat s.t. <i>Kagamay nga táwu apan dakug báang,</i> Such a small man, but how wide he can open his mouth to eat. <number>2</number> <tr>mouthful</tr>. <i>Usa ra ka báang sa buáya,</i> You are only one mouthful for a crocodile.

<p id=21120><form>&dagger;bàbà dakù ug &mdash;</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>talkative</tr>, <tr>noisy</tr>.

<p id=21121><form>badíday</form> <pos>n</pos> loving and tender address for little girls. <i>Gikápuy ang ákung badíday?</i> Is my little sweetie tired?

<p id=21122><form>&dagger;badigard</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> one&apos;s <tr>fiance</tr> or <tr>spouse</tr> (humorous).

<p id=21123><form>&dagger;bag</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>4</number> <formx>syuldir &mdash;</formx> <tr>shoulder bag</tr>. <form>pansing, pantsing &mdash;</form> <tr>punching bag</tr>. <form>ubirnayit &mdash;</form> <tr>overnight bag</tr>. <form>ayis &mdash;</form> <tr>ice bag</tr>. <form>pípar &mdash;</form> <tr>paper bag</tr>. <form>ham-, hand-</form> <tr>handbag</tr>.

<p id=21124><form>bagnul</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dull</tr>, not sharp. <i>Ang bagnul nga kutsilyu dì limpiyu ug pinutlan,</i> A dull knife will not make a clean cut. <number>2</number> for solids to be <tr>hard</tr> and compacted, not easily crumbling. <i>Bagnul ang batu ikumparar sa anapug,</i> Stone is harder than lime. <number>3</number> for skin to be <tr>calloused</tr> and tough. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> <number>1</number> for a blade to become dull. <number>2</number> <tr>solidify</tr> or form into hard lumps. <i>Ang kabugnaw makapabagnul (makabagnul) sa túbig,</i> Cold will make water solidify. <number>2a</number> for the skin to form callouses. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lumpy</tr>, having hard lumps. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> become lumpy.

<p id=21125><form>&dagger;bagting</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> one of the three significant events in one&apos;s life for which bells are rung: baptism, marriage, death.

<p id=21126><form>&dagger;bagtuk</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>2</number> having a sour expression on the face. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6]</itype> <number>2</number> wear a heavy and sour look. <i>Dì ka giyud makasúgù niánang bayhána kay mubagtuk dáyun ang nawung,</i> You can never ask that girl to do anything because she immediately gets a nasty expression on her face.

<p id=21127><form>&dagger;bag-u</form> <number>2</number> <formx>-ng kaláyu, kandílà, túbig</formx> blessing of the New Fire, Easter Candle, and Holy Water on the night of Holy Saturday. <form>-ng kinabúhì</form> new lease on one&apos;s life after it has been spared from an accident or from a serious illness. <i>Magpasalámat ta sa Diyus sa átung bag-ung kinabúhì,</i> Let us thank God for giving us a <tr>new lease on life</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; sa kaláyu, kandílà, túbig</formx> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> perform the rite of blessing the Holy Water, New Fire and Easter Candles. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; sa kinabúhì</formx> <itype>[A12]</itype> give s.o. a new lease on life. <form>&mdash; sa útang</form> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> renew a loan. <form>kabag-úhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>modern times</tr>. <number>2</number> the younger generation.

<p id=21128><form>bagul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>poor</tr>. <i>Dì ku mutúu nga kun bagul ka sa sinugdan, bagul ka na lang sa hangtud,</i> I don&apos;t believe that if you start poor, you must always remain poor.

<p id=21129><form>bagurung</form> <xr>= <sc>BAGRUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21130><form>&dagger;bagyu &mdash; sa kinabúhì</form> <tr>misfortunes</tr> in life (literary). <i>Taliw&amacrgra; sa ímung kalípay muhúrus usáhay ang mga bagyu sa kinabúhì,</i> Into every life some rain must fall.

<p id=21131><form>&dagger;bahù paniN-</form> <number>1b</number> <formx>-ng yútà</formx> for death to be <pb n=1146>near (lit. smell of earth&mdash;humorous). <i>Nagpanimahù nang yútà ang kansirun,</i> The cancer patient already smells of the grave.

<p id=21132><form>bait</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> walk the straight and narrow path (slang). <i>Dì na siya muinum. Nagbait na siya,</i> He doesn&apos;t drink anymore. He is following the straight and narrow path.

<p id=21133><form>&dagger;bakgráwun -ir</form> <xr>= <sc>BAKGRÁWUN</sc>, <i>n3, 4, 5.</i></xr>

<p id=21134><form>bakhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>backhand slap</tr>, <tr>backhand stroke</tr> in tennis. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> strike with a <tr>backhand</tr> slap or hit with a backhand stroke. <i>Bakhánun ta ka rug magtubagtubag ka,</i> I&apos;ll slap you with the back of my hand if you talk back to me.

<p id=21135><form>&dagger;bakì -in-</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> sitting squat with the legs crossed. <number>2</number> <tr>bikini panties</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> sit on the ground with crossed legs. <number>2</number> wear bikini panties.

<p id=21136><form>bakig</form> <xr>= <sc>PAKÌ<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=21137><form>&dagger;bakrayid</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>share</tr> in what s.o. else has. <i>Mahímù bang mubakrayid kus ímung kan-un?</i> May I share your food?

<p id=21138><form>baksit</form> <pos>n</pos> back seat of a bicycle or motorcycle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> ride on the back seat.

<p id=21139><form>&dagger;balalà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>BALÁLÀ</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> fail in school. <i>Balaun (ibalà) tikaw sa klási ug dì ka magtuun,</i> I&apos;ll fail you if you don&apos;t study. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> fall to the ground with a big thud. <i>Mibalà ku sa salug nga sínaw,</i> I fell flat on the slippery floor with a thud.

<p id=21140><form>&dagger;balay &mdash; sa lamígas</form> <tr>ant hill</tr>. <form>tag-</form> call shouted upon reaching the house of a friend to announce one&apos;s presence.

<p id=21141><form>balbangáhan</form> <xr>= <sc>BALBANGÁAN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21142><form>&dagger;baldúsa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> k.o. square-shaped white <tr>cracker</tr>.

<p id=21143><form>&dagger;bali<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>7</number> <itype>[A]</itype> change goals in basketball at the second half. <pos>n</pos> exchange of goals.

<p id=21144><form>bali<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ballet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> dance the ballet.

<p id=21145><form>&dagger;báli</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; ug ígù</formx> serves [so-and-so] right. <i>Báli ug ígù ang íyang gidangátan kay matinumánun sa gustu,</i> It serves her right what happened to her because she is so headstrong.

<p id=21146><form>&dagger;bálì balìbálì</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>3</number> in basketball, bending the upper part of the body far to the back while shooting to make it difficult to block the ball. <i>Maáyu sa balìbálì si Bárun,</i> Baron is good in making shots with his body bent backward. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> shoot the ball in this way.

<p id=21147><form>&dagger;balibul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> toss s.t. about as if it were a volleyball. <i>Gibalibul sa mga bugáung ang tubul nga nag-utaw-útaw,</i> The jarbua fish are poking at the hard stools that are floating in the sea.

<p id=21148><form>balikturyan</form> <pos>n</pos> student who failed a grade (word play on <ix>balidikturyan</ix> and <ix>bálik</ix> &mdash; humorous).

<p id=21149><form>&dagger;balisbis paN-an</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> for rain to be heavy enough to flow from the eaves. <i>&lsquo;Kusug ba ang ulan?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Ígù giyung nakapamalisbisan,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Was the rain heavy?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;It was heavy enough to flow from the eaves.&rsquo;

<p id=21150><form>&dagger;balista</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> for wind or luck to change to an opposite direction. <i>Mibalista ang hángin maung nanimbang na pud sila sa píkas,</i> The wind blew in the opposite direction and so the people moved to the other side of the boat to balance it. <i>Namawì na pud si Pabling. Mibalista na tingáli ang íyang dimálas,</i> Pabling is having a winning streak. Maybe his luck is starting to change. <form>-da</form> <xr>= <sc>BALISTA</sc>, <i>v3.</i></xr>

<p id=21151><form>&dagger;balítà walay (&larr;)</form> without any knowledge of what is going on or what had happened. <i>Wà lay balítà ang bána nga naglaki ang íyang asáwa,</i> The husband has <tr>no idea</tr> that his wife is playing around.

<p id=21152><form>bálit prup</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bullet proof</tr>.

<p id=21153><form>&dagger;bálun pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give a <i>pabálun, 4a, 5.</i> <pos>n</pos> <number>4</number> the custom of throwing earth or gravel upon the coffin as soon as it is lowered into the grave as a sign of respect and also so that the soul of the dead person may not come back to haunt those he left behind. <number>4a</number> soil that is thrown on the coffin in the <ix>pabálun</ix> ceremonies. <number>5</number> send-off gift for a newly-wed couple consisting of equal contributions from both sets of parents.

<p id=21154><form>&dagger;balur</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dignified</tr>, having high prestige. <i>Ang pagmaistra balur kaáyung pangitáa,</i> Teaching is a prestigious calling. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b7]</itype> give dignity to oneself or to one&apos;s office. <i>Magpabalur giyud ang huwis sa kurti,</i> A judge should maintain his dignity in court. <form>di-</form> <pos>a</pos> carrying respect and high prestige. <i>Dibalur nga tígum. Púlus imbahadur sa mga násud ang mitambung,</i> A <tr>high-level</tr> meeting, attended by ambassadors of various nations.

<p id=21155><form>baluskad</form> <xr>= <sc>BALUSKAG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21156><form>bambu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> hit s.o. in the body with a hard blow with a thumping sound. <i>Bambuhun ta kag magtubagtubag ka,</i> I&apos;ll give you a hard blow on the body if you talk back.

<p id=21157><form>&dagger;banà pasi-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> call s.o.&apos;s attention to, <tr>warn</tr>. <i>Gipasiban-an (gipasibanáan) ku siya sa dílì pagpúnay ug kúyug adtung tawhána,</i> I warned her not to go out with that man all the time.

<p id=21158><form>&dagger;bandu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> place where a group of people united for a common purpose meet. <i>Bandu Usminya,</i> The place where the followers of Osme&ntilde;a meet.

<pb n=1147>

<p id=21159><form>&dagger;bangdaybangday</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> children&apos;s game of flicking rubber bands by turns wherein one wins a rubber band if it lands lying over the opponent&apos;s. <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[AC; b]</itype> play <ix>bangdaybangday</ix>.

<p id=21160><form>&dagger;banghag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A23; b6]</itype> cut into a conversation. <i>Dì ka mubanghag ug náay magsulti, panábì,</i> Don&apos;t join in a conversation suddenly. Ask permission. <pos>a</pos> cutting in a conversation even when one doesn&apos;t know the topic being talked about.

<p id=21161><form>&dagger;bangku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>toilet</tr> (humorous&mdash;cf. <ix>dipusitu, v 5</ix>). <i>Buysit. Humag káun, diritsus bangku!</i> Darn! As soon as I had finished eating I had to rush to the &lsquo;bank&rsquo;.

<p id=21162><form>bangkúru</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small <tr>tree</tr> of the seashore and thickets with a stinking fruit used medicinally: <bio>Morinda citrifolia</bio>.

<p id=21163><form>&dagger;banting</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> weigh s.o. down with an onerous task, impositions. <i>Lima ka klási ang gibanting sa usa ka maistru,</i> The teacher was <tr>burdened</tr> with five classes.

<p id=21164><form>&dagger;bantuk</form> <pos>n</pos> land for upland rice as opposed to paddies. <form>humay sa &mdash;</form> upland rice. <form>pulis &mdash;</form> a humorous and deprecatory allusion to a policeman who is not quite up to standard or k.o. funny-looking.

<p id=21165><form>&dagger;banwag -in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a newly-organized religious sect in Mindanao that patterns its religious practice after those of the Roman Catholic Church. <number>2</number> member of this sect. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be, become a member of the <ix>binanwágan</ix>.

<p id=21166><form>bara<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB]</itype> <tr>clog</tr> s.t. up, be <tr>clogged up</tr>. <i>May nuug nga mibara sa túbu sa hugasan,</i> A piece of cloth clogged up the drain in the sink. <i>Nabara ang isdang búhì sa ákung tutunlan,</i> The live fish stuck in my throat. <i>Magkabara ang trapiku basta magkaalas dúsi,</i> Traffic gets clogged up at about twelve o&apos;clock.

<p id=21167><form>&dagger;bára<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>4b</number> <formx>&mdash; sa Ispiritu Santu</formx> <pos>n</pos> a grievous sin originally committed by an ancestor to be paid subsequently by seven generations. <pos>v</pos> <number>2a</number> <itype>[b5]</itype> suffer from having incurred the wrath of the Holy Spirit. <i>Gibára (gibaráhan) sa Ispiritu Santu nang pamilyáha,</i> That family has incurred the wrath of the Holy Spirit.

<p id=21168><form>bards</form> <xr>= <sc>PART</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21169><form>barit</form> euphemism for <xr><sc>BARUT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21170><form>&dagger;bása</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> say the prayers for a dying person. <i>Gibasáhan ang himalatyun nga nagtingà,</i> Prayers were said for him as he breathed his last. <number>1b</number> <formx>&mdash; ug kúmiks</formx> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> for a prostitute to be so oblivious of the sex act that she can read the comics while she is being had. <i>Basáhan ka lag kúmiks ánang kapúnga, dakù na kaáyu nag bangag,</i> That prostitute will hardly feel you (lit. will read the comics on you), she has such a huge hole.

<p id=21171><form>&dagger;baskit bul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> k.o. <tr>dance</tr> characterized by movements which suggest the dribbling and shooting of a ball. <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> dance the <tr>basketball dance</tr>.

<p id=21172><form>batangginyu</form> <xr>= <sc>BATANGGINYA</sc> (male).</xr>

<p id=21173><form>&dagger;batbat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> follow, traverse along the edges or outskirts. <i>Mibatbat sila sa lapad nga humayan,</i> They walked around edges of the wide rice field. <i>Batbáta ning dalána ug muabut ka sa tubud,</i> Follow this footpath, and you will reach the spring.

<p id=21174><form>&dagger;bátì -l-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2a</number> <tr>epidemic</tr>. <i>May balatían karun sa Pásil,</i> There&apos;s an epidemic in Pasil now. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> be, become <tr>sick</tr>. <i>Nagbalatían ang inahan,</i> The mother has an illness.

<p id=21175><form>*batingting</form> <form>hugut ang &mdash;</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>HUGUT</sc>, <i>a5.</i></xr>

<p id=21176><form>&dagger;batu batubátu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>4</number> <tr>testicles</tr> (humorous slang).

<p id=21177><form>baybay<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>dance</tr> in which partners embrace each other and swing the upper part of their body sidewise in rhythm with the music. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> dance the <ix>baybay</ix>.

<p id=21178><form>bayi kababayin-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>BAYIN-AN</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> belong to the group consisting of friends or relatives of the bride.

<p id=21179><form>baylarína</form> <xr>= <sc>BAYLIRÍNA</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>BAYLI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21180><form>báyung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. dark-colored <tr>hardwood</tr>.

<p id=21181><form>&dagger;bibirun</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for a grown person to behave with childlike immaturity and dependence. <i>Unsa, nagbibirun ka pa nga magpatábang ka pa mag pasul-ub sa karsúnis?</i> Are you still a baby that you ask for help in putting on your pants?

<p id=21182><form>&dagger;bíbu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> in a card game of the bridge or whist type, the situation where the players must follow suit. <number>2</number> the card lead. <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> lead with a suit that must be followed or follow suit. <i>Bibúhun (ibíbu) giyud sa magburiskas ang íyang baráha ug dúna siyay ikabíbu,</i> The <ix>buriskas</ix> player follows suit if he can do so.

<p id=21183><form>&dagger;bigu tilyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> wearing a <tr>mustache</tr>. <i>Sa úna bigutilyu nà siya,</i> He used to have a mustache.

<p id=21184><form>&dagger;bikarbunátu &mdash; disúsa</form> <xr>= <sc>BIKARBUNÁTU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21185><form>&dagger;bilíbid</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> <tr>jail</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be put in jail, <tr>imprison</tr>. <i>Nabilíbid sa salà nga panlúgus,</i> Imprisoned for rape.

<p id=21186><form>binhurun</form> <pos>a</pos> women who are not highly esteemed, women left by their husbands, <tr>disgraced women</tr>, women of ill repute, and the like. <i>Ayawg pangasáwag binhurun,</i> Don&apos;t marry a <tr>cheap woman</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> consider a woman cheap.

<p id=21187><form>binipisya</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> concoct medicine from <pb n=1148>herbs. <i>Binipisyahun (ibinipisya) sa tambálan ang mga sagibunhun,</i> The medicine man concocts medicine from herbs.

<p id=21188><form>&dagger;binta<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> ready-made clothes that are not finely-done. <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> be cheaply and poorly made.

<p id=21189><form>bintul<sub>2</sub></form> an expression of mild disappointment or disgust. <i>Bintul, wà man diay nákù kasirhi ang pultahan,</i> <tr>My goodness!</tr> I forgot to lock the door.

<p id=21190><form>&dagger;bínug</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> <tr>quicksand</tr>.

<p id=21191><form>birianádir</form> <pos>a</pos> having adopted a <tr>haughty</tr>, <tr>stand-offish</tr> attitude (colloquial). <i>Basta iksámin birianádir siya kay dì man pakupya,</i> He is very different when it comes to exams because he doesn&apos;t let you copy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> develop a stand-offish attitude to others. <i>Nabirianádir na siya sukad muasinsu,</i> He has become quite <tr>distant</tr> since he got his promotion.

<p id=21192><form>bís<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>military base</tr>.

<p id=21193><form>&dagger;bisti</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. that is typical of a place. <i>Ang kuting ug lamuk mauy bisti sa Sugbu,</i> Bedbugs and mosquitoes are an integral part of Cebu. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> for s.t. to be typical of a place.

<p id=21194><form>bitirána</form> <xr>= <sc>BITIRÁNU</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=21195><form>&dagger;bitiránu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>3</number> <tr>widower</tr> (humorous).

<p id=21196><form>&dagger;bitúun</form> <number>6</number> <formx>&mdash; sa dágat</formx> the <tr>Blessed Virgin</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; ang panan-aw</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S3P]</itype> <tr>see stars</tr>. <i>Namitúun ákung panan-aw pagkaigù sa ákung mata,</i> I saw stars when I was hit in the eyes.

<p id=21197><form>bluprint</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>blueprint</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a blueprint of s.t.

<p id=21198><form>bradi, brádi</form> <xr>= <sc>BRAD</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr>

<p id=21199><form>&dagger;búang -in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>misfunction</tr>. <i>Nagbinúang na sad ning awtúha dà. Dílì na sad muandar,</i> This car is <tr>acting up</tr> again. It won&apos;t start.

<p id=21200><form>bugalu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bugaloo</tr> dance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> dance the bugaloo.

<p id=21201><form>&dagger;bugas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2a</number> <formx>&mdash; bugtung</formx> a small boil without a head. <pos>v</pos> 2a <itype>[a4]</itype> have a small boil without a head. <i>Gibugas bugtung ku,</i> I have a small boil without a head.

<p id=21202><form>&dagger;bugtik</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; a]</itype> for containers to stretch, <tr>bulge</tr>, and become tight from being too full. <i>Mubugtik (mabugtik) ang íyang pitáka kun tingsuwildu,</i> His wallet bulges on payday. <i>Bugtíka pagsulud ang sáku,</i> Fill the <note>add something like: sack brimful.</note>

<p id=21203><form>búgù<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>BUGUN</sc>, <i>n1, v.</i></xr>

<p id=21204><form>&dagger;bugwak</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> reclaimed area in Cebu City, so called from the spewing of mud during dredging.

<p id=21205><form>&dagger;búhat</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>4a</number> the <tr>Acts of the Apostles</tr>, one of the four Gospels.

<p id=21206><form>&dagger;búhì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; nga bakak</formx> <tr>obvious lie</tr>. <form>&mdash; ug bakak</form> <tr>obvious liar</tr>. <i>Way mupiyal sa mga táwung búhì ug bakak,</i> No one believes an obvious liar.

<p id=21207><form>búing</form> euphemism for <ix>búang</ix>, used as an endearing curse and not particularly as an insult. <i>Kabúing nímu uy! Gipahulat ku nímug maáyu,</i> You sure made me wait, you handsome S.O.B., you!

<p id=21208><form>bukádu<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>ABUKÁDU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21209><form>&dagger;bukàkà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>open</tr> s.t. up. <i>Kinsay nagbukàkà sa putus?</i> Who opened the package up? <number>4</number> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become a tattler, talking too much. <i>Nabukàkà siya tungud sa pagpanumbálay,</i> She became a gossip because she liked to go visiting.

<p id=21210><form>bulakt&acaron;y</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. scaly <tr>fish</tr> with a silvery body, 2&Prime; in diameter and 3&Prime; long, found in brackish waters of bays.

<p id=21211><form>bulasa, bulasà</form> <xr>= <sc>LAMUDLAW</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21212><form>bulis walà ma-</form> [so-and-so] did not fail to happen, just as was expected. <i>Giingnan ta kag musaka ka dinhà, mahúlug ka. Dà, wà mabulis ag ákung sulti,</i> I told you you&apos;d fall if you climbed up there. There, now you fell.

<p id=21213><form>bulitlit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a small opening wide, push the sides apart with both hands. <i>Akuy mibulitlit sa gamayng lungag sa bungbung,</i> I was the one who <tr>widened</tr> the small opening in the wall. <i>Ákung bulitlitan<note>bulitlítan ?</note> ang ímung buhuk ug wà bay kútu,</i> I&apos;ll go through your hair to see if there are any lice.

<p id=21214><form>bupalu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>buffalo</tr>.

<p id=21215><form>&dagger;búru<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <form>mangga &mdash;</form> salted green, sliced or shredded mangoes.

<p id=21216><form>burumbut</form> <xr>= <sc>ALUNDRIS<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=21217><form>búsa núba</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bossa nova</tr> song, dance. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> dance the bossa nova. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> do the music in bossa nova time.

<p id=21218><form>busting</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>show off</tr>, <tr>braggart</tr> (slang). <i>Busting kaáyu siya, pakitàkítà dáyun sa íyang bag-ung rilu,</i> He is such a <tr>show-off</tr> displaying his new wristwatch for everybody to see. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become a show-off, braggart (slang).

<p id=21219><form>butáka<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> in movie houses, the section at the back of the orchestra.

<p id=21220><form>&dagger;butang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>5a</number> <formx>butangi</formx> [<ix>b&umacracu;tangi</ix>] exclamation indicating that a taunt is so apt there is no answer possible (lit. hit him where it hurts). <i>&lsquo;Primírang tihik ug mangáyù lag sabaw nga dílì mupalit ug unud.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;B&umacracu;tangi,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;What a tightwad! He asks for gravy but won&apos;t buy the meat it&apos;s supposed to go with.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;OK, you win (I can&apos;t answer that).&rsquo;

<pb n=1149>

<p id=21221><form>&dagger;butar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>favor</tr> or give one&apos;s approval to s.o. or s.t. <i>Mubutar ku kun duktúra ímung pangasaw-un,</i> I would <tr>approve</tr> if you married a doctor. <i>Dílì sad ku makabutar ánang idíya nga muwilga ta,</i> I would not favor the idea that we go on strike.

<p id=21222><form>butikin</form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>drugstore</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a space into a small drugstore.

<p id=21223><form>butíkul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pockmarks</tr> (humorous). <number>2</number> person with pockmarks (humorous). <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having pockmarks (humorous).

<p id=21224><form>&dagger;butu paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> develop skin eruptions. <i>Namutu ang ákung líug,</i> I developed skin eruptions. <pos>n</pos> eruptions of the skin caused by tuberculosis of the skin.

<p id=21225><form>buyna<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> black <tr>beret</tr> made of felt. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> wear a beret.

<p id=21226><form>bwaybuway</form> <xr>= <sc>BURAYBÚRAY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21227><form>bwisit, bwísit</form> <xr>= <sc>BUYSIT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21228><form>&dagger;byáhi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2a</number> <formx>katapúsang &mdash;</formx> <number>2a1</number> last trip to the cemetery. <number>2a2</number> last chance to get married. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> marry at the last chance. <i>Bísag makatapúsang byáhi basta prantsit, úki,</i> Even if it is the last trip, it is all right, as long as I get a good seat. (I.e. never mind if I marry late so long as it is a good catch.)

<p id=21229><form>&dagger;byúda &mdash; aligri</form> a flirtatious widow. <i>Nagpalámì uruy ang byúda aligri,</i> Humph! The merry widow seems to be having fun. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B13]</itype> be, become a flirtatious widow.

<p id=21230><form>&dagger;dágat paN-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fishing boat</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>fishing grounds</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> be made into a fishing boat or fishing ground.

<p id=21231><form>&dagger;daghan</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> put <tr>more than enough</tr> of s.t. <i>Nadaghanan ra sa asin ang ákung linatan,</i> I put <tr>too much</tr> salt into my stew.

<p id=21232><form>Dagúhuy</form> the leader of an anti-Spanish revolt in Bohol. <form>kalíwat ni &mdash;</form> people from Bohol.

<p id=21233><form>&dagger;dagungdung</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> heavy with fruit. <number>2</number> <tr>overcast</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> <number>2</number> for the sky to be overcast. <i>Nagkadagungdung ang panahun. Muulan tingáli,</i> It is getting overcast. It will probably rain.

<p id=21234><form>&dagger;dagway</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>4</number> <xr>= <sc>BAYHUN</sc>, <i>n4.</i></xr>

<p id=21235><form>dahúluy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> for food to slide smoothly down the throat. <i>Ang landang mudahúluy lang inigtún,</i> The buri starch sweet just slides down the throat.

<p id=21236><form>dakang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>DAKUL</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> hammer s.t. down hard. <i>Dakngun ku ang mga lansang nga nanglábaw,</i> I&apos;ll <tr>hammer down</tr> the nails that are protruding. <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to rap or hammer s.t.

<p id=21237><form>&dagger;dakdak -an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <form>-an ug Sabadu</form> a face that is so flat it looks like the stone they pound their wash on on Saturdays. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125]</itype> for a face to become flat.

<p id=21238><form>dakug</form> <xr>= <sc>PAKUG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21239><form>&dagger;dalága</form> (&rarr;) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> for a widow to primp herself up. <i>Gustu na pud tingáling magminyù pag-usab ang byúda kay nagdalaga man,</i> The widow must want to get married again because she is primping herself up.

<p id=21240><form>&dagger;dalágan dagandagan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <number>1</number> for money to grow. <i>Mudagandagan ang kwarta ug inigusyu,</i> Money will grow if you invest it in business. <number>2</number> not be used up for a certain period. <i>Maáyu kay nakadagandagan ang ámung bugas hangtud sa katapúsan sa búwan,</i> It&apos;s a good thing our rice lasted until the end of the month.

<p id=21241><form>dalímasù</form> (from <ix>pásù</ix>) <pos>n</pos> an insect about 1&Prime; by &frac34;&Prime; in diameter, covered with green, kinky, hair-like growths, found on the underside of coconut leaves. They produce an itchy, burning sensation and affect fowl that consume them with extreme debility.

<p id=21242><form>dalipasù</form> (from <ix>pásù</ix>) <pos>n</pos> a k.o. skin protrusion like a <i>pasù,</i> <pos>n</pos>1, in appearance, having a clear liquid content, caused by the bite of a mite found in loose, powdery soil.

<p id=21243><form>dalipsut</form> <xr>= <sc>DALIPSÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21244><form>damagan<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> careless in doing one&apos;s work. <i>Dì giyud magkadimáu ning íyang búhat kay damagan kaáyu,</i> Her work is always a mess because she is so careless. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125]</itype> be careless in doing s.t.

<p id=21245><form>&dagger;damikà, damíkà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> sit flat on the floor, usually with the legs crossed at the ankles. <i>Gidamikaan níla ang húgaw nga salug,</i> They sat sprawled on the dirty floor.

<p id=21246><form>dámun</form> <xr>= <sc>KANÁMÙ</sc> (dialectal).</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>KAMI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21247><form>&dagger;dánag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> be unaware of what is going on round about one.<i> Nagdánag lang ang bána sa dautang líhuk sa íyang asáwa,</i> The husband is unaware of the terrible things his wife is doing.

<p id=21248><form>&dagger;danggit -in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> position in sexual intercourse where the partners both lie on their sides and the man faces the woman&apos;s back. <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> do it in this position.

<p id=21249><form>&dagger;daplak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[B3(1)6]</itype> be lying flat on the ground. <i>Giánay ang trúsu nga nagdaplak sa yútà,</i> The log that is lying flat on the ground has gotten infested with termites. <i>Nadaplak ang bátang nadugmù sa balas,</i> The child stumbled and fell flat on the sand.

<p id=21250><form>dapli, daplì</form><i> v</i> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put, set aside. <i>Mìdaplì siya sa íyang buluhatun pag-abut námù,</i> She put the things she was working on aside when we arrived. <i>Nagdaplì kug sud-an pára ninyu,</i> I set some food aside for you. <i>Nakadapli kug duha ka gatus ka písus,</i> I have put aside two hundred pesos.

<p id=21251><form>&dagger;daplin pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> put aside s.t. one is <pb n=1150>doing. <i>Mipadaplin siya sa íyang gibása ug namátì sa tabì,</i> She put aside what she was reading and listened to gossip.

<p id=21252><form>dápul bag</form> <pos>n</pos> duffel bag. <pos>v</pos> [<form>c1</form>] place in a duffel bag. <i>Dapulbága (idápul bag) ang tanang bulingun,</i> Put all the soiled clothes in a duffel bag.

<p id=21253><form>&dagger;dáru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> plowed field. <form>daruhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> animal used for plowing.

<p id=21254><form>datsun</form> <pos>n</pos> dachshund.

<p id=21255><form>&dagger;dátù<sub>3</sub></form> <form>sakit ug, sa</form> &mdash; <pos>n</pos> TB (from the notion that one who has TB should have a total rest).

<p id=21256><form>dátù<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. crudely distilled medicinal liquor of local make.

<p id=21257><form>dawa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; b6]</itype> for the blood in a dish of <form>dugùdugù</form> to curdle.

<!-- Check this entry -->

<p id=21258><form>dawungdung</form> <pos>a</pos>, <pos>v</pos><number>1, 2</number> <xr>= <sc>DAGUNGDUNG</sc>.</xr> <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>DAYUNGYUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21259><form>&dagger;dáyun -in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>3</number> continuous in one piece. <i>Dináyun ang karsúnis ug kamisadintru,</i> The shirt and the trousers are sewn together.

<p id=21260><form>dì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> word used to call pigs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> call a pig by saying <bio>dì,</i> <i>dì,</i> <i>dì</bio>. <form>dìdì<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>DÎ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21261><form>&dagger;dibisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1a</number> school division. &mdash; <form>syupirintindint</form> <pos>n</pos> Division Superintendent of Schools.

<p id=21262><form>diditi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>DDT</tr>.

<p id=21263><form>didtut</form> <xr>= <sc>DIDTU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21264><form>dík</form> <xr>= <sc>DÎ<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=21265><form>dikyam</form> <xr>= <sc>KYAMUY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21266><form>dimasyádu, dimasyáwu</form> <xr>= <sc>MASYÁDU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21267><form>&dagger;dipirinsiya -du</form>(&larr;) <pos>a</pos> defective. <i>Dipirinsiyádu siyag matris,</i> She has a defective uterus. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> develop a defect.

<p id=21268><form>diprisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> depression of atmospheric pressure. <i>May diprisyun kunu kay may bagyu,</i> They say that there&apos;s a depression because there is a storm coming.

<p id=21269><form>&dagger;diskarga</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1b</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> defecate or urinate (colloquial). <i>Mudiskarga úsà ta dinhi kay way mga táwu,</i> Let&apos;s urinate here because there is no one around.

<p id=21270><form>diskutsu</form> <xr>= <sc>BISKUTSU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21271><form>&dagger;dispatsar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>5</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> tell s.o. off, say s.t. curtly to s.o. <i>Dispatsahun ka lag ingun nga wà kay kwalipikasiyun,</i> They will just tell you curtly that you are not qualified.

<p id=21272><form>&dagger;dispatsu</form> <pos>n</pos> errand boy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> be an errand boy.

<p id=21273><form>&dagger;dispuwis</form> <number>2</number> therefore, so. <i>Miingun ka nagdamgu ka, dispuwis natúlug ka,</i> You said you were dreaming, so you must have been sleeping.

<p id=21274><form>&dagger;distansiya</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A23; a]</itype> <corr sic=given>give</corr> an opponent an advantage of a certain distance in a race. <i>Mudistansiya ka níyag lima ka dupa?</i> Will you give him an advantage of five lengths?

<p id=21275><form>distinar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>assign</tr> s.o. s.w. for a job. <i>Supirintindinti mauy nagdistinar nákù dinhis isla,</i> The superintendent assigned me to this island. <number>2</number> be <tr>destined</tr> to a certain fate. <i>Gidistinar ku sa pag-antus,</i> I was destined to suffer.

<p id=21276><form>distribyútur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>distributor</tr> of an engine.

<p id=21277><form>distrungk&acaron;r</form> <xr>= <sc>ISTRUNGK&Acaron;R</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21278><form>&dagger;distsards</form> <form>unurabul, dis-unurabul &mdash;</form> honorable, dishonorable discharge. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give an honorable, dishonorable discharge.

<p id=21279><form>dramstik</form> <pos>n</pos> ice-cream cone shaped like a drumstick.

<p id=21280><form>dridyir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dredger</tr>, for clearing out or deepening channels, harbors. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>dredge</tr> out.

<p id=21281><form>drísing</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>dress</tr> a wound or sore. <pos>n</pos> <tr>dressing</tr> for a wound.

<p id=21282><form>duak</form> <xr>= <sc>DUKÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21283><form>&dagger;duas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> <tr>rot</tr> or <tr>wear down</tr> from exposure to the elements. <i>Bísan ang dagkung batu muduas sa kadugáyan,</i> Even large rocks wear out with time.

<p id=21284><form>dugsaw</form> <xr>= <sc>DUGSAK</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21285><form>&dagger;duha</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> do s.t. with both hands. <i>Bug-at nà. Kinahanglan duhaan nímu pag-aswat,</i> It&apos;s so heavy you have to lift it with both hands.

<p id=21286><form>&dagger;dukà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[B1456]</itype> for light to <tr>flicker</tr> or to burn unsteadily. <i>Nagdukà ang lamparilya kay wà na nay gás,</i> The lamplight is flickering. It must be out of kerosene.

<p id=21287><form>&dagger;dulurúsa</form> <form>&mdash; ug nawung, panagway</form> <pos>a</pos> having a sad look on the face. <i>Dulurúsag dagway kay gibulagan sa trátu,</i> She has a sad look because her boy friend left her.

<p id=21288><form>dulyan</form> <xr>= <sc>DURYAN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21289><form>dumikà</form> <xr>= <sc>DAMIKÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21290><form>&dagger;dungug</form> <form>dunggánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>2</number> having the reputation of being a vampire (<ix>unglù</ix>). <i>Dunggánun kaáyu nang pamilyáha,</i> The people in that family are reputed to be vampires. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> get to be reputed to be a vampire.

<p id=21291><form>dyíay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> an American soldier during World War II. <number>2</number> a six-by-six lorry. <number>3</number> acronym for galvanized iron.

<p id=21292><form>dyú</form> term of address to American men (from the WW II <corr sic=appelation>appellation</corr> of American GI&apos;s). <i>Máni, dyú,</i> Give me money, Joe.

<p id=21293><form>&dagger;gabíi</form> <form>gabíing</form> <form>gabhiúna</form> exactly <tr>last night</tr>. <i>Gabíing gabhiúna mukrás ang ayruplánu,</i> The plane crashed just last night.

<p id=21294><form>gabing<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>dependent</tr> that is an encumbrance. <i>Makalakaw ku bísan ása kay wà kuy gabing,</i> I can go out anywhere because there is no one I have to stay home for.

<p id=21295><form>gábing</form> <xr>= <sc>GABLING</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=1151>

<p id=21296><form>gái</form> <ix>short for</ix> <form>tagái</form>. <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>*TÁGÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21297><form>gakàgákà</form> <xr>= <sc>BAKÀBAKÀ</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>BÁKÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21298><form>&dagger;galinggaling</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> k.o. <tr>cicada</tr> that makes noise in the late afternoon.

<p id=21299><form>gangstir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gangster</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; b6]</itype> be, become a gangster.

<p id=21300><form>&dagger;gangù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> for a small or slender object joined to s.t. else or a continuation of s.t. to break off, get detached; cause it to do so. <i>Migangù ang tiil sa lamísa,</i> The leg of the table broke off. <i>Wà siya makagangù sa sanga,</i> He was not able to break the branch off.

<p id=21301><form>garantisar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> give assurance that s.t. is as asserted. <i>Garantisaran ta kang mulampus ning batáa,</i> I can guarantee you that this boy will succeed.

<p id=21302><form>gardim</form> <xr>= <sc>GÁDIM</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21303><form>gardímit</form> <xr>= <sc>GADÍMIT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21304><form>garis</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. itchy <tr>skin disease</tr> caused by a mite, usually spreading over large areas of the body. <number>2</number> very light scratches, as one would get from brushing against s.t. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> get this skin disease. <i>Garisun giyud ka ug magsígi kag táak sa lápuk,</i> You&apos;ll get <tr>scabies</tr> if you keep wading in the mud. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; b8]</itype> be lightly scratched. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having this skin ailment.

<p id=21305><form>*gats</form> <form>may &mdash;</form> have the <tr>guts</tr> to do s.t. <i>May gats ka ug makawan tu tri kas Wayt Guld,</i> You have got to have guts to steal s.t. at the White Gold.

<p id=21306><form>gay</form> <pos>n</pos> intimate nickname among young men (colloquial). <i>Muuban ka námug panúruy, gay?</i> Won&apos;t you go out with us, buddy?

<p id=21307><form>gidlaw</form> <xr>= <sc>GINLAW</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21308><form>&dagger;gílis</form> <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for palm leaflets to separate. <i>Sa dì pa makagilis ang lubi, piligru sa mga mananap,</i> Before the leaflets of the coconut palm frond break apart, the plants are in danger of being eaten by harmful insects.

<p id=21309><form>gil iskáwut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>girl scout</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be, become a girl scout.

<p id=21310><form>giníya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>guinea fowl</tr>.

<p id=21311><form>gíwaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> start to appear or come out from behind a hiding place. <i>Migíwaw na ang adlaw sa pagmata nákù,</i> The sun had started to appear when I woke up. <i>Dì pa makagíwaw ang turuk sa pugas humay sa duha ka adlaw,</i> In two days the rice sprouts still won&apos;t have come out. <pos>n</pos> s.t. that has started to appear.

<p id=21312><form>&dagger;grába</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b5]</itype> pave with gravel.

<p id=21313><form>&dagger;grádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>5</number> degree of a fever.

<p id=21314><form>&dagger;grátis</form> <form>&mdash; it amúri</form> <xr>= <sc>GRÁTIS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21315><form>gráyin</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. dance characterized by grinding action. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do the grind.

<p id=21316><form>&dagger;gúlang</form> <form>ma-(&rarr;)</form> <number>3a</number> <formx>&mdash; sa hátag, pangáyù</formx> so cheap it is practically being given away, being asked for for nothing. <i>Kanang ímung hangyù maguwang lang sa pangáyù,</i> You&apos;re offering so little, you might as well just ask me to give it to you.

<p id=21317><form>gús</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gauze</tr>.

<p id=21318><form>gutì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>small</tr>. <i>Ang mga gutì kaáyung mga sigay maáyung isungkà,</i> The small cowries are good to play <ix>sungkà</ix> with. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become small in amount, size. <i>Mugutì (magutì) ang inyung kapital ug sigíhag útang,</i> You&apos;re going to run out of capital if you keep extending credit.

<p id=21319><form>gúwing istrit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146]</itype> <tr>go straight</tr>, follow the straight and narrow. <i>Kaniadtu gibuguybugúyan níya ang pag-iskuyla, karun naggúwing istrit na siya,</i> He used to fool around with his studies, but now he is serious. a following the straight and narrow.


<p id=21320><form>hábir sak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>knapsack</tr>.

<p id=21321><form>&dagger;hagkut &mdash; ug kamut</form> <tr>light-fingered</tr>. <i>Ayaw isayàsayà ang ímung kwarta kay hagkut ra bag kamut ang mga mutsatsa dinhi,</i> Don&apos;t leave your money around because the maids around here are light-fingered.

<p id=21322><form>hàhà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> clean s.t. in water by swishing it around. <i>Ákù nang gihàháan ang mga piníkas nga isdà,</i> I swished the split fish around in the sea to clean them.

<p id=21323><form>hákut(&rarr;)<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> for a boil to accumulate pus. <i>Mag-ugnap ang hubag nga maghakut ug nánà,</i> A boil develops a throbbing pain when it begins to accumulate pus.

<p id=21324><form>halag</form> <xr>= <sc>HALAGHAG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21325><form>halahála</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>halahala</tr>, a k.o. dance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do the halahala.

<p id=21326><form>halíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jelly</tr>, <tr>jam</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> make a fruit jelly.

<p id=21327><form>haltir</form> <pos>n</pos> women&apos;s upper garment designed like a <tr>halter</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make into this sort of garment.

<p id=21328><form>hambù</form> <xr>= <sc>HAMBUK</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21329><form>hamilsing<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>healthy</tr>, <tr>growing well</tr>. <i>Hamilsing ang mga tanum sa walug,</i> The plants in the valley are healthy. <i>Hamilsing ang bátà nga pinainum ug gátas,</i> A child who is fed with milk is healthy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be, become healthy.

<p id=21330><form>hamuy<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>HAMLUY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21331><form>hantir</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sharpshooter</tr>. <i>Hantir kaáyu siya. Makaigù ug langgam nga maglupad,</i> He is a <tr>good shot</tr>. He can fell a bird on the wing.

<p id=21332><form>hapaag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> playfully jump on s.o. <i>Natumba ming duha kay mihapaag man siya nákù nga walà ku kabantay,</i> We both fell to the ground because he jumped on me when I wasn&apos;t looking.

<pb n=1152>

<p id=21333><form>&dagger;hapnut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>2</number> for a mixture of solids and liquids to be smooth and stiff. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> be, become smooth and thick. <i>Muhapnut ang sikwáti ug ayúhun ug kusukúsu,</i> Chocolate becomes smooth and thick if it is well stirred.

<p id=21334><form>hapsak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hopsacking</tr>, a k.o. rough, loosely woven fabric used for clothing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear s.t. of hopsacking.

<p id=21335><form>háras</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>harass</tr>. <i>Pulis ang nagháras sa mga pumipilì,</i> The police harassed the voters.

<p id=21336><form>hard líbur</form> <pos>n</pos> sentence to <tr>hard labor</tr> in prison.

<p id=21337><form>&dagger;haum</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> apply aptly. <i>Pangartíyu sa bálak sa ininglis nga muhaum sa pamálak nga binisayà,</i> Techniques in writing English poetry that are applicable as well to Visayan poetry.

<p id=21338><form>háwung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a123]</itype> <tr>rekindle</tr> s.t. smouldering to produce a flame. <i>Hawnga tung káyu kay maglung-ag na ta,</i> Rekindle the fire because we are going to cook rice now. <number>2</number> encourage s.o.&apos;s burning interest or desire of s.t. <i>Ang íyang pag-apil-apil sa dráma nakahawung sa íyang tingúhà nga maartista,</i> Her parts in small plays fanned her interest in becoming an actress.

<p id=21339><form>hibul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> dress a chicken. <i>Ákung hibulan ang manuk nga ímung giíhaw,</i> I&apos;ll dress the chicken that you killed.

<p id=21340><form>hidláyin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>headlines</tr> of a newspaper. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; c1]</itype> be in the headlines of a newspaper. <i>Nahidlayin ang kamatáyun ni Kinidi,</i> President Kennedy&apos;s death was in the headlines.

<p id=21341><form>híkaw<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bracelet</tr>.

<p id=21342><form>&dagger;híkug</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>suicide</tr>.

<p id=21343><form>hinhin<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> women <tr>refined</tr> and <tr>delicate</tr> in manners (colloquial). <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> behave gently and <tr><corr sic=refinely>refinedly</corr></tr>. <i>Bágis kaáyu nang bayhána apan magpahinhin dáyun igpamisíta sa íyang trátu,</i> She&apos;s a rough sort of woman, but when her boy friend calls on her, she is ever so delicate.

<p id=21344><form>&dagger;hitak hitakhitak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> play around in the mud, jumping around in it or walking back and forth in it.

<p id=21345><form>&dagger;hitsu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[a]</itype> do s.t. to completion, to the <tr>finish</tr>. <i>Hitsúa ang usa ka búhat úsà ka magsúgud ug láing buluhatun,</i> Finish one piece of work before you start s.t. else. <i>Wà pa ku níya hitsúi ug báyad,</i> He has not paid me <tr>in full</tr>.

<p id=21346><form>&dagger;hiyá(&larr;)</form> <number>2</number> <itype>[B146]</itype> be growing, produced in abundance. <i>Barátu ang mangga karun kay naghíya pagbúnga,</i> Mangoes are cheap because they are fruiting in vast quantities.

<p id=21347><form>&dagger;hubag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2a</number> <formx>&mdash; ang pusud</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4; b6]</itype> become <tr>pregnant</tr> (humorous).

<p id=21348><form>hubashúbas</form> <pos>a</pos> money coming and going at irregular intervals. <i>Hubashúbas ning panápì sa sugarul,</i> For gamblers, money comes and goes at irregular intervals. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> for money to come and go at irregular intervals.

<p id=21349><form>&dagger;hulam</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> develop uncultivated land belonging to s.o. else and cultivate it without sharing with the owner. <i>Hulamun (hulaman) nákù ang ímung lasang ug napúlù ka túig,</i> I&apos;ll clear your forest and cultivate it for ten years without sharing.

<p id=21350><form>&dagger;hulat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>4</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> set s.t. aside to have it in readiness for an event or suitable occasion. <i>Ayawg ibaligyà! Ihulat ug maáyung prisyu!</i> Don&apos;t sell it! Keep it in readiness until you can get a good price for it.

<p id=21351><form>hulbut sínaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sexual intercourse</tr> (humorous allusion&mdash;word play on English &lsquo;All boats are in the sea now&rsquo;&mdash;lit. pull it out, it&apos;s glistening). <i>Hulbut sínaw sa buntag?</i> Doing &lsquo;it&rsquo; in the morning? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> do the <ix>hulbut sínaw</ix>.

<p id=21352><form>hulstir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>holster</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> use a <tr>holster</tr>, put in a holster.

<p id=21353><form>&dagger;hulughúlug</form> <xr>= <sc>BÙBUAY</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>BÙBÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21354><form>&dagger;hulungíhung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> be <tr>rumored</tr>. <i>Gihulungíhung nga makadawat kitag búnus,</i> There&apos;s a <tr>rumor</tr> going around that we&apos;re going to get a bonus.

<p id=21355><form>hurn&acaron;l</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>laborer</tr> who does odd, heavy manual work. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b6]</itype> do heavy, odd jobs. <i>Dì ku maghurn&acaron;l sa piyir kay bug-at kaáyu ang pangalsáhun,</i> I can&apos;t be a laborer at the pier because they make you carry terribly heavy things. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> hire s.o. to do <tr>heavy labor</tr>.

<p id=21356><form>huswà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> leave the bed undone after waking up. <i>Kining mga batáa mu rag mga úmang. Muhuswà lang sa ílang higdaánan inigmata,</i> These children are like hermit crabs. They leave their beds undone when they get up.

<p id=21357><form>hútuy<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a reddish swelling on the skin due to a burn or disease, soft with water beneath. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S3(1); b4]</itype> get this sort of swelling. <i>Mihútuy ang íyang buktun nga nayab-an sa ínit túbig,</i> She developed a big red <tr>blister</tr> on her arm when she spilled hot water on it.

<p id=21358><form>&dagger;huwis &mdash; diprimir istansiya</form> <pos>n</pos> judge in the Court of First Instance.


<p id=21359><form>&dagger;igurut</form> <number>2</number> euphemism for <ix>ignuranti</ix>.

<p id=21360><form>&dagger;ihap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> give s.o. a count to three to get going. <i>Iphan ta ka kay bunálan ta kag dì ka mulíhuk,</i> I&apos;ll count three. If you don&apos;t move, I&apos;ll whip you.

<p id=21361><form>&dagger;íhì</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> liquid excretion of some worms and <corr sic=millepedes>millipedes</corr>. <i>Ang íhì sa labud makapásù kunu,</i> <pb n=1153>They say millepede excretions burn the skin.

<p id=21362><form>*ikman</form> <form>tigúlang &mdash;</form> <pos>a</pos> a <tr>very old</tr> person.

<p id=21363><form>&dagger;ikstra bágids</form> <pos>n</pos> third party when there is a couple (humorous). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be a third party. <i>Ayawg uban kay maikstra bágids ka,</i> Don&apos;t come with us because two is a company, three is a crowd. <form>-lards</form> <pos>n</pos> extra large size.

<p id=21364><form>&dagger;ila<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>4a</number> <formx>dílì, walà &mdash;</formx> <itype>[A23]</itype> not mind, take into consideration as s.t. worth noting. <i>Trabahanti nga walà muilag ulag ínit paghuman sa taytáyan,</i> Workers that didn&apos;t mind the rain and heat in building the bridge.

<p id=21365><form>ilidyitimit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>illegitimate child</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be an illegitimate child.

<p id=21366><form>&dagger;ilígal &mdash; pusisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> illegal possession of firearms. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be booked for illegal possession.

<p id=21367><form>ilik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>elect</tr> or <tr>vote for</tr> s.o. for a position in school. <i>Nag-ilik mig mga upisyal sa ámung klási,</i> We elected our class officers.

<p id=21368><form>&dagger;imbalsamar</form> <form>imbalsamádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>embalmed</tr>.

<p id=21369><form>impirmu</form> <pos>n</pos> ill or <tr>wounded soldier</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for a soldier to be admitted to the infirmary. <i>Impirmúhun (iimpirmu) ang sundálung magdaut,</i> Sick soldiers are admitted to the infirmary.

<p id=21370><form>impiyirmu</form> <xr>= <sc>IMPIRMU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21371><form>inday<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>AMBUT</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p id=21372><form>indibag</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>in the bag</tr>, very <tr>certain</tr> that s.t. will come out as one wishes (colloquial). <i>Indibag na ang ímung kadaúgan kay gipamalit man nímu ang mga butanti,</i> Your election is in the bag because you bought lots of votes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be, become in the bag.

<p id=21373><form>inggrasadur</form> <pos>n</pos> one in charge of lubricating an engine in a ship. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; c1]</itype> work as an engine <tr>oiler</tr>.

<p id=21374><form>Ingk</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for <tr><ix>Iglisya ni Kristu</ix></tr>.

<p id=21375><form>ingkargu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>order</tr> s.t. by list. <i>Nag-ingkargu na kug mga dapat sa balay,</i> I have ordered the things we need to build the house.

<p id=21376><form>&dagger;Inglis &mdash; ispíking</form> <pos>n</pos> one who uses English in daily conversation, even at home. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become an <tr>English speaker</tr>.

<p id=21377><form>ini</form> <xr>= <sc>KINI<sub>1</sub></sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p id=21378><form>inkargu</form> <xr>= <sc>INGKARGU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21379><form>insisaryu</form> <xr>= <sc>INSINSARYU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21380><form>instraktur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>school instructor</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be, become a school instructor.

<p id=21381><form>instrumintal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>instrumental</tr> (as opposed to a vocal) musical number. <i>Instrumintal na puy ákung ipatukar,</i> I&apos;ll put on an instrumental number this time.

<p id=21382><form>&dagger;insultu insultadur</form> <pos>a</pos> given to insulting people.

<p id=21383><form>&dagger;intirnal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> give an internal medical <tr>examination</tr>. <form>&mdash; himurids</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>internal hemorrhage</tr>.

<p id=21384><form>intrabínus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>intravenous</tr> feeding or injection. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> give an <tr>intravenous injection</tr>.

<p id=21385><form>&dagger;intráda</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>6</number> the coming-in of an accompanying instrument. <i>Sayup ang ímung intráda. Nag-una ka ra sa tayming,</i> You didn&apos;t come in right. You were ahead of the beat.

<p id=21386><form>ip-is</form> <pos>n</pos> surplus navy ships used for inter-island shipping (so called from the legend <xr><sc>FS</sc></xr> painted on the sides).

<p id=21387><form>iri</form> <xr>= <sc>KIRI</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p id=21388><form>irpap</form> <pos>n</pos> hairstyle of the early Twenties where the hair was tied into a knot in the back and puffed around the ears.

<p id=21389><form>&dagger;isdà</form> <form>&mdash; sa insik</form> <tr>groupers</tr> (<ix>lapulápu</ix>), so called because Chinese are fond of buying this fish. <form>&mdash; sa mintiryu</form> k.o. large, fleshy catfish (<ix>tambangúngu</ix>) which in folk belief is said to be the body of a corpse turned into a fish by magic powers.

<p id=21390><form>ísi<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> metal bar or rod formed into a letter S, usually hooked on to a horizontal bar and used for hanging objects.

<p id=21391>iskram<sub>2</sub> <tr>scram</tr>, <tr>get out</tr> of here.

<p id=21392><form>ispiktur</form> <xr>= <sc>INSPIKTUR</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21393><form>&dagger;ispiritu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>3</number> <formx>walay &mdash;</formx> <tr>lifeless</tr>, without spirit. <i>Walay ispiritung ikasulti,</i> A person who doesn&apos;t react when one talks to him.

<p id=21394><form>&dagger;ispisyal &mdash; minsiyun</form> having <tr>especial mention</tr>, getting publicity for s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a1]</itype> get publicly mentioned. <i>Naúlaw siya nga naispisyal minsiyun ang íyang pagkaismaglir,</i> He was embarrassed to hear his name mentioned in connection with smuggling.

<p id=21395><form>isplit<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> split a class or political party. <i>Ang way pagsinabtanay mauy nakaisplit sa partídu,</i> Lack of mutual understanding split the party. <i>Isplitun (iisplit) ang klási ug dakù ra,</i> The class is split if it is too big.

<p id=21396><form>&dagger;ispunsur</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>4</number> sponsor of a wedding. <pos>v</pos> <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> be, become a <tr>wedding sponsor</tr>.

<p id=21397><form>ispur is</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for &lsquo;smooth four sides&rsquo; (S-4-S), a classification of lumber, all four surfaces of which have been planed. <pos>a</pos> beautiful girl (humorous).

<p id=21398><form>istínu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stenography</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> write in <tr>shorthand</tr>.

<p id=21399><form>istraglir</form> <pos>n</pos> an outsider who mingles with a group, one who doesn&apos;t belong to a group (humorous). <i>Nakúlang ang pagkáun sa parti kay dúnay daghang istraglir,</i> There wasn&apos;t enough food at the party because there were so many <tr>gate-crashers</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a gate-crasher, go with a group one does not belong to.

<p id=21400><form>istritkat</form> <pos>n</pos> straight cut pants. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c16]</itype> tailor trousers in the straight cut style.

<pb n=1154>

<p id=21401><form>istú is</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for &lsquo;smooth two sides&rsquo; (S-2-S), a classification of lumber, only the top and bottom surfaces of which have been planed.

<p id=21402><form>íyay</form> <pos>a</pos> asking for sympathy, affection by crying. <i>Íyay kaáyung bayhána. Gamay lang kaáyu nga sakit muhílak dáyun,</i> She whines a lot. The slightest thing and she has to burst into tears.


<p id=21403><form>&dagger;kabáyù kabayùkabáyù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>3</number> a toy-horse race which determines winners by lottery.

<p id=21404><form>&dagger;kadastral</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for lands to be surveyed for tax purposes. <i>Kadastrálun (ikadastral) ang tanang yútà sa búkid,</i> All the lands on the mountain will be surveyed for tax purposes.

<p id=21405><form>kamagung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B23]</itype> be, become <tr>dark-complexioned</tr>. <i>Nakamagung na ka sa pagkinalígù sa dágat,</i> You have become dark because you always bathe in the sea.

<p id=21406><form>kaman</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> give a <tr>military command</tr>. <i>Nikaman ug atinsiyun ang sarhintu,</i> The sergeant gave the command of attention. <pos>n</pos> military command.

<p id=21407><form>kamanir</form> <xr>= <sc>KAMANÍRU</sc> (humorous).</xr>

<p id=21408><form>kampíhì</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tiny <tr>crab</tr> of the sand with one pincer considerably larger than the other.

<p id=21409><form>kantar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> call s.t. out loud to notify people within earshot. <i>Kinsa kadtung ngálan ang ikantar dúul,</i> Whoever&apos;s name is <tr>called out</tr>, come forward. <number>2</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> for documents, letters or any official paper to state s.t. <i>Ang gikantar sa papílis mau nga akuy tag-íya sa yútà,</i> The document states that I am the owner of the land.

<p id=21410><form>kanugkug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>roar</tr> with a low, continuous rumble. <i>Mga kany&ucaron;n nga nagkanugkug pagbumbardíyu sa baybay,</i> Thundering cannons shelling the shore.

<p id=21411><form>karapkarap</form> <xr>= <sc>KURAPKURAP</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21412><form>kárat</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>carat</tr>, unit of weight of precious stones or metals. <number>2</number> <formx>may, walay &mdash;</formx> having (not having) money. <i>Gwápa untà siya apan way kárat,</i> She is beautiful but she doesn&apos;t have a cent.

<p id=21413><form>&dagger;karbun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>3</number> a black speck in a diamond, considered a flaw in the stone.

<p id=21414><form>&dagger;karta -s</form> <tr>cards</tr>, <tr>mahjong pieces</tr> (plural).

<p id=21415><form>kas-a<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> tell s.o. frankly. <i>Kas-aha (kas-ahi) ug sulti arun dì magdahum nga gastúhan siya sa íyang pag-iskuyla,</i> Tell him frankly not to count on our sending him to school because we don&apos;t have the money to do so.

<p id=21416><form>kásir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cashier</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> have, be, become a cashier.

<p id=21417><form>kasyir</form> <xr>= <sc>KÁSIR</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21418><form>kátir<sub>2</sub></form> <form>-ir(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>caterer</tr> of food and food service. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be, become a caterer.

<p id=21419><form>katlà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> cut with the tips of the scissors. <i>Katláa ang panaptun,</i> Clip the cloth with the tip of the scissors. <i>Ikatlà ang gunting,</i> Use the tip of the scissors to cut it.

<p id=21420><form>katsuy</form> <xr>= <sc>HATSUY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21421><form>kaw-ing</form> <xr>= <sc>KAB-ING</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21422><form>kidni</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>kidney ailment</tr>. <form>batu sa &mdash;</form> <tr>kidney stone</tr>. <form>sakit sa &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>KIDNI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21423><form>kighud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4]</itype> for the tide to go out. <i>Manginhas ta ug mukighud ang taúbun,</i> We will gather shells when the tide begins to ebb. <pos>n</pos> the receding of the tide.

<p id=21424><form>kimúnu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>sweat jacket</tr> used in judo or karate. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear a <ix>kimúnu</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a <ix>kimúnu</ix>.

<p id=21425><form>kiwat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b8]</itype> be hit with the tip of a slender object. <i>Ayawg ikiwatkíwat nang rúlir kay hikiwatan ta,</i> Don&apos;t wave the ruler around. We might be hit. <form>kiwatkíwat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> wave slender objects about.

<p id=21426><form>krak<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> crack company in military training. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be, become a crack company.

<p id=21427><form>krak<sub>4</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> work a handgun mechanism to make it ready for firing, usually with a clicking round. <pos>n</pos> sound of the <tr>cocking</tr> of a rifle.

<p id=21428><form>&dagger;krismas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[B146]</itype> put up Christmas decorations. <i>Krísis kaáyu ta karung tuíga. Dì lang ta magkrismas,</i> We don&apos;t have any money this year, so let&apos;s not put up any decorations.

<p id=21429><form>&dagger;Kristu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Christ</tr> in his various roles. <form>Ang -ng Diyus</form> <tr>Christ God</tr>. <form>Ang -ng Hárì</form> <tr>Christ the King</tr>. <form>-ng Hisus</form> <tr>Jesus Christ</tr>. <form>-ng manunúbus</form> <tr>Christ, the savior</tr>.

<p id=21430><form>kruwis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> take a <tr>cruise</tr> for pleasure.

<p id=21431><form>kudlungun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. marine <tr>crab</tr>, poisonous to eat, growing to 4&Prime;, having fine hair on the legs and having uneven bulges at the back.

<p id=21432><form>&dagger;kúgi kinugíhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> one&apos;s children (humorous).

<p id=21433><form>&dagger;kulasísi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> husband&apos;s paramour. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> maintain a paramour.

<p id=21434><form>kulintas</form> <xr>= <sc>KWINTAS<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=21435><form>&dagger;kulur &mdash; dikarni</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>flesh-colored</tr>.

<p id=21436><form>&dagger;kumbinsiyun kunstitusyunal &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Constitutional Convention</tr>.

<p id=21437><form>kumpay<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>KÚPAY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21438><form>&dagger;kumpisal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[AN]</itype> <tr>defecate</tr> (humorous). <form>-an(&larr;), kumpisinaryu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> <tr>toilet</tr> (humorous). <i>Túa pa sa kumpisálan,</i> She&apos;s still out back.

<p id=21439><form>kumpus pit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>compost pit</tr>.

<p id=21440><form>kunbinsyun</form> <xr>= <sc>KUMBINSIYUN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21441><form>kunsirba<sub>2</sub>, kunsirb&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>conserve</tr> s.t. <i>Ákung kunsirbahun (kunsirbarun, ikunsirb&acaron;r) <pb n=1155>ang mga karáang mga butang sa ákung mga apuhan,</i> I&apos;ll save the old things which belong to my grandparents.

<p id=21442><form>&dagger;kuntra &mdash; risíbu</form> <pos>n</pos> document entered upon to nullify a previous document. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> execute a document of this sort. <i>Ámung gikuntra risibúhan ang dukumintu sa pálit,</i> We have executed a document nullifying the sale.

<p id=21443><form>kurasunáda</form> <xr>= <sc>KURSUNÁDA</sc>.</xr>


<p id=21444><form>labanu</form> <xr>= <sc>GWAYABANU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21445><form>lagang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> a woman who is completely bald. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b]</itype> for a woman to become bald. <i>Gilagangan ang bátang punúun arun sayun pagtambal,</i> They cut all the hair off the child with scabies so that it would be easy to treat her.

<p id=21446><form>lagpat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b8]</itype> do s.t. <tr>by chance</tr>, <tr>at random</tr>. <i>Hilagpatan kug pílì ang kukakúla nga may lakináyin,</i> I <tr>happened</tr> to choose the bottle of coke that had the lucky nine prize in the cap. <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. done or said in guesswork. <i>Tubag nga palagpat básun na lag swirtihun,</i> Answer I just guessed at in the wild hope that it would come out to be right.

<p id=21447><form>&dagger;lagus sa ímung, íyang &mdash;</form> expression of disbelief. <i>Unásis sa ímung lagus nga wà gánì tuy diyuy!</i> Onassis, <tr>my foot!</tr> He doesn&apos;t have a penny!

<p id=21448><form>&dagger;lagut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <formx>walay gi-</formx> not have anything to eat. <i>Bisag way gilagut mutan-aw giyud ug sini,</i> Even when there is no money for food, she has to go to the show.

<p id=21449><form>laksit</form> <xr>= <sc>LAKSÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21450><form>&dagger;lála</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>3</number> having destructive effects on plants. <i>Lálang háyup ang kanding kay dílì tubúan ang ílang sinibsiban,</i> Goats are destructive animals because they nibble at plants in such a way that they won&apos;t grow back.

<p id=21451><form>&dagger;lamánu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[AC3]</itype> for couples to join their hands or have their hands joined in the wedding ceremony. <i>Nagkalamánu na ang gikasal sa dihang may mibábag,</i> The priest had already told the couple to take each other&apos;s hands when s.o. stopped the ceremony.

<p id=21452><form>lampak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for a bamboo tree to bend and crack but not break. <i>Lampákun (ilampak) sa hángin ang kawáyan,</i> The wind bends and cracks the bamboo tree.

<p id=21453><form>&dagger;lána</form> <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; sa hílug</formx> <pos>n</pos> consecrated oil used for the extreme unction.

<p id=21454><form>&dagger;landig</form> <number>1a</number> <formx>&mdash; sa pantalan sa himáyà</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> ask a woman for coital access for the first time (euphemism). <i>Kurdaping, makahímù bang mulandig ku sa pantalan sa himáyà?</i> Cordaping, let us enter the bower of bliss together.

<p id=21455><form>&dagger;lantáka</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> k.o. <tr>cannon</tr> used by the Spaniards.

<p id=21456><form>Lapulápu<sub>2</sub></form> the chieftain of Mactan who fought against Magellan in 1521. <form>dílà ni &mdash;</form> the Cebuano language (literary). <form>kalíwat ni &mdash;</form> Cebuanos (literary).

<p id=21457><form>largit</form> <xr>= <sc>LARGA</sc>, <i>v, 1b.</i></xr>

<p id=21458><form>law-it</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>hook</tr> s.t., pick up with a hook. <i>Nakalaw-it silag sapátus dunut,</i> They hooked an old shoe. <i>Law-íti ang sáku,</i> Pick up the sack with a hook. <number>2</number> hang s.t. on a hook, over s.t. like on a hook. <i>Gwápa ang milaw-it ug lukung sa búlak sa íyang líug,</i> A beautiful lady hung a garland around his neck. <i>Lansang ang law-íti,</i> Hang it on the nail. <pos>n</pos> <tr>hook</tr> to catch things.

<p id=21459><form>lay</form> <ix>short for</ix> <xr><sc>ALÁLAY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21460><form>libud</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. very small <tr>fish</tr> having transparent flesh and dark-grey rings around its body.

<p id=21461><form>&dagger;ligal</form> <form>&mdash; nga asáwa, bána, anak</form> <pos>a</pos> lawful wife, husband, <tr>legitimate child</tr>. <form>&mdash; nga siparasiyun</form> <tr>legal separation</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> make an agreement official. <i>Ligalun (iligal) nátù ning átung sábut,</i> We&apos;ll make our agreement official.

<p id=21462><form>&dagger;lígù</form> <form>paka- sa buláwan, pláta</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> gold-, <tr>silver-plated</tr>. <form>pinaka- sa buláwan, pláta</form> gold-, silver-plated.

<p id=21463><form>lihud</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>awl</tr>, a small slender metal hand instrument for piercing small holes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> use an awl, make into an awl.

<p id=21464><form>&dagger;likì</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> <tr>female genitalia</tr> (humorous euphemism).

<p id=21465><form>liúgat</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>UGAT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21466><form>líup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> be <tr>laid off</tr> from work. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> one who has been laid off. <number>2</number> action of <tr>laying off</tr>. <form>&dagger;liwat ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2a</number> <formx>&mdash; ni Adan</formx> men as a group. <form>&mdash; ni Íbà</form> women as a group. <form>ka-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>KALÍWAT</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p id=21467><form>&dagger;lublub</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2a</number> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> stay and <tr>live with</tr> s.o. for some time. <i>Túa na lang giyud maglublub si Lusyu sa íyang badyikdyik. Wà na lay uliúlì sa íla,</i> Lucio has finally gone to live with his woman. He doesn&apos;t bother going home any more.

<p id=21468><form>lunghan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> write s.t. in <tr>longhand</tr>, as opposed to shorthand or in typewritten form.

<p id=21469><form>&dagger;lupad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>4a</number> <formx>&mdash; ang, sa ispiritu</formx> <itype>[B246; c2]</itype> be terribly frightened. <i>Milupad (gilúpad) ang ákung ispiritu sa íyang dakung tíngug,</i> I was terribly frightened by his loud voice.

<p id=21470><form>lupug</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> weak and wobbly. <i>Lupug siya kay bag-u pang naáyu,</i> He is weak because he just recovered from an illness. <number>2</number> <tr>crippled</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become weak, crippled. <i>Nalupug siya human mahúlug,</i> He became crippled after he suffered a fall.

<pb n=1156>

<p id=21471><form>lúrù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> stare at s.o. with a sharp look. <i>Gilurúan níya ang bátà, maung mihílak,</i> He gave the child a sharp look, and it burst into tears.

<p id=21472><form>&dagger;luyu tagluyúan</form> <pos>a</pos> be related to each other in two ways through both the maternal and paternal lines. <i>Tagluyúan mi kay magsúun ang ámung isig ka inahan ug ámung isig ka amahan,</i> We are related twice through both our fathers and our mothers because our mothers are sisters and our fathers are brothers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be, become related on both the paternal and maternal sides.


<p id=21473><form>maagmaag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> talk or write without coherence. <i>Nagmaagmaag ang diskursu sa pulitiku,</i> The politician is talking incoherently.

<p id=21474><form>mádirn</form> <xr>= <sc>MÚDIRN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21475><form>magkunu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. large forest <tr>tree</tr> furnishing dark maroon wood, harder than stone, highly resistant to water, used for foundations of large buildings, ships, deadeyes, et al. <number>2</number> <tr>deadeye</tr>.

<p id=21476><form>magkut</form> <xr>= <sc>HAGKUT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21477><form>&dagger;maistru</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> be an initiator of mischief. <i>Way láing nagmaistru niíning binúang kun dì ikaw,</i> No one else could have started this mischief but you.

<p id=21478><form>&dagger;makinilya</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> use a windlass or winch to hoist s.t. <i>Nagmakinilya siya sa písì sa angkla,</i> He is winding the anchor line around the windlass.

<p id=21479><form>mámaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bogeyman</tr>. <i>Ayawg kanáug sa sílung kay náay mámaw,</i> Don&apos;t go out because there is a bogeyman.

<p id=21480><form>Mandarin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Mandarin</tr> Chinese.

<p id=21481><form>manipistu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>manifesto</tr> of passengers or cargo on a boat or plane.

<p id=21482><form>&dagger;manday</form> <number>2b</number> instead of doing what is expected. <i>Manday palitan ug sapátus, midílì núun. Minì,</i> Just when I was about to buy him a pair of shoes he didn&apos;t want any. The fool!

<p id=21483><form>&dagger;mánu manumánu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> do s.t. <tr>by hand</tr> without the aid of mechanical devices. <i>Gimanumánu (gimanumanúhan) lang námù ning pagpanghulma ug halu blak,</i> We are molding the hollow blocks by hand. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> do s.t. alone by oneself. <i>Aku ray mumanumánu sa ákung balay,</i> I&apos;ll build my house by myself.

<p id=21484><form>máping<sub>2</sub></form> <form>&mdash; upirisyun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> mop up after a battle wiping out the rest of the enemy force. <i>Nagmáping upirisyun ang Hapun sa búkid,</i> The Japanese had a mopping-up operation in the mountains. <pos>n</pos> mopping-up operation.

<p id=21485><form>&dagger;Maríya</form> <form>&mdash; agwanta</form> the personification of a woman who is resistant to heavy work, punishment, abuse. <i>Ayaw ku paalsáha ug bug-at kay dílì ku si Maríya Agwanta,</i> Don&apos;t make me lift heavy objects because I&apos;m not Maria Agwanta.

<p id=21486><form>martinis, martínis</form> <pos>n</pos> variety of <ix>bisul</ix> with purplish, compact meat.

<p id=21487><form>masusuylu</form> <pos>n</pos> rough, granular spots on the gums of a baby of several weeks. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a4]</itype> for an infant to have rough, granular spots on the gums. <i>Gimasusuylu (nagmasusuylu) ang bátà,</i> The baby has rough, granular spots on the gums. <form>masusuyluhun</form> <pos>a</pos> having this sort of problem.

<p id=21488><form>&dagger;matay</form> <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> <tr>epidemic</tr>, <tr>pestilence</tr>. <i>Gúbat, gútum, ug kamátay mauy mga katalagman nga kastígu sa Diyus,</i> War, famine, and pestilence are the calamities which God sends as punishment.

<p id=21489><form>mawmaw</form> <xr>= <sc>MÁMAW</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21490><form>&dagger;midiya</form> <form>&mdash; lútu</form> <pos>n</pos> mourning halfway with black and white clothing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> be in halfway mourning. <i>Magmidiya lútu ku human sa tulu ka búlan sa pagkamatay sa ákung amahan,</i> I&apos;ll go out of full mourning three months after my father&apos;s death.

<p id=21491><form>míni</form> <xr>= <sc>MINISKIRT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21492><form>&dagger;min-ibint</form> <note>confirm space</note><form>-ir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the boxer of the main bout. <number>2</number> the chief protagonist in a fight or quarrel (humorous).

<p id=21493><form>minimu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> minimum amount or quantity. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> do s.t. to a certain amount as the minimum. <i>Kun muminimu (makaminimu) tag hálig usa ka líbu matag adlaw dílì ta maalkansi,</i> If we could make a sale of at least one thousand pesos a day, we won&apos;t lose. <i>Sa byáhi kinahanglang iminimu ang ímung gastu bwáhan dílì ka mahutdan,</i> When you travel, keep your expenses to the minimum so you won&apos;t run out.

<p id=21494><form>miringgi<sub>2</sub></form> female genitalia of a child (humorous).

<p id=21495><form>mirku krum</form> <xr>= <sc>MIKRU KRUM</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21496><form>míya</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for the Manila International Airport.

<p id=21497><form>&dagger;múdus</form> <form>&mdash; upirandi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>modus operandi</tr>, system employed for doing s.t., esp. against the law.

<p id=21498><form>&dagger;mutung paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> be, become <tr>violent</tr> when desperate. <i>Nangmutung ang ulitáwu nga wà sugta,</i> The young man became violent because he was spurned.

<p id=21499><form>námun</form> <xr>= <sc>NÁMÙ</sc> (dialectal).</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>KAMI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21500><form>nárik</form> <pos>n</pos> relief clothing, used or second-hand clothing from the States (humorous).

<p id=21501><form>&dagger;natural</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> do s.t. in one&apos;s natural way. <i>Inatural (naturala) lang pagkanta. Ayaw <pb n=1157>ipanundug ni Prank Sinatra,</i> Just sing it your own natural way. Don&apos;t imitate Frank Sinatra.

<p id=21502><form>nayitgáwun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>nightgown</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> wear, make into a nightgown.

<p id=21503><form>&dagger;ngísi</form> <number>1a</number> <formx>nagngisi mu rag búhì</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S]</itype> <tr>grin</tr> stupidly. <i>Wang kasabut sa gisúgù maung nagngisi mu rag búhì,</i> He didn&apos;t understand the order, so he is grinning stupidly. &dagger;

<p id=21504><form>ninya buníta</form> <xr>= <sc>NINYU BUNÍTU</sc> (female).</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>NINYU</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21505><form>ninyu</form> <form>&mdash; inusintis</form> <xr>= <sc>INUSINTIS</sc>, <i>n4.</i></xr>

<p id=21506><form>nípa</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for the National Economic Protectionism Association.

<p id=21507><form>&dagger;numíru</form> <form>di-</form> <pos>a</pos> done by the number. <i>Dinumiru ang ílang pagtawag sa ílang mga binatunan,</i> They call their servants by shouting out a number.

<p id=21508><form>&dagger;nutaryu</form> <form>&mdash; publiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>notary public</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> be, become a notary public.

<p id=21509><form>&dagger;pabur</form> <form>-abli</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>favorable</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>in favor</tr>. <i>Paburabli kaáyu ku sa ímung mga plánu,</i> I&apos;m very favorable to your plans. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> be <tr>advantageous</tr> or favorable to. <i>Ug mapaburabli ang hángin sayu tang muabut sa píkas isla,</i> If the wind is favorable we&apos;ll get to the other island quickly. <number>2</number> be in favor of s.t.

<p id=21510><form>&dagger;paka-</form> <number>1a</number> added to nouns to form verbs meaning &lsquo;assert oneself, act like a [noun]&rsquo;. <i>Kay dì ka man kirída magpakaasáwa ka,</i> You are not a paramour, so assert your rights as a wife. <i>Pagpakamagulang. Buyaga ang ímung manghud,</i> Show you&apos;re the older brother. Tell your younger brother to stop doing it.

<p id=21511><form>pakbit</form> <pos>n</pos> dish of vegetables and meat with gravy, originating with the Ilocanos. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make, have <ix>pakbit</ix>. <form>-in-</form> <xr>= <sc>PAKBIT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21512><form>&dagger;pálà<sub>1</sub></form> <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>eraser</tr>.

<p id=21513><form>pálas</form> <pos>n</pos> Palace of Justice.

<p id=21514><form>&dagger;palit (&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[C13]</itype> make a sale with a customer. <i>Dì ta magkapálit sa prisyu nga ímung gitanyag,</i> We cannot make the sale because I cannot give it to you for the price you offer.

<p id=21515><form>palsi walsi</form> <pos>a</pos> be palsy walsy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become palsy-walsy.

<p id=21516><form>&dagger;palu</form> <form>alúlung &mdash;</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) expression of derision said to s.o. whose request was denied. <i>Alúlung palu. Wà siya tugtis pagsúruy,</i> Nma, nma, nma. You weren&apos;t allowed to go out.

<p id=21517><form>&dagger;pamínaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> for a treatment or medicine to give temporary relief. <i>Ígù lang mamínaw ug kadiyut sa sakit kining ákung tambal,</i> This medicine just gives me temporary relief.

<p id=21518><form>pamugkat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> go s.w. very early in the morning. <i>Nakapamugkat kug puspuru sa tindáhan kay nahutdan mig úhas,</i> I went to the store very early in the morning because we ran out of matches.

<p id=21519><form>&dagger;pamúu</form> <form>pinamuhúan</form> <pos>n</pos> compensation for work done. <i>Daghan kag mais nga pinamuhúan,</i> You managed to get lots of corn in compensation for your labor.

<p id=21520><form>&dagger;pan</form> <form>&mdash; byína</form> k.o. <tr>bread</tr> baked in a large, rounded loaf. <form>diagwa, dilitsi, dilmundu, ilmundu, ilpuwiblu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. bread shaped like two large buns joined together. <form>&mdash; dipásas</form> <tr>raisin bread</tr>. <form>&mdash; pransis</form> <tr>French bread</tr>, a k.o. elongated hard bread.

<p id=21521><form>panghalwan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>barracuda</tr>.

<p id=21522><form>parian</form> <pos>n</pos> a small gathering of people in villages to engage in business on a small scale, gamble, take in entertainments. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> hold a <ix>parian</ix>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> attend a <ix>parian</ix>.

<p id=21523><form>pariti</form> <pos>n</pos> a law granting Americans equal rights with Filipinos in the Philippines.

<p id=21524><form>pasgaw</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. nongregarious <tr>wasp</tr> bigger than the <ix>lampínig</ix> and which gives a painful sting.

<p id=21525><form>&dagger;pásis</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[AC; b5]</itype> for two or more people to hook their little fingers as a sign that their quarrel is settled.

<p id=21526><form>&dagger;pasku</form> <form>&mdash; sa pagkatáwu</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>Nativity</tr>.

<p id=21527><form>pasyandu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> take a leisurely walk when one is supposed to be doing s.t. <i>Uy, mupasyandu giyud ku. Dì bitaw mudágan nang búhat,</i> I&apos;m going for a walk. Anyway, the work won&apos;t run away. <form>&mdash; dulur pakítà sa balur</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> walk about for want of anything better to do. <i>Human na mang iksámin, dì magpasyandu dulur magpakítà sa balur,</i> The examination is over so now I can just stroll about.

<p id=21528><form>&dagger;patr&ucaron;n midyur, maynur &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>captain</tr> of a small passenger or cargo boat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> be, become a captain of this sort.

<p id=21529><form>&dagger;pílay</form> <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> hair style with the hair parted in the middle and laid flat to the sides.

<p id=21530><form>&dagger;pildi</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>4</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> break s.t., usually of ordinary value. <i>Ayawg dulái nà kay makapildi ka, wà kay ibáyad,</i> Don&apos;t play with that because you have no money to pay for it if you break it.

<p id=21531><form>&dagger;pilit</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>2</number> for mechanisms to hold or function efficiently. <i>Pilit ug brík ang íyang awtu,</i> His car&apos;s brakes function efficiently.

<p id=21532><form>pinakbit</form> <xr>= <sc>PAKBIT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21533><form>pitrun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>patron</tr> of a benefit performance. <form><note> &mdash; ?</note>tíkit</form> <pos>n</pos> patron ticket.

<p id=21534><form>*piutpiut</form> <form>panimáhung &mdash;</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> smell unpleasant. <i>Ang mga bátang gipaningut nanimáhung <pb n=1158>piutpiut,</i> The children smell unpleasant because they are sweating.

<p id=21535><form>planting rayis</form> <pos>n</pos> aerial bombing where bombs are spaced to obtain contiguous but not overlapping burst coverage. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> bomb in this way.

<p id=21536><form>&dagger;primíru -ng buling</form> dirt on the outside of s.t. <form>&mdash; makinista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chief engineer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b6]</itype> be, become a chief engineer.

<p id=21537><form>&dagger;pugà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1b</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> put s.t. into s.t. else coupled with squeezing action. <i>Kinahanglan pug-ag asin ang paliya arun mawálà ang kapait,</i> You have to squeeze the ampalaya out with salt to get rid of the bitter taste.

<p id=21538><form>&dagger;púkaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A12; c6]</itype> drink alcohol the morning after a drinking bout to sober up. <i>Ug tubà ang makahubug sa gabíi, tubà ra puy makapúkaw,</i> If you get drunk on palm toddy, the only thing that can sober you up the next morning is toddy. <number>4</number> <itype>[A12; c6]</itype> cause the oil to come out of fermented coconut extract by pouring boiling water into it before cooking it. <i>Ang ínit túbig mauy makapúkaw sa tinang-ug nga bulalakawun,</i> Hot water makes the oil come out of the fermented coconut juice when it has become all foamy.

<p id=21539><form>&dagger;pulsu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>throb</tr>, <tr>pulsate</tr>. <i>Nagpulsu ang ákung dungandúngan sa kasakit,</i> My temple is throbbing with pain.

<p id=21540><form>pungaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>owl</tr>.

<p id=21541><form>&dagger;pungkù</form> <xr>= <sc>LINGKUD</sc>, <i>v4.</i></xr> <pos>a</pos> squat (used only in set phrases). <form>&mdash; ug ilung</form> <pos>a</pos> for a nose to be squat. <i>Ilung ray gadakù ánang putúta kay pungkù kaáyu,</i> Everything is diminutive in that midget except his squat nose. <form>&mdash; ug tútuy</form> <pos>a</pos> for breasts to be firm. <i>Pungkù ug tútuy ang babáyi basta dì pa manganak,</i> A woman&apos;s breasts are firm before she has a baby. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> for breasts to become firm.

<p id=21542><form>&dagger;puphu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2a</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> acquire, get s.t. exclusively of the sort several people would normally share. <i>Ang bugtung anak mauy nakapuphu sa pagkabutangs tigúlang,</i> The only son inherited the old man&apos;s estate.

<p id=21543><form>purbisung</form> <xr>= <sc>PRUBISUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21544><form>purmas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Host</tr>, the bread of the Eucharist.

<p id=21545><form>pusdit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> <tr>postdate</tr>. <i>Way dipusitu. Átù na lang ipusdit (pusdítun) ang tsíki,</i> There is no money in the bank so we&apos;ll just postdate the check. <form>-id</form> <pos>a</pos> post-dated.

<p id=21546><form>pusisit</form> <xr>= <sc>PURIRIT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21547><form>puspurit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>match</tr> (humorous).

<p id=21548><form>&dagger;putru</form> <pos>a</pos> a man who is a devil when it comes to women. <i>Putru kaáyu nang tawhána kay maibúgun kaáyug babáyi,</i> That man is a real devil because he easily falls for women.

<p id=21549><form>puyuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>assuming</tr> and <tr>pretentious</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become assuming and pretentious. <i>Napuyuk siyang namaistra,</i> She has started to put on<note>F1 put on airs?</note> now that she has become a teacher.


<p id=21550><form>ráking tsir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rocking chair</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, obtain a rocking chair.

<p id=21551><form>&dagger;rakrak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give s.o. a good cussing out.

<p id=21552><form>ránir</form> <pos>n</pos> one who is sent on errands. <i>Aku ang ílang ránir,</i> I am their <tr>errand boy</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a]</itype> be an errand boy.

<p id=21553><form>rapid páyir</form> <pos>a</pos> doing things <tr>rapidly</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do s.t. <tr>hurriedly</tr>, rapidly. <i>Nagrapid páyir kug panglimpyu kay mulakaw ku,</i> I&apos;m cleaning the house rapidly because I&apos;m going out.

<p id=21554><form>ríban</form> <xr>= <sc>RAYBAN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21555><form>ribili</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>reveille</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> have reveille.

<p id=21556><form>ridyistr&acaron;r</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>registrar</tr> in school. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; b6]</itype> be, become a registrar.

<p id=21557><form>rikuhir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; c1]</itype> mind idle talk. <i>Makunsumisiyun ka ug rikuhirun (irikuhir) nímu ang tanan nímung madungug bátuk nímu,</i> You&apos;ll get sick at heart if you pay attention to all the things they say against you.

<p id=21558><form>&dagger;rikúla</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>objection</tr>, <tr>complaints</tr> about s.t.

<p id=21559><form>rikulítu</form> <pos>n</pos> name of a church, run by the Recollect Fathers. <form>rikulitánu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Recollect priest</tr>. <form>-s</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>Recollect order</tr>.

<p id=21560><form>rili</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>relay race</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> have a relay race. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> relay commands, orders. <i>Wà makarili ang awutpus sa urdir,</i> The outpost did not relay the order.

<p id=21561><form>&dagger;rilu</form> <form>&mdash; dipalsu</form> <pos>n</pos> a wristwatch that gives incorrect time (from <ix>palsu, 1</ix> &mdash; humorous).

<p id=21562><form>riluhiríya</form> <corr><pos>n</pos> </corr><tr>watch-repair shop</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> establish a watch-repair shop.

<p id=21563><form>rimurímu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> try to fix s.t. with only a small knowledge of how to do it. <i>Hidakan giyud ku sa mikaniku ug dì nákù rimurimúhun ning ákung dyíp,</i> The mechanic is going to charge me too much so I&apos;ll fix my jeep myself.

<p id=21564><form>rindirp&icaron;s</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rinderpest</tr>.

<p id=21565><form>ringlit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ringlet</tr> curls of hair. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> wear ringlet curls; form the hair into ringlets.

<p id=21566><form>riprap</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>riprap</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make riprap.

<p id=21567><form>rípu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>faucet</tr>.

<p id=21568><form>ritílir</form> <pos>n</pos> retailer of rice or corn to the consumer from a government agency. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> be, become a retailer of this sort.

<p id=21569><form>&dagger;rusaryu</form> <form>&mdash; kantáda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sung rosary</tr>.

<p id=21570><form>&dagger;rúsas pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for a woman to beautify herself.

<p id=21571><form>&dagger;ruska di-</form> <pos>n</pos> attached with a screw.

<p id=21572><form>&dagger;rúyal</form> <form>&mdash; blu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>royal blue</tr> color.


<p id=21573><form>&dagger;sábak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>5</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> give s.o. on-the-spot <pb n=1159>instruction on how to do s.t. <i>Ayaw pagunauna kay sabákun tikawg dráyib,</i> Don&apos;t try to drive on your own. Wait till I show you how.

<p id=21574><form>&dagger;sabat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> for muscles to react or respond. <i>Musabat ang tiil kun tikdúlan ang túhud,</i> The foot will react if you knock the knees.

<p id=21575><form>&dagger;sab-it</form> <form>1 a</form> <form>kasab-ítag kawit ang simud</form> for the lips to be pouting (lit. one could hook a toddy container over them).

<p id=21576><form>&dagger;sábud (&rarr;)<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>3</number> <tr>rice seedlings</tr>.

<p id=21577><form>&dagger;sagang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1a</number> <tr>shield</tr>.

<p id=21578><form>sag-ang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>cook</tr> s.t. on the stove. <i>Wà ku makasag-ang ug sud-an kay way gás,</i> I have not cooked our meat and vegetables yet because there&apos;s no kerosene.

<p id=21579><form>&dagger;sakramintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> <tr>sacrament of matrimony</tr>. <number>2a</number> wife, wedded in the Roman Catholic Church. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> be wedded in the Roman Catholic Church. <i>Gihuwis úsà mi, úsà mi masakramintu,</i> We had a civil marriage before we were wedded in the church.

<p id=21580><form>&dagger;salà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1a</number> <formx>&mdash; nga ikamatay</formx> <tr>mortal sin</tr>.

<p id=21581><form>&dagger;salamà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[B1256; c6]</itype> for s.t. which is supposed to be a secret to slip out. <i>Nasamà ku kay nakalimut ku nga dì diay untà tu ipatug-an,</i> I let it out because I forgot that it was supposed to be a secret. <i>Ayawg isalamà pagsulti nang mga pulúnga ha?</i> Don&apos;t let those words slip from your mouth.

<p id=21582><form>salamagan</form> <xr>= <sc>SALUMAGAN</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21583><form>salig-ang</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hips</tr>. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> of s.o. having big hips. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> get to have big hips.

<p id=21584><form>&dagger;sálud</form> <form>&mdash; sa gábà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S]</itype> be the recipient of <ix>gábà</ix> (a divine curse). <i>Magsalud tas gábà ug musúkul ta sa átung ginikánan,</i> We will earn heaven&apos;s wrath if we defy our parents.

<p id=21585><form>salumagan</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) exclamation of mild anger shouted at s.o.

<p id=21586><form>sambágul</form> <xr>= <sc>BÁGUL</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>BAGUL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21587><form>&dagger;sambul</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>2</number> s.t. new which causes whoever has it to feel uneasy. <i>Sambul kaáyu ang antiyúhus basta bag-u pa,</i> Eyeglasses are uncomfortable until you get used to them.

<p id=21588><form>&dagger;sampul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> take a bite or taste of s.t. (humorous). <i>Sampúlan ta nang ímung kík,</i> Are you giving away free samples of your cake?

<p id=21589><form>samsi</form> <pos>n</pos> a Chinese dish of pork cut in thin long slices with shredded cabbage and sauteed.

<p id=21590><form>&dagger;sámuk</form> <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> be <tr>bothersome</tr>. <i>Dì mu magsinamuk ug náay bisíta,</i> Don&apos;t be bothersome when there are visitors around. <form>sinamuksamuk</form> <xr>= <sc>-IN-</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21591><form>san-antun</form> short for <tr>San Antonio</tr> <tr>Saint Anthony</tr>. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> light a candle and implore St. Anthony&apos;s help in sending punishment to a person who wronged one. <i>Íyang ipasan-antun ang nangáwat sa íyang kwarta,</i> She&apos;ll implore St. Anthony&apos;s help to bring retribution on the one who stole her money.

<p id=21592><form>sánaw<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> having an uncomfortable feeling of inferiority. <i>Sánaw kaáyung iságul sa punduk sa mga dátù,</i> I feel so uncomfortable when I am thrown together with rich people.

<p id=21593><form>&dagger;sansan</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> fill the <ix>sansan</ix> stove with sawdust. <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>stove</tr> composed of a tube stuffed tightly with sawdust. A hole is left in the center and underneath into which firewood is inserted, causing the sawdust to catch fire a little at a time and burn with intense heat for a long time. <form>-an</form> <xr>= <sc>SANSAN</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p id=21594><form>santunína</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>santonin</tr>, a k.o. anthelmintic in candy form.

<p id=21595><form>&dagger;sápaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2b</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> stake a mining claim on land where s.o. has already made a stake, uprooting the stakes. <i>Duguun ang mahitabù ug sapáwan ang klím,</i> S.t. bloody will happen if s.o. stakes a claim on the same land s.o. else has staked previously.

<p id=21596><form>&dagger;sapinday</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>staggering</tr>, unsteady in footing.

<p id=21597><form>sapud<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>APLUD</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21598><form>sapunul</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>rough</tr> and not smooth to feel or swallow. <i>Sapunul kaáyu tunlun ang kan-ung mais,</i> Corn grits are very rough to swallow. <i>Sapunul kaáyu ang ímung nawung tungud sa bugas,</i> Your face is very rough with your pimples. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become rough.

<p id=21599><form>saringsáring</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b]</itype> go about in front or in full view of a group of people where one has no business being. <i>Magsaringsáring (magpasaringsáring) giyud ning batáa atubángan sa mga bisíta,</i> This child prances up and down in front of the visitors when he should stay out of the way.

<p id=21600><form>satù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>dip up</tr> or <tr>scoop</tr> out solids or liquids. <i>Satui kug usa ka luwag nga linúgaw,</i> Give me a ladleful of porridge. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>scoopful</tr>. <number>2</number> action of <tr>scooping</tr>.

<p id=21601><form>sayantipiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>scientist</tr>. <pos>a</pos> <tr>scientific</tr>.

<p id=21602><form>sayis<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>size</tr>, measurement of s.t. to be worn. <i>Unsay sayis sa ímung sapátus?</i> What size of shoes do you wear?

<p id=21603><form>sayitsíing</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> go <tr>sight-seeing</tr>. <pos>n</pos> action of sight-seeing.

<p id=21604><form>saytid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125]</itype> be <tr>in sight</tr>. <i>Nasaytid na ang átung swildu,</i> Our salary is already in sight. <i>Nagkasaytid na ang átung kadaúgan,</i> Our victory is already in sight. <pos>a</pos> be in sight.

<p id=21605><form>síb</form> <pos>a</pos> be freed in a game of hide-and-seek or saved from punishment in other kinds of <pb n=1160>games. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> set s.o. free. <pos>v</pos> <form>&mdash; bay da bil</form> <tr>saved by the bell</tr>, i.e. just barely escape getting punished. <i>Nasíb bay da bil ku sa kasábà ni Nánay kay may mga bisítang nangabut,</i> I was saved by the bell. Mother didn&apos;t get to scold me because some visitors arrived.

<p id=21606><form>&dagger;siba</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> load a firearm.

<p id=21607><form>sibag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> change a course, turn off. <i>Dì ta makasibag dihà kay náa may du nat intir,</i> We can&apos;t turn off there because there is a do-not-enter sign. <number>2</number> for the voice to go off key. <i>Musibag ka man sa túnu ug ipataas na ang tíngug,</i> You&apos;ll be off-key if you go off on a higher pitch. <number>3</number> deviate from one&apos;s topic. <i>Dì ka makasibag ug sulti sa kurti,</i> You can&apos;t get off your topic of conversation in court. <pos>a</pos> off-key, deviating from the topic.

<p id=21608><form>&dagger;sibat</form> <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. taken without permission. <i>Dílì nà íyang sinínà. Íya nang sinibat,</i> That dress isn&apos;t hers. She snuck off with it from s.w.

<p id=21609><form>síbay</form> <xr>= &dagger;<sc>*TSÍBAY</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21610><form>&dagger;sidbaks</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> sow in a <tr>seedbox</tr>. <i>Talagsa ray nabúhì sa gilúyung níyang lísu kay wà man isidbaks,</i> Only a few seeds germinated because they were not sown in the seedbox.

<p id=21611><form>sig-ang<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SALIG-ANG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21612><form>&dagger;sigarilyu</form> <form>&mdash; sa ilung</form> <xr>= <sc>INHÍLIR</sc> (humorous).</xr>

<p id=21613><form>sigarilyu<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>BUDBURUN</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>BUDBUD</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21614><form>síkan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> boxer&apos;s second. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>2</number> act as boxer&apos;s second. <i>Siyay misíkan ni Ilurdi,</i> He acted as Elorde&apos;s second.

<p id=21615><form>sikpat</form> <xr>= <sc>SIPLAT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21616><form>&dagger;síngu dì, wà ma-</form> for an offensive odor to be unbearable. <i>Dúnay patayng ilagà dinhi kay dì masíngu ang báhù,</i> There is a dead rat here because the odor is unbearable.

<p id=21617><form>&dagger;sinsilyu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>3</number> for a woman to be careless in her ways and deportment. <i>Sinsilyu kaáyung bayhána, magpahungaw lang nga maglingkud,</i> That woman is careless. She sits in such a way that one can see her private parts. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; c1]</itype> <number>3</number> for a woman to act without proper reserve.

<p id=21618><form>sintimínga</form>w <xr>= <sc>SINTIMINT&Acaron;L</sc>, <pos>v</pos> (humorous).</xr>

<p id=21619><form>sintimiruy</form> <xr>= <sc>SINTIMINT&Acaron;L</sc>, <pos>v</pos> (humorous).</xr>

<p id=21620><form>sintimiyut, sintimiyuy</form> <xr>= <sc>SINTIMINT&Acaron;L</sc> (humorous).</xr>

<p id=21621><form>sintins</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sentence</tr> in a language.

<p id=21622><form>sinturíra</form> <pos>n</pos> loop attached to the waist of trousers through which the belt is passed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> provide belt loops.

<p id=21623><form>&dagger;sinyúra</form> <form>Nwistra Sinyúra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Our Lady</tr> (the Virgin).

<p id=21624><form>sipara, siparar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> <tr>separate</tr>, part ways. <i>Ang mudyul musiparar sa rákit,</i> The module separates from the rocket ship. <i>Nagsiparar ang magtiáyun,</i> The couple parted ways. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> set s.t. aside. <i>Magsiparar kug isúd sa bangku,</i> I set s.t. aside to deposit in the bank.

<p id=21625><form>siparasiyun ligal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>legal separation</tr>, a couple with separate bed and board, but not divorced. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; a12]</itype> have a legal separation.

<p id=21626><form>&dagger;sípung(&mdash;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> corner s.t. <i>Tulu ka simána siyang nasipung sa lángub,</i> He was trapped inside the cave for three weeks. <i>Sipunga ang manuk sa kwartu,</i> Chase the chicken into the room to entrap it.

<p id=21627><form>sirù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for the eyebrows to be set close to each other at the center. <i>Sirù kaáyu ang ímung kílay,</i> Your eyebrows are very close to each other. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b6]</itype> for the eyebrows to be set close to each other at the center.

<p id=21628><form>&dagger;sirung</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>SIRÙ<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>SIRÙ<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=21629><form>síu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the C.O., acronym for the Commanding Officer in a military headquarters. <number>2</number> anyone in charge of an establishment (humorous). <i>Aku na karuy síu sa ámù kay túa sa Mindanaw si Pápa ug Máma,</i> I&apos;m the C.O. at home now because Dad and Mom are in Mindanao. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> get to be the C.O.

<p id=21630><form>siúdi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> C.O.D., acronym for cash on delivery. <number>2</number> get s.t. on credit. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> get s.t. on credit. <i>Ug wà kay kwarta karun siudía (isiúdi) na lang,</i> If you don&apos;t have any money just get it on credit. <pos>n</pos> debt.

<p id=21631><form>&dagger;síug (&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>budge</tr>, <tr>move</tr> s.t. heavy. <i>Batu nga dì masiug ug tulu ka táwu,</i> A rock that cannot be budged by three persons. <number>2</number> move one&apos;s emotions. <i>Ang lúhà sa dalága wà makasiug níya,</i> The tears of the maiden did not move him.

<p id=21632><form>siyuk, síyuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> for the eyes to <tr>squint</tr> in bright light. <i>Misíyuk (nagsiyuk) ang íyang mga mata nga nagtan-aw sa kaláyu,</i> He squinted as he looked at the flame.

<p id=21633><form>&dagger;subrikáma</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make, use as a <tr>bedspread</tr>.

<p id=21634><form>&dagger;súgat</form> <form>sugatsúgat</form> <pos>v</pos> [A; a 12] accompany a song or melody with make-do chords. <i>Sugatsugátun lang sa magduduyug ang kanta nga dì kaáyu níya sinátì,</i> The accompanist uses make-do chords if he is not very familiar with the song.

<p id=21635><form>&dagger;súgid</form> <form>sugilánun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> <tr>conversation</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2]</itype> <tr>converse</tr>. <i>Dì úsà ta mangat&umacracu;g kay magsugilánun usà ta,</i> Let&apos;s not go to sleep yet. Let&apos;s <tr>talk</tr> for a while. <i>Ayaw úsag lakaw kay makigsugilánun pa ku nímu,</i> Don&apos;t leave yet because I want to talk with you.

<p id=21636><form>sulisitar</form> <xr>= <sc>SULÍSIT</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21637><form>súlu</form> <form>&mdash; alún</form> <xr>= <sc>SÚLU</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr>

<p id=21638><form>&dagger;sul-ung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[B246]</itype> for heat or temperature to rise. <i>Ug musul-ung ang kaínit sa ímung <pb n=1162>láwas, hilantan ka,</i> If your body gets hot, you have a fever.

<p id=21639><form>&dagger;súma</form> <form>pag- (inig-) pa</form> but when it comes to a test. <i>Ingun kang kamau ka. Pagsúma (pagsumáda) pa, dì diay,</i> You said you knew how, but when it came to a test, you didn&apos;t.

<p id=21640><form>sumu<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> the first litter of piglets a sow has. <i>Sa karáang tinuhúan dì kunu maáyung buhiun sa tag-íya ang bábuyng sumu,</i> According to folk belief the owner should not raise the first litter of piglets a sow has (for they will die under his care).

<p id=21641><form>sung-ad</form> <xr>= <sc>SUN-AD</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21642><form>sungkat</form> <xr>= <sc>SUNGKAD</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21643><form>sunlut</form> <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a3]</itype> prepare <ix>sunlutan</ix> to eat.

<p id=21644><form>supukar</form> <xr>= <sc>SIPUKAR</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21645><form>&dagger;sur<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>4</number> <tr>south</tr>. <i>Lánaw Sur,</i> South Lanao.

<p id=21646><form>&dagger;surambaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>3</number> a large square or rectangular lift net operated with a scareline at night, using a lantern. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> go fishing with a surambaw.

<p id=21647><form>súrù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> start <tr>sizzling</tr> or <tr>bubbling</tr> with heat. <i>Magsurù gánì ang tumuy sa agipu kanà timailhan kunu nga may bisíta,</i> If the end of a firebrand starts to exude bubbling juice, it is a sign that visitors are coming. <pos>n</pos> the sizzling or bubbling of s.t. liquid.

<p id=21648><form>suspindir</form> <xr>= <sc>TIRANTI</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr>

<p id=21649><form>suy bins</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>soy beans</tr>.

<p id=21650><form>swáb</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>swab</tr> s.t. with medicine or to clean it. <i>Tunlang giswában,</i> A throat that was swabbed. <pos>n</pos> swab.

<p id=21651><form>swáing</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C13; c5]</itype> <number>1</number> to get tired of s.o.&apos;s unpleasantness. <i>Dílì ikaswáing nang tigulánga kay huyù,</i> You don&apos;t get tired of that old man because he is tender. <number>2</number> have a misunderstanding and hurt feelings. <i>Nagkaswáing ang mga magsúun tungud sa kabílin,</i> The brothers and sisters had a misunderstanding over the inheritance.

<p id=21652><form>&dagger;swirti</form> <pos>n</pos> <form>&mdash; dikasáhus</form> <tr>bad luck</tr> or <tr>misfortune</tr> of a sort that shouldn&apos;t normally be happening to the person. <i>Tituláda nga naminyug buguy. Mu na nay nganlag swirting dikasáhus,</i> A girl with a degree marrying a no-good. That&apos;s what they call jerked-meat luck.

<p id=21653><form>&dagger;syákuy</form> <number>2</number> grades in the eighties (so called from the rough similarity of the figure 8 to a <ix>syákuy</ix> &mdash; slang).

<p id=21654><form>syatdáwun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> shut down operations in a factory, mine, logging, and the like. <i>Musyatdáwun ang mína ug wà nay úr,</i> The mine will shut down operations when the ore is gone.

<p id=21655><form>syúgar dádi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sugar daddy</tr>, a man who keeps a woman.

<p id=21656><form>syurthan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shorthand</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> write s.t. in shorthand.

<p id=21657><form>tabagak</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish similar to the <ix>malangsi</ix> but with a broader body, esp. around the abdomen.

<p id=21658><form>tabatsuy</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>obese</tr> (humorous &mdash; from Tagalog <ix>tabà</ix> &lsquo;fat&rsquo;).

<p id=21659><form>&dagger;tagud<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> <tr>seeds</tr> of any fruit or vegetable used for seedlings.

<p id=21660><form>taháda</form> <pos>n</pos> toast made from sliced, stale <ix>pansu</ix> bread, shaped into an oval. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make <ix>taháda</ix> tidbits.

<p id=21661><form>tahíru</form> <xr>= <sc>BYATILIS</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21662><form>takdas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> jump onto s.t. <i>Mutakdas ang mga bátà sa ílang inahan inig-abut,</i> The children will jump on their mother when she comes home.

<p id=21663><form>takdul<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>TIKDUL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21664><form>takiling, takíling</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <tr>tilt</tr>, <tr>turn over</tr> on the sides. <i>Dalia ang masitíra kay nagtakiling na,</i> Hurry and fix the flower pot because it is tilting to one side. <i>Ug takilíngun (itakiling) sa pilútu ang iruplánu, mahadluk ang mga pasahíru,</i> If the pilot tilts the airplane to the side the passengers will be afraid.

<p id=21665><form>taklaba</form> <xr>= <sc>TAKABA</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21666><form>takmù<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>TAKMUL</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21667><form>taksip</form> <xr>= <sc>TAGSIP</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21668><form>&dagger;taktak</form> <form>pa- sa bukbuk</form> <xr>= <sc>PAÚYUG</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ÚYUG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21669><form>talagtag</form> <note>missing p.o.s.: a</note> be <tr>thinly spread</tr> or distributed. <i>Talagtag kaáyu ang mga balay sa búkid,</i> The houses in the mountain are very <tr>sparse</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be thinly spread or distributed. <i>Mitalagtag ang íyang buhuk nga nanglarut,</i> His hair is sparse because it is constantly falling out.

<p id=21670><form>&dagger;tali</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> just be <tr>weaned</tr> from one&apos;s mother&apos;s breast and too young to do s.t. (humorous). <i>Magminyù ka nga bag-u ka pa gáning natali?</i> You&apos;re getting married when you&apos;re just weaned?

<p id=21671><form>talíngab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make a <tr>sharp</tr> point on s.t. <pos>a</pos> <tr>sharpened</tr> to a point.

<p id=21672><form>tampikas</form> <xr>= <sc>TAMPIHAK</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21673><form>tampird</form> <pos>a</pos> radio that has been poorly repaired. <i>Dì ku makagarantíya ánang radiyúhag patíngug kay tampird,</i> I can&apos;t guarantee that radio will play because it has been repaired once and not very well.

<p id=21674><form>&dagger;tampuk<sub>1</sub></form> <form>&mdash; sa, ang luyu, likud</form><note>? F1</note> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>betray</tr>, stab s.o. in the back. <i>Kun wà ku dinhi libakun kunuku<note>spacing unclear</note> ninyu. Ngánung inyu man kung tampukun sa likud?</i> You say mean things about me when I&apos;m not around. Why do you stab me in the back?

<p id=21675><form>tamudlaw</form> <xr>= <sc>LAMUDLAW</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=1162>

<p id=21676><form>&dagger;tangantángan</form> <form>panahun pa sa &mdash;</form> in the olden times, when people still used castor oil for lamps. <i>Ang ílang gigámit nga libru panahun pa sa tangantángan,</i> The books they are using go back to the days of the horse and buggy.

<p id=21677><form>&dagger;tanggu<sub>1</sub></form> <form>&mdash; kriminal, makapíang</form> <pos>n</pos> tango dance characterized with difficult and fancy steps (humorous).

<p id=21678><form>tanggu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> slow in understanding simple things, incompetent in doing simple things (from <ix>tangà</ix> and <ix>gágu</ix>). <i>Tanggu kaáyung tawhána, dì lang gihápun kamau ug ása pirma,</i> He is an idiot, because he still doesn&apos;t know where to sign his name. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become stupid in this way.

<p id=21679><form>&dagger;tangtang</form> <form>&mdash; útang</form> <pos>n</pos> the state or condition where one pays off debts and incurs debts again. <i>Mau giyud ning pubri ta, tangtang útang,</i> This is the way it is when you are poor. You pay off one set of debts and incur another.

<p id=21680><form>&dagger;tapang</form> <pos>n</pos> successfully executed or <tr>accomplished</tr> out of sheer luck rather than due to skill or ability.

<p id=21681><form>tardi</form> <pos>a</pos> arrive <tr>late</tr> at a time set for s.t. <i>Tardi ka na kaáyu sa klási,</i> You are very late for the class. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> get to a place late.

<p id=21682><form>&dagger;tarípa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rate</tr>, schedule of charges, esp. <tr>fare</tr>. <i>Naumintu na karun ang tarípa sa mga salakyanan,</i> The fares on transportation have gone up. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>charge</tr> according to a certain schedule.

<p id=21683><form>tibak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> make a killing, make a lot of money (slang). <i>Nakatibak silag maáyu sa pag-ismágul ug sigarilyu,</i> They made a fortune in smuggling cigarettes.

<p id=21684><form>tígì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> pour all the remaining portion of liquid from a container. <i>Tigía ang patis sa butilya,</i> Drain the last drop of soy sauce from the bottle.

<p id=21685><form>tikarul<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>TINGKARUL<sub>1</sub></sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p id=21686><form>&dagger;tikì</form> <form>&mdash; nga kwanggul</form> <pos>n</pos> a stupid gecko (so called because of the fact that he hides but shouts to let the world know where he is).

<p id=21687><form>tik-ibis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <i>1</i> in baseball, <tr>take a base</tr>. <i>Mitik-ibis ang bátir,</i> The batter took a base. <number>2</number> for a teacher of long service to take an easy test to give her official eligibility. <i>Dì untà ku mailidyibul ug wà pa ku makatik-ibis,</i> I wouldn&apos;t have made eligible status if I hadn&apos;t taken the promotional examination.

<p id=21688><form>&dagger;tikwì</form> <number>3</number> euphemism for <i>wakwak<sub>1</sub></i> or <i>unglù.</i> <i>Mga tikwì nang pamilyáha,</i> That is a family of vampires.

<p id=21689><form>&dagger;timáan (&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>TIMÁAN</sc>, <i>v1,</i> <i>2.</i></xr>

<p id=21690><form>&dagger;timbri<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> <tr>booby trap</tr> or any scheme or device for catching s.t. unaware. <i>Gibutangan sa mga Múrus ug mga timbri ang agiánan padulung sa ílang kampu,</i> The Moros placed booby traps on the trail that <corr sic=lead>leads</corr> to their camp. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>2</number> place, catch with a booby <tr>trap</tr> or a similar tricking device. <i>Nakatimbri silag bábuy ihálas,</i> They trapped a wild pig.

<p id=21691><form>tingkarul<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>TIKARUL<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=21692><form>&dagger;tiniblas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> ceremony held on the Wednesday before Easter.

<p id=21693><form>&dagger;tipas</form> <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>charm</tr> that renders one bullet-proof.

<p id=21694><form>tipli</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>soprano</tr> voice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> sing the soprano voice.

<p id=21695><form>tiriring</form> <pos>a</pos> having a slight mental <tr>derangement</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B123]</itype> be slightly <tr>deranged</tr>. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> slightly deranged.

<p id=21696><form>tirminisyun pí</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>termination pay</tr>.

<p id=21697><form>trakítu, trakítuk</form> <xr>= <sc>TALAKÍTUK</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21698><form>&dagger;trangka</form> <form>trangkilya</form> <pos>n</pos> small fastening stick or bar. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> attach, make a small fastening bar or stick. <i>Nagtrangkilya kus paradur sa sud-an,</i> I am making a small bar to lock the food cabinet.

<p id=21699><form>trúnu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>3</number> <tr>toilet</tr> (humorous). <i>Naghingári lang kug lingkud sa trúnu kay gihibús,</i> I keep sitting on the <tr>throne</tr> because I have diarrhea.

<p id=21700><form>tsariti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>charity ward</tr> in a hospital. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> be placed in the charity ward.

<p id=21701><form>*tsíbay</form> <form>insik &mdash;, &mdash; wákang</form> phrase said to insult a Chinaman. <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>WÁKANG</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21702><form>tsit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chit</tr>.

<p id=21703><form>&dagger;tubà</form> <form>&mdash; nga balintung</form> <pos>n</pos> tuba mixed with an adulterant that will cause one to get more drunk than normal.

<p id=21704><form>&dagger;túbù</form> <form>&mdash; sa kunhud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b7]</itype> for a thing to diminish when it should grow (humorous). <i>Sa ímung binaligyaan mutúbù sa kunhud ang ímung nigusyu,</i> The way you do business it will grow&mdash;but downwards.

<p id=21705><form>&dagger;túhud (&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> have <tr>pains</tr> in the knees. <i>Abi nákug tigúwang ray tuhurun,</i> I thought only old people had <tr>rheumatism</tr> in the knees.

<p id=21706><form>túka</form> <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s part in doing s.t., one&apos;s <tr>turn</tr> to do. <i>Ímu na rung túka sa panghúgas,</i> It&apos;s your turn to do the dishes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> for one&apos;s turn to come to him. <i>Dì makabalíbad ang táwu ug mutúka na níya ang kagul-ánan,</i> When it is a man&apos;s turn to have sorrows he cannot refuse. <form>tukatúka</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; abc]</itype> do s.t. by turns. <i>Gitukatukáhan mig hátag,</i> We were given some in turns.

<p id=21707><form>tukistukis</form> <pos>n</pos> illegal <tr>cockfight</tr> on a small scale (slang). <i>Dúnay tukistukis sa ílang baryu káda adlaw,</i> There is a small-scale illegal cockfight in their barrio every day. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> hold a small illegal cockfight (slang).

<pb n=1163>

<p id=21708><form>&dagger;tumuy sa</form> <form>&mdash; sa dílà</form> be at the tip of one&apos;s tongue, but still one cannot quite remember it. <i>Dì giyud kung kahinumdum ug kinsa tu ka apan nía ra giyud sa tumuy sa ákung dílà,</i> I cannot quite remember who you <corr sic=were>are</corr>, but you are so familiar, it is right at the tip of my tongue.

<p id=21709><form>túpung</form> <number>3</number> <formx>dílì, wà mag- ang tudlù</formx> not everybody is the same. <i>Wà magtúpung ang tudlù sa táwu,</i> Some people are rich and some are poor. (Lit. A man&apos;s fingers are not the same.)

<p id=21710><form>tusínu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>salt pork</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make salt pork.

<p id=21711><form>&dagger;túud</form> <form><r>[<ix>plant name</ix>]</r> nga &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> the most common variety of [such-and-such a plant]. <i>Kamúting túud,</i> The common sweet potato.

<p id=21712><form>úa</form> <xr>= <sc>ÚI</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21713><form>&dagger;ubus</form> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <formx>pa- kay laylay pa</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be humble because one is at the bottom of society (<ix>laylay, a 2a</ix>). <i>Mau giyud, magpaubus kay laylay man,</i> I should be humble because I am poor. (Lit. A matured leaf is naturally found in the lower part of the plant.)

<p id=21714><form>úi</form> <pos>a</pos> acronym for <tr>over-acting</tr>: putting on airs, engaging in exaggerated actions uncalled for by the situation. <i>Úing muhílak arun tugtan,</i> Putting on a big show of crying so she would be allowed to go. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> <tr>overact</tr>. <i>Naúi siya arun himatikdan sa ulitáwu,</i> She started to put on a big act so the young man would notice her.

<p id=21715><form>úiks u</form> <pos>n</pos> OXO, a gang of Visayan toughs in Manila.

<p id=21716><form>&dagger;ulan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>3</number> diamond with some yellowish coloration. <i>Bubaratu ang brilyanting ulan,</i> A yellowish diamond brings a lower price.

<p id=21717><form>&dagger;ulípun (&mdash;)</form><note>?</note> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>enslave</tr>.

<p id=21718><form>&dagger;unà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>4</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> be oozing with dirt. <i>Hubúa nang ímung sinínà kay nag-unà,</i> Take off your dress because it is oozing with dirt.

<p id=21719><form>&dagger;únat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> do s.t. in a leisurely manner. <i>Dì ta makaúnat sa átung trabáhu kay mag-apas ta sa úras,</i> We can&apos;t dilly-dally with our work because we are rushing things.

<p id=21720><form>unir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>own</tr> s.t. <i>Maáyu nákung pagpahalúnà sa kutsi sa ákung higála, mu rag nakaunir,</i> I made myself comfortable in my friend&apos;s car as if it belonged to me. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>UNAY</sc>, <pos>v</pos>.</xr>

<p id=21721><form>urihinal</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>4</number> <formx>salà nga &mdash;</formx> <number>a</number> <tr>original sin</tr>. <number>b</number> <tr>adultery</tr>.

<p id=21722><form>&dagger;úrus</form> <form>pa-, pina-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> prepare s.t. by <corr sic="sautéeing">sautéing</corr>, usually said of preparing s.t. special (by people who don&apos;t normally prepare food that needs to be sautéed). <i>Ákù siyang paurúsan (pinaurúsan) run kay Duminggu man,</i> I&apos;ll sauté some food for him today because it is Sunday.

<p id=21723><form>&dagger;útak</form> <form>&mdash; brin</form> <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s <tr>brains</tr> as a means of thinking (humorous). <i>Gamíta ang ímung útak brin,</i> <tr>Use your head</tr>! <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> do s.t. from memory, not written. <i>Inutukun (iinutuk) sa mga ispíya ang ílang mga kúd,</i> Spies memorize their codes.

<p id=21724><form>&dagger;utut</form> <form>&mdash; ug bapur</form> <pos>n</pos> dark-complexioned.

<p id=21725><form>&dagger;uwak</form> <form>(&larr;) gibalikas</form> <pos>n</pos> a person who is such a nuisance that he keeps coming to a place he knows he is unwanted (like a crow that keeps coming back the more it is cursed). <i>Mu rag mga úwak gibalikas ning mga batáa. Dì patúu ug badlung,</i> These children are like crows you shout at. They just won&apos;t listen when you try to get rid of them.




<p id=21726><form>wan-a</form> <xr>= <sc>WALÀ NA</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>WALÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21727><form>wap-a</form> <xr>= <sc>WALÀ PA</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>WALÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21728><form>wásu</form> <xr>= <sc>HUWÁSÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p id=21729><form>wáway</form> child talk for <ix>áway</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> quarrel with (child talk).

<p id=21730><form>&dagger;wiliwili</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> <tr>lure</tr> s.o. to stay s.w. <i>Ang mga bag-ung bisyu sa ákung bag-ung naglakaw mauy magwiliwili nákù,</i> My toddler has so many cute tricks it lures me to stay home.




<p id=21731><form>yá</form> word shouted simultaneously with the execution of a karate chop, blow, or kick.

<p id=21732><form>&dagger;yamu</form> <form>&mdash; ug</form> <tr>never</tr> did, do, does. <i>Yamug midúaw ang ákung binaláyi pagkauspital nákù,</i> Never did my daughter-in-law visit me when I was hospitalized. <i>Yamug muhátag nákù,</i> He never gives me any. <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> <tr>none</tr>. <i>&lsquo;Duna kay kwarta?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Yamu,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Do you have money?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;(I have) none.&rsquo;

<p id=21733><form>yatap</form> (from <ix>patay</ix>&mdash;slang) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>kill</tr>. <i>Ang kriminal nga nagyatap sa gitulísan,</i> The criminal that killed the robbery victim.

<p id=21734><form>yíma</form> <pos>n</pos> candied yolk. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make yolk candy.



</body>
</text>
</TEI.2>
