<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN" [

<!ENTITY larr       CDATA "&#x2190;"            -- leftwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY rarr       CDATA "&#x2192;"            -- rightwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY glots      CDATA "&#x0294;"            -- glottal stop -->

<!ENTITY amacr      CDATA "&#x0101;"            -- a with macron -->
<!ENTITY imacr      CDATA "&#x012B;"            -- i with macron -->
<!ENTITY umacr      CDATA "&#x016B;"            -- u with macron -->

<!ENTITY acaron     CDATA "a&#x030c;"            -- a with caron -->
<!ENTITY icaron     CDATA "i&#x030c;"            -- i with caron -->
<!ENTITY Icaron     CDATA "I&#x030c;"            -- I with caron -->

<!ENTITY amacrgra   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0300;"    -- a with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY imacrgra   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0300;"    -- i with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY umacrgra   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0300;"    -- u with macron and grave -->

<!ENTITY amacracu   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0301;"    -- a with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY imacracu   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0301;"    -- i with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY umacracu   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0301;"    -- u with macron and acute -->

<!ENTITY amacrcir   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0302;"  -- a with macron and circumflex -->
<!ENTITY imacrcir   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0302;"  -- i with macron and circumflex -->
<!ENTITY umacrcir   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0302;"  -- u with macron and circumflex -->

<!ENTITY acaron     CDATA "a&#x030C;"           -- a with caron -->
<!ENTITY ucaron     CDATA "u&#x030C;"           -- u with caron -->
<!ENTITY icaron     CDATA "i&#x030C;"           -- i with caron -->

<!ENTITY schwa      CDATA "&#x0259;"            -- schwa (turned e) -->

<!ENTITY prime      CDATA "'"            -- prime -->
<!ENTITY Prime      CDATA "'"            -- double prime -->


]>

<!--

Step one

[X] Run pgpp.pl
[X] Fix page-breaks
[X] Fix hi tags (back to i tags)
[X] Insert p tags
[X] Run catpars.pl

Step two

[X] tag pos: n v
[ ] tag pos: a
[X] tag sense numbers (split of from b tags, look for /<b>word [0-9]</b>/ case
[X] verify 'real' italics (not samples), look for /[a-z] italics>/ case
[X] verify meaning numbers followed by sub-head-word or phrase <b>[0-9] word</b> case
[X] italics and bolds midword. E.g. A<i>ng</i>
[X] remove redundant tags near commas.
[X] handle sup tags
[X] verify starred entries (sub-entry immediately after headword)
[ ] handle [**proofer notes]
[ ] handle quotes. look for " '", etc.
[X] Renumber pages.

Step three

Iterate:
    [X] Run WCED-uptag1.pl
    [ ] Run uptag.pl
    [X] Verify output for anomalies and fix in source

Step four

[ ] Run WCED-uptag1.pl
[ ] Integrate result into WCED-body-0.3

-->

<TEI.2 lang=en>
<teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
        <titleStmt>
            <title>A Dictionary of Cebuano Visayan</title>
            <author>John U. Wolff</author>
        </titleStmt>
    </fileDesc>
    <profileDesc>
        <langUsage>
            <language id=en>English</language>
            <language id=en-US>English (United States)</language>
            <language id=ceb>Cebuano</language>
        </langUsage>
    </profileDesc>
</teiHeader>
<text>
<body>
<pb n=781>
<div1 n=P type=Letter>




<!-- Starting at page 781 -->

<p><form>pribilihiyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>privilege</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> enjoy a privilege. <i>Tagsa ray táwung makapribilihiyu ug sáma sa átung naangkun karun,</i> It's rare for a person to get privileges of the sort we are enjoying now.

<p><form>pribinir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> set s.t. <tr>aside</tr> for a purpose. <i>Nakapribinir ka nag kwarta pára sa ímung pagpanganak?</i> Have you set anything aside for your delivery? <i>Pribinihi kug dagkung púsù pára binhì,</i> Set some big ears of corn aside for me for seedlings. <form>pribinídu</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>set aside</tr>. <i>Pribinídu ning pagkaúna pára sa kasíra,</i> This food has been set aside for the boarder.

<p><form>pribyu</form> <pos>n</pos> a showing of a movie before its normal run. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> see a <tr>preview</tr> showing of a movie. <i>Mga kadagkúan sa punduk sibiku mauy mupribyu niánang salidáha,</i> The heads of civic organizations will preview that movie.

<p><form>prídi</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. popular <tr>dance</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do this dance.

<p><form>pridikar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>preach</tr> the gospel. <i>Mupridikar ang Murmun bísag lingiwlingíwan,</i> The Mormons preach even if no one listens to them.

<p><form>pridikt&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> <tr>foretell</tr>, <tr>predict</tr>. <i>Íyang hingpridiktahan ang súnug sa wà pa mahitabù,</i> He predicted the fire before it happened.

<p><form>pridyidir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>refrigerator</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> use, own a frigidaire. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put s.t. in a frigidaire. <i>Maprisirb&acaron;r ang pagkáun ug ipridyidir,</i> Food keeps in the frigidaire.

<p><form>prigunta</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>ask</tr> s.o. a question, <tr>inquire</tr>. <i>Priguntahun ka gánì, sulti sa tinúud,</i> If they question you, tell the truth. <i>Unsa pay inyung iprigunta?</i> What else will you ask? <pos>n</pos> <tr>question</tr>.

<p><form>príhu</form> <xr>= <sc>PARÍHU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>prilansir</form> <pos><corr sic=a>n</corr></pos> <tr>free-lancer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a free-lancer.

<p><form>prílim</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>preliminary exam</tr> in school. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> have a prelim. <i>Magprílim ta karun tápus sa búlan,</i> We will have our prelims at the end of this month.

<p><form>priliminári</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>preliminary</tr> games or bouts in boxing, prior to the main event.

<p><form>prilimináris</form> <xr>= <sc>PRILIMINÁRI</sc> (plural).</xr>

<p><form>príma</form> <xr>= <sc>PRÍMU</sc> (female).</xr>

<p><form>primarya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>primary grades</tr>, from grades one to four. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> study on the primary level.

<p><form>primatiyur</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>premature</tr> in birth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b4(1)]</itype> have a premature delivery, be prematurely born. <i>Iingkiyubítur ang bátang maprimatiyur,</i> They put premature babies in the incubator.

<p><form>prí mid</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pre-medical</tr> course leading to a <pb n=782>B.S. degree. <number>2</number> <tr>girl</tr> who is just a servant (humorous). <i>Mangasáwa ka lag usa ka pri mid nga prupisyunal ka man?</i> You want to marry a mere maid when you work at a profession? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a pre-medical student.

<p><form>*primir</form> short for <bx>primíru</bx> <form>&mdash; grádu</form> <tr>first grade</tr>. <form>&mdash; kumuniyun</form> first <tr>communion</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> take first communion. <form>&mdash; ministru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prime minister</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56; c1]</itype> be, become a prime minister.

<p><form>primíra</form> <pos>a</pos> first. <form>&mdash; dáma</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>First Lady</tr>, wife of the highest official. <number>2</number> a beauty princess next in rank to the reigning beauty queen. <form>&mdash; klási</form> first class. <pos>n</pos> first <tr>gear</tr> in an automotive transmission. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put into first gear. <form>&mdash; kumuniyun</form> <pos>n</pos> first <tr>communion</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> have one's first communion. <form>di-</form> <form>klási, marka</form> <pos>n</pos> of the first rank in s.t. bad, number one. <i>Palaaway siyang diprimíra marka,</i> She is number one when it comes to picking fights.

<p><form>primíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>first</tr>, <tr>firstly</tr>. <i>Daghan kug balayran: primíru, ang iskuylahan, sunud, ang kasíra,</i> I have lots of payments to make: first, the school, then, my board. <number>1a</number> <formx>&mdash; nga <r>[<ix>verb</ix>]</r></formx> the first one that did, had [so-and-so] happen to it. <i>Ang primírung makakità níya,</i> The first one to see him. <i>Ang primírung masakpan,</i> The first one caught. <number>2</number> first day of a month. <i>Prímiru sa Marsu,</i> The first of March. <form>&mdash; anyu</form> first year of college or high school. <form>&mdash; grádu</form> first grade. <form>&mdash; upisiyal</form> chief mate on a boat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56]</itype> be, become first. <i>Nagprimíru na ang Marsu ug wà pa si Makuy,</i> Here it is the first of March, and Macoy still hasn't come.[+]

<p><form>primisyas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>celebration</tr> in thanksgiving for success attained or safe recovery from a disastrous event or illness. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b]</itype> give thanks with some sort of celebration. <i>Nagprimisyas kay nakadaug siyas iliksiyun,</i> He is celebrating because he won the election. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. to celebrate a thanksgiving with. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> celebrate a thanksgiving with.

<p><form>prímu</form> <pos>n</pos> male first <tr>cousin</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> have a male cousin. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC2; a]</itype> call s.o. &lsquo;cousin&rsquo;. <form>(&rarr;)</form> vocative.

<p><form>primyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>reward</tr>, <tr>prize</tr>, or <tr>premium</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give a reward, prize, premium. <i>Muprimyu ku sa makasalb&acaron;r sa ákung anak,</i> I'll give a reward to whoever rescues my child. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b]</itype> get a reward. <i>Nakaprimyu (naprimyuhan) siyag radiyu,</i> She got a radio as her prize.

<p><form>prinátal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prenatal</tr> care. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> give prenatal care.

<p><form>prinda</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>mortgage</tr> of land whereby the mortgagee uses the land in lieu of interest. <number>2</number> mortgage or <tr>pawn</tr> in general. <form>&mdash; indúnu</form> <xr>see <sc>INDÚNU</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; pálit</form> a mortgage where the mortgagee has the option to buy the thing mortgaged. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> mortgage, pawn s.t. <i>Nakaprinda siyag yútà tungud sa madyung,</i> He mortgaged a lot to pay for his mahjong debts. <i>Iprinda ring rilu sa ahinsiya,</i> Pawn this watch to the pawnshop. <form>prindahánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pawnshop</tr>. <form>-du, -in-, pinirinda</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. pawned.

<p><form>prinsa<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>printing press</tr> or a printing establishment. <number>2</number> the <tr>press</tr>: newspapers, magazines in general or the persons who write for them. <i>Kagawásan sa prinsa,</i> <tr>Freedom of the press</tr>.

<p><form>prinsa<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> plant for pressing abaca <tr>hemp</tr> into bales. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> press abaca hemp into bales.

<p><form>prinsipal<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>principal</tr> in a school. <number>2</number> <tr>lead</tr> role in a drama. <number>3</number> instrument that plays the lead, person who plays a lead instrument. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2c1]</itype> be a school principal, player of a lead role, lead instrument in a band.

<p><form>prinsipal<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>capital</tr> invested. <i>Ígù ra kung nakabawì sa prinsipal,</i> I barely recovered the capital. <number>2</number> amount of <tr>money</tr> for a large expense. <i>Wà silay prinsipal nga ipatunghà námù,</i> They have no funds to send us to school. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain capital. <i>Magnigusyu ku kun makaprinsipal,</i> I will go into business if I can secure capital. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> provide capital. <i>Láway ray giprinsipal námù,</i> All we could capitalize on was our gift for words (lit. spit). <i>Prinsipali ug dus míl,</i> Provide two thousand pesos capital.

<p><form>prinsipi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>prince</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>preeminent</tr> person in a class or group. <i>Si Pirnandu Pu mau ang prinsipi sa pilikulang Pilipínu,</i> Fernando Poe is the prince of the Philippine film. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> be, become a prince. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get a prince (as offspring). <form>&mdash; digális</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the <tr>Prince of Wales</tr>. <number>2</number> a man who is handsomely and smartly dressed.

<p><form>prinsipyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>principle</tr>, <tr>rules</tr> of conduct adhered to by persons of right conduct.

<p><form>prinsísa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>princess</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> be a princess. <form>prinsisíta</form> <tr>n</tr> little, young princess, esp. in festivities where people chosen as royalty take part in the program. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> be made a little princess.

<p><form>prinsis kat</form> <pos>n</pos> princess cut, a one-piece, close-fitting women's <tr>garment</tr>, gored and unbroken at the waistline. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> wear, make into a princess cut dress.

<p><form>prinspus</form> <pos>n</pos> the prince post supporting a roof.

<p><form>printing pris</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>printing press</tr>.

<p><form>prínu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>brakes</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> put on the brakes. <i>Prinúhi ang dyíp ug buut kang mupahúnung,</i> Apply the brakes if you want to <pb n=783>stop. <number>2</number> <tr>restrain</tr> one's actions or movements. <i>Ayawg húnung apan prinúhi lang ang ínum,</i> Don't stop but put a limit to your drinking.

<p><form>prípab</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pre-fabricated</tr> <tr>building</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> build a pre-fabricated building. <i>Pripábun (iprípab) na ang mga bag-ung iskuylahan karun,</i> The schools are all going to be pre-fabs.

<p><form>priparar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>prepare</tr>, get s.t. <tr>ready</tr>. <i>Priparaha ang pagkáun sa bisíta,</i> Prepare the food for the visitors. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> hold a <tr>feast</tr>. <i>Magpriparar giyud mig adlaw nákù,</i> We always hold a dinner party on my birthday. <form>priparádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>prepared</tr>. <i>Priparádu na mi kaáyu pára sa byáhi,</i> We are all prepared for the trip. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> get prepared. <form>priparasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>preparation</tr>. <i>Kining duláa nagkinahanglan maáyung priparasiyun,</i> This play requires a lot of preparation. <number>2</number> preparations for a banquet. <number>3</number> in <tr>billiards</tr>, shooting the cue ball in such a manner that it knocks the target ball into the pocket and at the same time is in perfect position to hit the next target ball. <i>Hináya lang pagtíra ang utsu arun priparasiyun sa nuybi,</i> Hit the number eight ball lightly so that the cue ball will be in vantage position for hitting the number nine. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b6]</itype> <xr>= <sc>PRIPARAR</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr>

<p><form>priparatúri</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>preparatory</tr> course preparing for a higher course.

<p><form>pris</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>press</tr>. <i>Miguwà sa pris ang maung balità,</i> The news came out in the press.

<p><form>prís</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>freeze</tr>, a game of <tr>statue</tr> telling the players not to move. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> freeze s.t., get frozen. <i>Maáyu kaáyung muprís ang ámung pridyidir,</i> Our frigidaire makes ice well. <i>Wà pa maprís ang ayisdrap,</i> The popsicles haven't frozen yet.

<p><form>Pris</form>. abbreviation for <ix>prisidinti</ix>.

<p><form>prisidinsiya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>town hall</tr>.

<p><form>prisidinsiyal</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>presidential</tr>. <form>&mdash; tíbul</form> <pos>n</pos> presidential table where the honored guests are seated.

<p><form>prisidint</form> <xr>= <sc>PRISIDINTI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>prisidinta</form> <xr>= <sc>PRISIDINTI</sc> (female).</xr>

<p><form>prisidinti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>president</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a]</itype> be a president.

<p><form>prisidiyu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> put to hard <tr>labor</tr>, make s.o. do heavy <tr>work</tr>. <i>Makamau giyung muprisidiyu nang bayhána sa íyang mga suluguun,</i> That woman certainly knows how to make her servants do heavy work. <i>Prisidiyuhun ka giyud sa kalabúsu ug hisakpan kang mangáwat,</i> You'll be sentenced to hard labor in prison if you are caught stealing.

<p><form>prisidiyu<sub>2</sub>, prisidiyum</form> <pos>n</pos> a local chapter of the <tr>Legion of Mary</tr>.

<p><form>prisintabli</form> <pos>a</pos> suitable for presentation. <i>Dì prisintabli ning sinináa,</i> This dress is not <tr>presentable</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> be presentable.

<p><form>prisint&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>present</tr> oneself for a job or to help do s.t. <i>Dúnay miprisint&acaron;r pagkasuluguun,</i> A girl came to apply as maid. <i>Way usa ninyu nga miprisint&acaron;r paglampásu,</i> Not one of you came forward to <tr>volunteer</tr> to polish the floor. <number>2</number> present an idea or a person. <i>Iprisint&acaron;r nang ímung mga idíya sa kadaghánan,</i> Present your ideas to the public. <form>prisintáda</form> <xr>= <sc>PRISINTÁDU</sc> (female).</xr> <form>prisintádu</form> <pos>a</pos> speaking when not spoken to, offering one's services unasked. <i>Prisintádu siyang mutábang apan way nahímù,</i> He is great in volunteering his services, but what has he ever accomplished? <i>Ngánung mutubag ka mang dì ikay gipangutána? Prisintádu kaáyu ka,</i> Why do you answer when I didn't ask you? You're very forward. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become rash to offer one's services, forward in speaking.

<p><form>prisintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>precinct</tr> for election purposes. <number>2</number> a polling place. <number>3</number> police precinct. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a2]</itype> make into a polling place, police precinct.

<p><form>prísir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>freezer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put in a freezer.

<p><form>prisirb</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>preserve</tr> food in jars. <pos>n</pos> <tr>preserves</tr>.

<p><form>prisirbing dyar</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jar</tr> for preserves.

<p><form>prisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>blood pressure</tr>. <number>2</number> prison <tr>sentence</tr> handed down by a court. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> have [such-and-such] blood pressure. <i>Miprisiyun siyag mubù,</i> He had low blood pressure. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>mete</tr> out a prison sentence. <i>Kamatáyun ang prisiyun sa manlulugus,</i> The rapist was sentenced to death. <form>alta &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> high blood pressure. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> have high blood pressure.

<p><form>priska</form> <xr>= <sc>PRISKU</sc>, <i>a2, v2</i> (female).</xr> <form>litsi &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> fresh <tr>milk</tr>. <i>Mas lamì ang litsi priska kay sa linata,</i> Fresh milk tastes better than canned milk.

<p><form>priskráyib</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>prescribe</tr> medicine. <i>Mau ning tambála ang gipriskráyib sa dukt&ucaron;r,</i> This is the medicine the doctor prescribed.

<p><form>priskripsiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> doctor's <tr>prescription</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> give a prescription. <i>Gipriskripsiyunan ka ba sa dukt&ucaron;r?</i> Did the doctor give you a prescription?

<p><form>prisku</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fresh</tr>. <number>1a</number> not spoiled or stale. <number>1b</number> <tr>fresh air</tr>. <i>Prisku nga hángin,</i> Fresh air. <number>1c</number> fresh in feeling. <number>2</number> fresh in behavior. <i>Prisku nà siyang manubagtubag,</i> He answers in a fresh way. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> be, become fresh. <i>Muprisku (maprisku) ang átung památì human malígù,</i> We feel fresh and vigorous after we take a bath. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> be, become rude or ill-mannered.

<p><form>pristihiyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prestige</tr>.

<pb n=784>

<p><form>prísu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prisoner</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P; a2]</itype> put in <tr>jail</tr>. <i>Unsang saláay nakaprísu (nakapaprísu) nímu?</i> What crime did you commit that you went to jail? <i>Prisúha ang nakapatay,</i> Send the murderer to jail. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB16]</itype> <tr>confine</tr>, be confined. <i>Siyay nagprísu sa bábuy sa álad,</i> She locked the pig in the pen. <i>Nagprísu siya sa kwartu tibuuk adlaw,</i> She locked herself in her room the whole day. <i>Naprísu ang mga isdà sa bungsud,</i> The fishes got caught in the fish corral. <form>&mdash; kabalyíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> trustee in a prison. <number>2</number> person under house arrest. <form>prisuhan</form> <pos>n</pos> jail.

<p><form>prisupwistu</form> <pos>n</pos> money or goods allocated for a certain purpose. <i>Dakù ra ang prisupwistu álang sa dipartamintu sa dipinsa nasyunal,</i> The department of defense gets much too large an <tr>allocation</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>allocate</tr> money or goods for s.t. <i>Kinahanglan magprisupwistu álang sa katigulangun,</i> It is necessary to set s.t. aside for one's old age.

<p><form>prisyat</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> foul shot in basketball. <number>2</number> free shot for a photograph. <i>Ang síkan prayis dúnay prisyat gíkan sa Bínus Istudyu,</i> The second prize winner receives a free shot from Venus Studios. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make a foul shot.

<p><form>prisyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>price</tr>. <pos>a</pos> <tr>high-priced</tr>. <i>Prisyu kaáyu ang isdà karun kay nihit man,</i> Fish is high-priced today because it is scarce. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB456; c]</itype> set a price on s.t., have a price. <i>Ug muprisyug barátu palita,</i> If it is priced cheap, buy it. <i>Dì ku makaprisyu ug ubus pa niánà,</i> I can't give a lower price. <i>Mahal ra tung ímung giprisyu nákù,</i> The price you quoted me was a bit high. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b]</itype> get s.t. for a certain price. <i>Wà ku makaprisyu (maprisyuhi) ug barátu niánà,</i> I couldn't get a low price on that. <form>&mdash; píhu, píyu</form> fixed price. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for a woman to conduct herself as if she were very high class in order to make a good marriage. <i>Ug magpaprisyu, lagmit dì ka mahálin,</i> If you set a high price on yourself, no one is going to buy you.

<p><form>pritind&icaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> show s.t. off. <i>Gipritindihan ku níya sa íyang mga pundang binurdáhan,</i> She showed her embroidered pillow cases off to me. <i>Ipritind&icaron;r ang maáyu, itágù ang dautan,</i> Show off the good; hide the bad.

<p><form>pritru</form> <xr>= <sc>PRISYAT</sc>, <i>n1, v.</i></xr>

<p><form>prítu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>cook</tr> s.t. in deep fat. <i>Pritúhun (iprítu) ta ang ságing,</i> Let's cook the bananas in deep fat. <pos>n</pos> <tr>fried food</tr>. <form>-in-</form> <xr>= <sc>PRÍTU</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p><form>príwar</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pre-war</tr>, from before World War II.

<p><form>príward</form> <pos>n</pos> free <tr>ward</tr> in a hospital. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> stay, put in a free ward.

<p><form>príwur</form> <xr>= <sc>PRÍWAR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>prubar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> try s.t. out. <i>Muprubar kug hímù ánang risipíha,</i> I'll try making that recipe. <i>Ákù siyang giprubahan (giprubaran) ug musugut ba,</i> I only tried her out to see if she would give in to me. <i>Prubahan ka lang ug makaapas ka sa trabáhu,</i> I'll try you out to see if you can do the job. <i>Iprubar lang nag haum ug masúd ba,</i> Try putting it in and see if it fits. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>prove</tr> s.t. <i>Dì ku makaprubar sa ákung tyuríya,</i> I can't prove my theory.

<p><form>prubidinsiya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Divine Providence</tr>.

<p><form>prubinsiya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>province</tr>, a political division of a country. <number>2</number> area not in the big city. <i>Daghang tagaprubinsiya muiskuyla sa Sugbu,</i> Lots of people from the province come to Cebu to study. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> be a province, be made into a province. <form>-na</form> <xr>= <sc>PRUBINSIYÁNU</sc> (female).</xr> <form>-nu, -nhun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> from the <tr>rural</tr> areas. <number>2</number> like s.o. from the rural areas, <tr>bumpkin</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> become like one from the country. <form>-l</form> <pos>a</pos> provincial, on the provincial level. <i>Bilangguang prubinsiyal,</i> Provincial jail.

<p><form>prubinsyal</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>provincial</tr>, on the provincial level (used only in set phrases from English). <form>&mdash; burd</form> <pos>n</pos> provincial board. <form>&mdash; dyil</form> Provincial jail.

<p><form>prubisung</form> <pos>n</pos> school <tr>supervisor</tr> (humorous).

<p><form>prubisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>clause</tr> in a contract, <tr>provision</tr> of a law.

<p><form>prubisyunal</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>temporary</tr>. <i>Prubisyunal lang ning kural tang kawáyan. Átù unyà ning ihalublak kun makakwarta ta,</i> This bamboo fence is just temporary. We'll replace it with hollow blocks when we can afford it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> have s.t. temporary. <i>Prubisyunali lang nag atup myintras tantu,</i> Just put up temporary roofing for the time being.

<p><form>prubits&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>avail</tr> oneself of some benefit that presents itself on occasion. <i>Kami ang nagprubits&acaron;r sa íyang balay samtang wà siya dinhi,</i> We availed ourselves of his house while he was gone. <i>Prubitsahi siyag súgù samtang nía pa siya,</i> Use him for your errands while he is still here. <form>prubitsáwu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>useful</tr>. <i>Karáan túud nig dagway, apan prubitsáwu kaáyu ni kanákù,</i> It looks old, but it is useful to me.

<p><form>prubitsu</form> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>PRUBITS&Acaron;R</sc>.</xr> <pos>n</pos> <tr>use</tr> that can be made of s.t. <i>Way prubitsung pagkatáwu ang tapulan,</i> A lazy person is useless. <i>Unsay prubitsu ánang gubà na man?</i> Of what use is that since it is broken?

<p><form>prublíma</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>problem</tr>. <i>Ímu nang prublíma. Sunud ayaw na pangútang,</i> That's your problem. From now on, don't borrow money. <i>Daghang prublíma ang migawas sa pasúlit,</i> Many problems came out in the exams. <pb n=785><pos>a</pos> being a problem. <i>Prublíma kaáyung anáka kay buluyágun,</i> That child is a terrible problem because he is mischievous. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> get to be a problem. <i>Nagkaprublíma na ning ákung alap-ap,</i> My rash is turning into a real problem.

<p><form>pruduksiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>yield</tr>, <tr>output</tr>. <i>Gamay ra ang pruduksiyun sa pabrika sa kámay,</i> The sugar refinery has a small output. <number>2</number> stage or movie production.

<p><form>pruduktu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>product</tr>, <tr>output</tr>, <tr>yield</tr>. <i>Dakug pruduktu ang ámung yútà,</i> Our lands have a high yield. <i>Ang pruduktu niíning pabrikáha,</i> The products of this factory. <number>1a</number> item of manufacture. <i>Ang kinabag-uhang pruduktu muabut niíning lugára,</i> The latest products reach this place. <number>2</number> one's <tr>children</tr> (humorous). <i>Duha nay ílang pruduktu,</i> They have two kids now. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> yield, have [so-and-so great] an output. <i>Nakapruduktu na ning anáya ug kinyintus písus,</i> This sow has yielded five hundred pesos (worth of piglets). <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> have children (colloquial).

<p><form>prudyúsir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>producer</tr> of a play or movie. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be, become a movie producer.

<p><form>prugram</form> <xr>= <sc>PRUGRÁMA</sc>, <i>n1, v1.</i></xr>

<p><form>prugráma</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>program</tr> of entertainment or ceremony. <number>2</number> program listing the details of an entertainment. <i>Naimprinta na ang prugráma,</i> The program has been printed. <number>3</number> <tr>plans</tr>. <i>Ang <corr sic="prugrama">prugráma</corr> sa gubyirnu sa panguma,</i> The government's agricultural program. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> have a program. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> make out a written program. <i>Magprugráma pa ku sa tulumanun sa pista,</i> I'll make out the program of the events during the fiesta.

<p><form>prugrisista</form> <pos>n</pos> a short-lived third party of the nineteen sixties, the Progressive Party of the Philippines, or a member thereof. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a PPP member.

<p><form>prugrísu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>improvement</tr> from a state, condition, or station. <i>Way prugrísu ang átung lungsud kay naghítak ang pamulitiku,</i> The town never makes progress because everything is politics.

<p><form>pruhibir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>prohibit</tr> s.o. from doing s.t. <i>Dì ku mupruhibir ug unsay ímung buhátun,</i> I won't stop you from doing what you want.

<p><form>pruklamar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>announce</tr> s.t. officially. <i>Ang mayur mauy mupruklamar sa rayna,</i> The mayor will proclaim the beauty queen. <i>Wà ipruklamar nga pista upisiyal ugmà,</i> Tomorrow hasn't been proclaimed a public holiday. <form>pruklamasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>proclamation</tr>, s.t. announced officially. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> hold a program to proclaim s.t. <i>Magpruklamasiyun sa rayna rung gabíi,</i> The queen will be proclaimed in a program tonight.

<p><form>prumininti</form> <pos>a</pos> of high standing in society. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be, become of <tr>prominent</tr> social standing. <i>Naprumininti sila tungud sa ílang pagkasapían,</i> They become prominent because of their wealth.

<p><form>prumísa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>promise</tr> relating to s.t. important, not trivial. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make a solemn promise. <i>Iprumísa nákù Ginúu ug buháyun ku nímu,</i> I promise, Lord, if you prolong my life....

<p><form>prumusyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>promotion</tr> to a higher position. <i>Wà nà siya maapil sa prumusyun,</i> He was passed over for promotion. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b8]</itype> <tr>promote</tr> s.o. to a higher position.

<p><form>prumusyun síl, prumusyunal síl</form> <pos>n</pos> special <tr>sale</tr> to promote products. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c6]</itype> hold such a sale.

<p><form>prumut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>promote</tr> to a higher position in a job or grade. <i>Kinsa guy nagprumut ánang buluk?</i> Who promoted that stupid child? <form>-id(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a3]</itype> be promoted to a higher grade or position. <i>Maprumútid (maprumut) ka pagkapurman,</i> You will get promoted to foreman.

<p><form>prumútir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>boxing</tr> <tr>promoter</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a2]</itype> be a boxing promoter.

<p><form>prunáwuns</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>pronounce</tr> s.t. articulately. <i>Dílì siya makaprunáwuns ug ip,</i> She can't pronounce an <ix>f.</ix>

<p><form>prunsit, pruntsit</form> <pos>n</pos> front <tr>seat</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; c6P]</itype> sit, put in the front seat. <i>Dì ku mupruntsit (mupapruntsit) ug lingkud sa trák,</i> I won't sit in the front seat of the bus. <i>Ipruntsit (ipaprunsit) pagsakay ang bátà,</i> Let the child sit on the front seat. <form>bísag maulahi basta &mdash;</form> don't mind being the last (to get on) as long as I get the front seat&mdash;said of an old maid that gets married late but makes a good marriage or a person that eats last but gets the best.

<p><form>pruntu</form> <pos>a</pos> on time, <tr>punctual</tr>. <i>Pruntu kanúnay ang ámung swildu,</i> Our salary is always on time. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> do s.t. on time, promptly. <i>Kasab-an ka giyug dì ka mupruntu pagtambung sa upisína,</i> They'll surely call your attention to it if you don't report to the office on time.

<p><form>pruntun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fronton</tr> for jai alai.

<p><form>prunumbri</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pronoun</tr>.

<p><form>prup</form> <pos>n</pos> galley <tr>proof</tr> or proof of photos. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> make proofs. <i>Prúpi ang ritrátu arun mi makapílì,</i> Make proofs of the pictures so that we can make a choice.

<p><form>prupidad</form> <xr>= <sc>PRUPYIDAD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>prupaganda</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>propaganda</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>advertisement</tr> over the radio or in the form of leaflets or billboards. <i>Prupaganda sa sini,</i> <tr>Leaflets</tr> advertising the movie. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> spread propaganda. <pb n=786><number>2</number> <tr>advertise</tr>. <i>Dì ta makaprupaganda sa radiyu ug way báyad,</i> We can't advertise free over the radio. <i>Ayaw ug iprupaganda ang ímung pagkaignuranti,</i> Don't advertise your ignorance. <form>prupagandista</form> <pos>n</pos> one who disseminates propaganda or advertisements. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be, become a <tr>propagandist</tr>.

<p><form>prupagar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c6]</itype> display, show off for all the world to see. <i>Nagprupagar sila sa ílang kaadunáhan,</i> They are showing off their wealth. <i>Kun mau nay ímung buhátun magprupagar ka lang sa ímung kaignuy,</i> If you do that, you will just be displaying your ignorance.

<p><form>prupisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>profession</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> <tr>study</tr> s.t. as a profession. <form>-al</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> one who is trained for a profession. <i>Prupisyunal na ang ákung mga anak,</i> My children are all trained for a profession. <number>2</number> <tr>professional</tr> in some field. <i>Prupisyunal nga kantúra,</i> Professional singer. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> become a professional s.t. or a person who has been trained for a profession.

<p><form>prupisur</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>teacher</tr> at an institution of higher learning. <number>2</number> music or art teacher. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; c1]</itype> become a college, music, or art teacher.

<p><form>prupisúra</form> <xr>= <sc>PRUPISUR</sc> (female).</xr>

<p><form>prupíta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prophet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be, become a prophet.

<p><form>prupitaryu</form> <pos>n</pos> one who owns a landed <tr>estate</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be an estate <tr>owner</tr>. <i>Ug magprupitaryu ka, dakù na pud ang buhis,</i> If you are a landowner, you also have a big tax.

<p><form>prupursiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>well-proportioned</tr>. <i>Prupursiyun kaáyu ang ímung láwas,</i> You have a well-proportioned body. <number>2</number> <tr>mixture</tr>, <tr>ratio</tr> of constituent ingredients. <i>Pilay prupursiyun sa balas ug simintu?</i> What is the ratio of sand to cement? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> become well-proportioned.

<p><form>prupusisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>proposition</tr>, <tr>proposal</tr>. <i>Ang prupusisiyun nga bahínun ang Sibu ángay tun-an,</i> They should study the proposal to divide Cebu.

<p><form>prupyidad</form> <pos>n</pos> real and personal <tr>property</tr>.

<p><form>prúsa</form> <pos>n</pos> prose.

<p><form>prusikusiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>prosecution</tr> in a criminal case. <i>Pruyba nga gipakítà sa prusikusiyun,</i> Evidence offered by the prosecution.

<p><form>prusisiyun, prusisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> religious <tr>procession</tr>. <i>Bísag unsa kataas sa prusisyun, mupaúlì giyud sa simbahan,</i> No matter how long the procession, it always winds up back at the church,&mdash;i.e. no matter how far the husband wanders, he returns home. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> hold a procession. <number>2</number> go s.w. in a long line, as if in a procession.

<p><form>pruspik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prospective</tr> <tr>customer</tr> or <tr>candidate</tr>. <i>Gilista sa ahinti ang gituúhan níyang pruspik,</i> The agent listed his prospective customers. <i>Gwápa ang íyang pruspik,</i> He is eyeing a beautiful girl. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>prospect</tr> for minerals. <i>Nagpruspik silag buláwan,</i> They are prospecting for gold. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> get as a prospect, make a prospect out of s.o. <i>Básig makapruspik ta níla sa pagpalit ug insiyúrans,</i> We might get them as prospective customers for insurance.

<p><form>pruspiktus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prospectus</tr> of a school.

<p><form>pruspirar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>prosper</tr>. <i>Wà mupruspirar ang ílang láraw,</i> Their plans did not prosper.

<p><form>prusúsu</form> <xr>= <sc>*PURSÚSU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>prutagunista</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>protagonist</tr> in a story. <number>2</number> <tr>opponents</tr> in an election. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B156; c1]</itype> be, become a protagonist. <number>2</number> <itype>[C]</itype> be opponents in an election. <i>Nagprutagunista ang duha ka magsúun pagkamayur,</i> The two brothers were opponents in the race for mayor.

<p><form>prútas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fruit</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> eat, have fruits.

<p><form>prutihir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>protect</tr>. <i>Átung prutihian ang átung katungud,</i> We will protect our rights. <form>prutihídu</form> <pos>a</pos> s.o. or s.t. <tr>protected</tr>. <i>Ang mga táwu prutihídu sa batakang baláud,</i> The people are protected by the Constitution. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> be protected by. <i>Ang mga ismaglir giprutihidúan sa mga pulitiku,</i> Smugglers are protected by politicians.

<p><form>prutiksiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>protection</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> give protection. <i>Prutiksiyuni ang ímung mata sa sulaw sa adlaw,</i> <tr>Protect</tr> your eyes from the glare of the sun.

<p><form>prutína</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>protein</tr>. <i>Tugub sa prutína ang karni sa báka,</i> Beef is rich in protein.

<p><form>prutíra</form> <pos>n</pos> fruit <tr>bowl</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> use, place s.t. on the fruit tray.

<p><form>prutista</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3c]</itype> <tr>protest</tr> against, make an objection to s.t. <i>Ang mga Libiral miprutista sa iliksiyun,</i> The Liberals protested the election results. <i>Wà kuy ikaprutista sa bag-ung riglamintu,</i> I have no objections to make against the new regulation. <pos>n</pos> action of protesting. <i>Prutista sa hukum,</i> Protest against the decision.

<p><form>prutistanti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Protestant</tr> church or a member thereof. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; a12]</itype> be, become a protestant.

<p><form>prut kik</form> <pos>n</pos> fruit <tr>cake</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, have fruit cake.

<p><form>prúwa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prow</tr>, the forward part of a ship or boat. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a prow of the ship. <number>2</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> put at the prow. <i>Iprúwa pagbutang ang mga karga,</i> Put the cargoes at the prow.

<p><form>pruyba</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>proof</tr> tending to establish the truth of s.t. <number>2</number> galley proof or proof of a photo. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>prove</tr> s.t. true, use s.t. as proof. <i>Pruybáhun ku nà arun ka maprísu,</i> <pb n=787>I'll prove it to get you put in jail. <i>Kining sundánga ipruyba sa pagbunù,</i> Show this bolo as proof of the murder. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make galley proofs or proofs for photographs. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>proofread</tr>. <i>Magpruyba pa ku sa katapúsang pahina,</i> I still have to proofread the last page.

<p><form>pruyiktu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>project</tr>, a <tr>proposal</tr> to do s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a project. <i>Nagpruyiktu sila pagpanindut sa plása,</i> They have a project to <corr sic=beautiful>beautify</corr> the plaza.

<p><form>P.S.</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>PÍIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>P.S.K.</form> abbreviation for <ix>pahúlay sa kalínaw</ix> &lsquo;rest in peace&rsquo;, engraved on tombstones.

<p><form>p&umacracu;</form> <xr>= <sc>PÚLU<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pû</form> <xr>= <sc>PULÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>p&umacrcir;</form> <xr>= <sc>PÚLÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púan</form> <xr>= <sc>PUL-AN</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PÚLU<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puángud</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>compassion</tr>, tender <tr>regards</tr>. <i>Tungud sa puángud sa Mahal nga Birhin,</i> Through the compassion of the Blessed Virgin. <i>Pirmi siya nga gidagmálan sa íyang walay puángud nga inaína,</i> She was constantly maltreated by her merciless stepmother. <form>mapuangúrun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>compassionate</tr>, <tr>tender</tr>. <i>Mapuangúrung kasingkásing,</i> Compassionate heart. <number>2</number> patient, bearing with others' faults. <i>Mapuangúrung kalabaw,</i> The patient water buffalo.

<p><form>púas walay &mdash;</form> there's no end or stopping. <i>Walay púas ug ági ang mga trák tibuuk gabíi,</i> The trucks kept coming by without end, the whole night through.

<p><form>puása</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fasting</tr>. <number>1a</number> <tr>abstinence</tr> from anything. <number>2</number> a day or period of fasting. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>fast</tr>. <i>Magpuása ku sa Simána Santa,</i> I'll fast during Holy Week. <number>1a</number> <tr>abstain</tr> from anything. <i>Mupuása únà ku sa paghilabut sa ákung asáwa,</i> I'll abstain from having relations with my wife. <form>ting-</form> <pos>n</pos> day or period of fasting.

<p><form>púay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B6; b5]</itype> <tr>spill over</tr>, <tr>overflow</tr>. <i>Mipúay ang bínu sa kupíta,</i> The wine spilled over the goblet. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; a1]</itype> <tr>sag</tr>, <tr>droop</tr> listlessly. <i>Nagpúay ang búlak sa pláwir bis kay way túbig,</i> The flowers in the vase drooped for lack of water. <form>puaypuay, puaypúay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN]</itype> filled to <tr>overflowing</tr>; <tr>bursting at the seams</tr>. <i>Namuaypúay ka na sa katambuk,</i> You're bursting at the seams, you're so fat. <i>Mga bátà ang nakapuaypúay sa dyíp,</i> The children filled the jeep to its seams.

<p><form>publasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> town proper, the place in a town where there is a concentration of houses. <number>2</number> <tr>town</tr> as a political unit. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into the town proper. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> be, become a <tr>town</tr>. <i>Publasyunun na ang ámung baryu,</i> Our village will be made into a town.

<p><form>publikar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>make known</tr> to the public. <i>Gipublikar sa radiyu ang kadaúgan,</i> The victory was <tr>announced</tr> over the radio. <i>Gipublikar na ang risulta sa bár,</i> The results of the bar examination have been published. <number>2</number> <tr>publish</tr> s.t. <i>Ámung imprinta ang mupublikar sa ílang piryudiku,</i> Our printing press will publish their newspaper. <form>publikadur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>publisher</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be a publisher. <form>publikasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>publication</tr>.

<p><form>publiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>public</tr>. <i>Makiglantúgì ku nímu sa publiku,</i> I want to debate you in public. <number>1a</number> public, not private. <i>Salakyanan nga (sa) publiku,</i> <tr>Public transportation</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>audience</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256; c1]</itype> be, become s.t. for public use. <i>Napubliku na ang ílang bumba tungud sa kadaghang mugámit,</i> Their water pump has become public property since so many <form>people</form> use it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> have an audience; be an audience. <i>Nakapubliku siyag ubay-*ubay,</i> She drew a large audience.

<p><form>publisidad</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>publicity</tr>. <i>Kinahanglan ang publisidad sa dráma,</i> We need publicity for the play.

<p><form>pubri</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>poor</tr>, not having money. <i>Pubri apan ligdung,</i> Poor but honest. <number>2</number> poor, <tr>unfortunate</tr>. <i>Pubring mga ílu,</i> Poor orphans. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB12; a12]</itype> make s.o. poor; become poor. <i>Súgal mauy nagpubri (nagpapubri) námù,</i> Gambling made us poor. <form>mata &mdash;</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>MATA</sc>.</xr> <form>-ng káhuy</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>shrub</tr> with fleshy, green, smooth branches but no leaves: <bio>Euphorbia tirucalli</bio>. <form>pubrihun</form> <pos>a</pos> destined to be poor. <i>Taas nang adlaw, natúlug gihápun. Mau nang táwung pubrihun,</i> He's still asleep even at this hour. That's the way it is with people who are destined to be poor. <form>-síta</form> <pos>a</pos> poor little thing (female). <i>Pubrisíta intáwun ang bátà nga gilábay sa gáhung,</i> The poor little thing was thrown into the pit. <i>Kapubrisíta sa mga pisù nga inyung gikúhà,</i> You took the poor little birdlings. <form>-sítu</form> <xr>= <sc>PUBRISÍTA</sc> (male).</xr>

<p><form>pud</form> <xr>= <sc>UPUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>p&umacracu;d</form> <xr>= <sc>PÚLUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puday</form> <xr>= <sc>PURAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púding</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pudding</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, have pudding.

<p><form>pudir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> rights one has over another person to regulate or order him. <i>Ang kumandanti may pudir sa pagdisiplína sa mga kadíti,</i> The commander has the <tr>right</tr> to discipline the cadets. <i>Agálun ku apan wà kuy pudir pagpugung sa íyang kwarta,</i> I am her boss, but I have no right to hold her money back. <number>1a</number> place one has control or rights over. <i>But-an ba ku nímu sa ákung pudir?</i> You dare to order me around in my own house? <i>Kay <pb n=788>miláyas kas ákung pudir, dì ku manggilábut nímu,</i> You left my house so I have nothing more to do with you. <i>Karun kay midaug tas piliay, náa na tas pudir,</i> Now that we won the election, we are in <tr>power</tr>. <form>-úsu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>powerful</tr>, <tr>influential</tr>. <i>Ang mga Duránu pudirúsu kaáyus pulitika,</i> The Duranos are very powerful in politics. <form>túdu -úsu</form> <pos>n</pos> all powerful, <tr>almighty</tr>. <i>Ilikay kami sa kadaútan, Diyus nga túdu pudirúsu,</i> God Almighty, deliver us from evil. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become powerful.

<p><form>pud kuluring</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>food coloring</tr>.

<p><form>pudlung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> destroy plants completely, uprooting everything. <i>Kainginíru ang nagpudlung sa lasang,</i> The slash and burn cultivators destroyed the forest. <i>Pudlunga ang mga balágun nga mikáput sa atup,</i> Get rid of the vines that are growing over the roof.

<p><form>pudlus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>run away</tr> fast from s.t. usually in a temper tantrum. <i>Mipudlus siya pagkakità sa dintista,</i> She fled when she saw the dentist. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for animals that are tied to run about restlessly in excitement. <i>Mupudlus ning ákung túru ug makakitag bayi,</i> The bull that is tied keeps running back and forth when it sees a female.

<p><form>pudlus<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>clothesline</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make a clothesline. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> hang up on the clothesline. <i>Ayaw nà ihayhay sa kural. Ipudlus giyud,</i> Don't hang it over the fence. Put it over the line.

<p><form>pudlus<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>beat</tr> or <tr>whip</tr> vigorously. <i>Ang táwung nagkastígu sa íyang anak mu rag nagpudlus ug bitin,</i> The man is beating his child as if he were clubbing a snake. <pos>n</pos> s.t. to beat s.o. with.

<p><form>pudngan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>bird</tr>, the yellow-breasted fruit <tr>dove</tr>: <bio>Ptilinopus occipitalis</bio>.

<p><form>pudpud<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB1; a12]</itype> <tr>wear</tr> down or <tr>decay</tr> at the ends or tips, become so. <i>Dulsi ang nagpudpud (nagpapudpud) sa íyang ngípun,</i> Her teeth decayed from all the candy. <i>Nagkapudpud ang halígi sa ulan ug ínit,</i> The post is getting decayed from the rain and the sun. <i>Nagkapudpud na ang íyang bakyà,</i> His wooden slippers are becoming worn out. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> knock the ashes off s.t. burning slowly. <pos>a</pos> <tr>worn</tr> down or <tr>decayed</tr>.

<p><form>*pudpud<sub>2</sub></form> <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> dried <ix>malangsi</ix> fish.

<p><form>púdul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>poodle cut</tr>, hair cut like a poodle. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> give s.o. a poodle cut. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear a poodle cut. <i>Angayan siyang magpúdul,</i> She looks becoming with a poodle cut.

<p><form>pudyut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>pick up</tr> s.t. or <tr>pinch</tr> s.t. <i>Gipudyut níya ang íkug sa ilagà,</i> He carefully picked up the rat by the tail. <i>Kaáyu giyung pudyútun nang ilung mu,</i> How nice it would be to pinch your nose. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> give or take a small quantity of s.t. <i>Syáru dì giyud ka makapudyut nákug dyútayng isdà,</i> Surely you can give me a little <tr>bit</tr> of your fish. <i>Pudyútig asin,</i> Add a <tr>pinch</tr> of salt. <pos>n</pos> small amount, amount which could be grasped in the tips of the fingers. <i>Pipila ka pudyut nga bugas,</i> A few pinches of rice.

<p><form>púg</form> <xr>= <sc>PULUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púga<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b26]</itype> escape from prison. <i>Nakapúga ang bitayúnun,</i> The prisoner escaped from death row. <pos>n</pos> escapee from a prison. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>PÚGA</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p><form>púga<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for a woman to be beautiful (slang).

<p><form>pugà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>squeeze</tr> to extract <tr>juice</tr>. <i>Pugaa (pug-a) ug maáyu ang limunsítu,</i> Squeeze the calamondin dry. <number>1a</number> <formx>&mdash; sa útuk</formx> <itype>[A135; a12]</itype> <tr>rack</tr> one's brains. <i>Nagpugà ku sa ákung útuk ug unsay itubag,</i> I'm racking my brains to think of how to answer. <number>1b</number> <formx>kapug-an ug singut</formx> dripping wet with sweat. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> force s.o. to do s.t. <i>Kinsay nagpugà nímu pagpahátag sa kwarta?</i> Who compelled you to give the money? <i>Dì ka makapugà (makapamugà) nákù pagbutar nímu,</i> You can't force me to vote for you. <i>Gipugà siya pagpatug-an sa mga pulis,</i> The cops forced him to confess. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. squeezed out.[+]

<p><form>púgad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> put fowl away for the night. <i>Si Núnuy nagpúgad sa mga manuk gabíi,</i> Nonoy was the one who put the chickens away for the night last night. <number>2</number> put newly hatched baby chicks down from the nest for the first time. <i>Ug sayung pugárun ang pisù háyang lamigasun,</i> If you take chicks out of the nest too early, the ants are likely to get at them. <pos>n</pos> action of gathering fowl. <form>pugaran</form> <pos>n</pos> chicken's nest.

<p><form>pugáhan</form> <xr>= <sc>ANÍBUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pugápu</form> <pos>n</pos> general name for <tr>groupers</tr>, except for extremely large ones.

<p><form>pugapúga</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> do s.t. in a <tr>rush</tr>. <i>Nagpugapúga silag pangarga kay lumalarga nag barku,</i> They loaded the cargo as fast as they could because the boat was about to leave. <i>Pugapugáha (pugapugáhi) ninyug hípus ang binulad kay hápit na muulan,</i> Gather the rice quick because it is about to rain.

<p><form>pugas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>plant</tr> grains or seeds in a hole. <i>Akuy nagpugas ánang lísu sa kapáyas dihà,</i> I was the one who planted the papaya seeds there. <i>Íyang gipugsan ug munggus ang usa ka parsíla,</i> He planted one lot to mung beans. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>seed</tr> that has been planted. <i>Giánud ang mga pugas sa bahà,</i> The seeds were washed away in the flood. <number>2</number> the amount of seeds planted to a given area. <i>Pugas ug tulu ka gantang ang ákung baul,</i> I can plant three <pb n=789>gantas of grain in my field. <form>pugaspúgas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> do s.t. with the expectation of a return in the future. <i>Kanang íyang paghátag namugaspúgas nà arun hiayunan sa ginikánan,</i> His gift is actually an investment so that her parents would like him. <form>pugsanan</form> <pos>n</pos> place to be planted. <form>iga-, ig-r-(&larr;), ig-l-(&larr;)</form> <number>1</number> thing to <tr>sow</tr>. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>TING-L-</sc>.</xr> <form>ting-l-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> sowing <tr>season</tr>.

<p><form>pug-aw</form> <xr>= <sc>PUGHAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pugáwù</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small <tr>grouper</tr>, found in shallow waters, with dark spots all over the body.

<p><form>pugdaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125; a12P]</itype> be <tr>burned</tr> to ashes, <tr>burn</tr> oneself out. <i>Ug mapugdaw ang sugnud<corr sic=.>,</corr> hipúsa ang abu ug paglihíya,</i> When the fuel burns itself out, gather the ashes and make lye out of them.

<p><form>pugdaw<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PUKDAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pugdul</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>trimmed</tr>, <tr>cut</tr> <tr>short</tr>. <i>Pugdul ang íkug sa irù,</i> The dog has a stubbed tail. <i>Pugdul ang íyang buhuk,</i> She has short hair. <i>Pugdul ang mga tanum sa kadaplínan,</i> The plants along the sides have been trimmed down. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; ab]</itype> <tr>trim</tr> s.t. down. <i>Ang bagyu mauy nakapugdul (nakapapugdul) sa lubi,</i> The typhoon ripped the tops off the coconut trees.

<p><form>pughad</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for root crops to have a fine, <tr>mealy</tr> consistency when cooked. <number>2</number> for a woman to be <tr>good-looking</tr> (slang). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> be <tr>tasty</tr> with this smooth consistency.

<p><form>pughak</form> <pos>n</pos> egg yolk.

<p><form>pughaw</form> <pos>a</pos> for s.t. colored to be <tr>faded</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> get faded. <i>Mupughaw ang sinínà ug ibulad sa ínit,</i> The dress will <tr>fade</tr> if it is dried in the sun.

<p><form>púgi</form> <pos>a</pos> for a boy to be <tr>handsome</tr> (slang). <i>Púgi apan dihin gúli,</i> He may be handsome but he's dirty. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a1P]</itype> be, become handsome (slang).

<p><form>pugì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> be the <tr>first</tr> to do s.t. to s.t. <i>Akuy mupugig sakay sa ímung kutsi,</i> Let me be the first one to ride in your new car. <i>Akuy mupugì ánang dalagáha,</i> Let me be the one to break that virgin in. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> first use made of s.t. new. <i>Pinugian ning linung-ága sa átung abut humay ning aníha,</i> This is the first rice we cooked from the rice we harvested this season.

<p><form>púgis, pug-is</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; ac]</itype> having too much powder on the skin. <i>Nawung nagpúgis (gipugísan) sa pulbus,</i> A face with face powder <tr>caked</tr> on it. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>faded</tr> to the point of whiteness. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become faded to the point of whiteness. <i>Mupugis (mapugis) ang sinínà ug isígig ladlad,</i> The dress will turn white if it's always put in the sun. <form>pugispugis</form> <pos>a</pos> streaks or spots of whitish or grayish substances which form on the skin or may come from external sources. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> for skin to get <ix>pugispugis</ix> on it. <i>Magpugispugis ang pánit sa sabun ug dílì hugásan ug maáyu,</i> The skin will get streaks of soap if you don't rinse it off.

<p><form>pugnit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>pick</tr>, <tr>pinch</tr> with the tips of the fingers and the thumb. <i>Gipugnit níya ang bugas nga naúsik,</i> He picked up the rice that had spilled.

<p><form>pugpug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>PULPUG</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[BN]</itype> be covered with dust. <i>Namugpug ang ákung tiil sa abug,</i> My feet are covered with dust.

<p><form>pugsak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> <tr>drop</tr> or <tr>dash</tr> s.t. downward so that it lands with force. <i>Ang tuntu mauy nakapugsak sa básu,</i> The fool let the glass crash to the floor. <i>Gipugsakan níyag dakung batu ang hás,</i> He bashed the snake's head with a huge stone. <i>Napugsak ang baskit ug nangabúak ang itlug sa súd,</i> He put the basket down hard and the eggs in it broke.

<p><form>pugsit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> have loose bowel movements in spurts. <i>Nagpugsit ku kay wà ku kahilísi,</i> I have <tr>diarrhea</tr> because I had indigestion.

<p><form>pugtas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> get <tr>exhausted</tr> from doing s.t. strenuous, get out of breath. <i>Napugtas ang bátà ug dinágan,</i> The child exhausted himself running. <i>Makapugtas ang hilabihang kabusug,</i> Eating too much can get you out of breath. <form>-an, ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> prone to fainting spells.

<p><form>pugtas<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; ab8]</itype> <tr>snap</tr> or <tr>break</tr> off suddenly. <i>Pagpílì ug alambri nga dílì tayaun arun dílì mapugtas,</i> Choose a wire that's not rusty so that it will not break easily. <number>2</number> <tr>kill</tr>, cause s.t. or s.o. to die with suddenness and force. <i>Si Dyíma nagpugtas sa íyang kaugalíngun,</i> Gemma killed herself. <i>Ang kasukù dílì ígù makapugtas sa ákung gugma nímu,</i> Anger cannot kill my love for you.

<p><form>pugtud</form> (from <ix>putud</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB26; a]</itype> <tr>break</tr> into separate pieces, esp. things which easily come apart, due to age, wear. <i>Napugtud ang kaptanan sa tása,</i> The handle of the cup broke off. <i>Ákung pugtúrun ning hilúa arun wà nay mugámit niíni,</i> I'll break this thread into pieces so that no one can use it anymore.

<p><form>púgu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>bird</tr>.

<p><form>púgud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> for a <tr>bud</tr> to form and swell. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> infected <tr>pimple</tr> on the face. <form>pugudpugud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; a4b4]</itype> for the face to get little bumps from infected <tr>acne</tr>. <i>Nawung nga nagpugudpugud (gipugudpugud, gipugudpuguran) sa mga bugas,</i> A face with bumps all over it from acne. <form>pugurun</form> <pos>a</pos> acne infected.

<p><form>pug-uk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> hold s.t. back to prevent <pb n=790>growth or development. <i>Ang maung baláud nagpug-uk sa átung nasudnun nga pag-uswag,</i> Such a law stifles the progress of our nation. <i>Gipug-uk sa Insik ang kámay arun silay magbuut sa prisyu,</i> The Chinese hoarded the sugar so that they could determine the price. <number>2</number> cut a branch too close to the trunk. <i>Ug ímung pug-úkun ang sanga pagputul, madáut ang tanum,</i> If you cut the branch too close to the trunk, it will ruin the plant. <number>3</number> <tr>acquire</tr> s.t. surreptitiously. <i>Nakapug-uk ang lídir ug daghang kwarta,</i> The politician managed to get his hands on a lot of money. <number>4</number> manipulate cards one is dealing. <i>Maáyu kaáyu siyang mupug-uk sa baráha,</i> He is very good in manipulating the cards. <number>5</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> be stung by the truth of what s.o. says. <i>Napug-uk siya sa ákung gisulti kay namatud-an,</i> He was stung by what I said because it was true.

<p><form>púgul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> for s.t. to be <tr>massed</tr> in a small area. <i>Mipúgul ang túbig kay nasap-*ungan ang bangag,</i> There's a pool of water because the outlet got stopped up. <i>Nagpúgul ang asu sa kwartu,</i> The room is <tr>full</tr> of smoke. <i>Nagpúgul ang mga babáyi sulud sa kwartu,</i> The women were all <tr>huddled</tr> together in the bedroom. <i>Dugung nagpúgul sa inunlan,</i> Placenta <tr>filled</tr> with a big clot of blood. <i>Gipugúlan siya sa kasukù,</i> She is filled with anger.

<p><form>pugun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>range</tr> for cooking, baker's <tr>oven</tr>, <tr>kiln</tr> or oven for drying s.t. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> use a range in cooking. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain a range. <form>-íru</form> <pos>n</pos> one who operates the baker's oven or the kiln drier.

<p><form>pugung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> hold or keep in place, <tr>restrain</tr> the movement of. <i>Gitabangan pagpugung ang búang nga gustung mugawas,</i> The people held the lunatic that wanted to escape back. <i>Pugngi ang hagdanan kay musaka ku,</i> Hold the ladder because I'm going up. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> keep s.o. from doing s.t. <i>Dílì ku ikaw pugngan sa ímung buut buhátun,</i> I won't <tr>prevent</tr> you from doing what you want. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> <tr>control</tr> oneself. <i>Nagpugung lang ku arun way mahitabù,</i> I'm just keeping myself under control so nothing happens. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>clip</tr>, tie the hair in place or clip clothes to the line. <pos>n</pos> clip or <tr>safety pin</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S]</itype> clip, tie one's own hair in place. <pos>n</pos> s.t. to tie the hair with or clothespins. <form>pinugngan</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>suppressed</tr>. <i>Pinugngang katáwa,</i> Suppressed laughter. <form>mapugngánun</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to be strict, having a restrictive attitude. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be restrictive.

<p><form>pugus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3PN; a1cN]</itype> <tr>compel</tr> s.o. to do s.t. <i>Dì untà ku mupalit, apan mamugus giyud ang ákung asáwa,</i> I didn't want to buy any, but my wife insisted. <i>Way nagpugus nímu pagpakasalà,</i> No one is forcing you to commit a sin. <number>1a</number> <formx>pugsun ug &mdash;</formx> it cannot be helped that [such-and-such] is the case. <i>Pugsun ug daghang mangulitáwu nákù,</i> Can I <tr>help</tr> it if lots of men fall for me? <i>Pugsun ug nasayup ku,</i> I couldn't help making a mistake. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>force</tr> s.t. to give way. <i>Ayaw pugsa (ipugus) pagpasulud kay mabúngì,</i> Don't force it in or you might break it. <i>Mabugtù nà ug pugsun pag-ínat,</i> It will snap if you stretch it too far. <form>pugsunun</form> <pos>a</pos> needing to be urged or told to do s.t. <i>Ang mutsatsang pugsunun maáyung ikurindu,</i> You might as well get rid of a maid that you have to keep telling to get to work. <form>pugsunun ug útuk</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>slow</tr> in comprehension. <i>Intirisádu siya muiskuyla apan pugsunun kaáyug útuk,</i> He likes to study, but he is very slow. <form>mapugsánun, mapinugsánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>insistent</tr> (literary). <i>Usa ka mapugsánung maghahálad,</i> He is a persistent suitor. <form>-u(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> insistent, <tr>demanding</tr> of oneself or others. <i>Pugúsu ka man gud. Ímung pugsun bísag dì mahímù,</i> You are highly demanding. You try to force people to do things they can't do. <i>Pugúsu nang pliyíra, mulusut bísag blakíngan,</i> He is a persistent player. He forces his way through to the basket even if he is blocked. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become insistent, persistent in doing s.t.

<p><form>pugut</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to trigger <tr>fishes</tr>, esp. species with very small mouths (as opposed to the <ix>pakul</ix>, which have larger mouths). <form>-un ug bàbà</form> having a small mouth.

<p><form>pugwat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A36; a1]</itype> <tr>startle</tr> s.o. that is asleep or so engrossed in s.t. that he is oblivious of his surroundings. <i>Napugwat ang bátà sa pagbutu sa libintadur,</i> The child was startled out of his sleep when the firecracker exploded. <i>Pugwátun ku siya sa íyang paghinuktuk,</i> I'll startle her out of her deep thought.

<p><form>púhag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>scatter</tr> a large group of s.t. <i>Napúhag ang mga táwu sa plása pag-ulan,</i> The people in the plaza scattered when it started to rain. <number>2</number> <tr>destroy</tr> completely. <i>Napúhag ang syudad sa bumba,</i> The city was destroyed by bombs. <number>3</number> get honey from a bee-*hive (for which one must destroy the hive). <i>Ang mipúhag sa putyúkan wà hipaaki,</i> He got the honey but he was not bitten.

<p><form>puhal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>undersell</tr> s.o. or bid a higher price for s.t. than a rival. <i>Ákù tà tung palitun, apan gipuhalan giyud sa babáyi,</i> I was going to buy it, but a lady came and bought it from under my nose (by offering <pb n=791>a better price). <i>Puhali ang kumpaníya arun kitay makapalit sa awtu,</i> <tr>Outbid</tr> the company so we can buy the car. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> be <tr>outclassed</tr> or <tr>outstripped</tr> in comparison. <i>Hipuhalan ang átung dyíp sa bag-ung awtu sa átung silíngan,</i> Our neighbor's new car quite outclasses our jeep. <pos>n</pos> higher bid than s.o. else offered or lower than s.o. else asked. <form>-in-ay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>competition</tr> or <tr>rivalry</tr> in selling or bidding. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ANC]</itype> be in competition.

<p><form>puhaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for a color or voice quality to be lacking its full intensity. <i>Puhaw na kaáyu ang ímung sinínà sa tantung linadlad,</i> Your skirt is all <tr>faded</tr> from being put under the sun. <i>Puhaw ang íyang pamánit kay bag-ung naáyu sa sakit,</i> His complexion is <tr>pale</tr> because he has just recently recovered from his illness. <i>Ang puhaw ug tíngug dílì mahímung mag-aawit,</i> One with a <tr>weak</tr> voice cannot become a singer. <number>2</number> become <tr>embarrassed</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> get to lose its full quality. <i>Napuhaw ang buhuk pagkinalígù sa dágat,</i> His hair turned blond from swimming so much. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; ab3(1)]</itype> <tr>embarrass</tr> s.o. <i>Napuhaw siya kay wà tagda sa íyang gikutána,</i> She was embarrassed because the man she asked didn't pay any attention to her. <form>pamuhawpuhaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> for the face to change colors in embarrassment. <i>Namuhawpuhaw ku dihang giingnan ku níyang wà kuy batásan,</i> My face turned all colors of the rainbow when she told me I had no manners.

<p><form>puhun</form> in the <tr>future</tr>, God willing. <i>Puhun, ug may kinabúhì pa, mulangyaw ku,</i> Someday, God willing, I will go abroad. <i>Mugíkan ku ugmà puhun,</i> I'm leaving tomorrow, God willing. <form>puhunpúhun</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN2; a12]</itype> say that one will do s.t., God willing. <i>Mupuhunpúhun (mamuhunpúhun) ta kay dì ta makasigúru sa ugmà,</i> We should say &lsquo;God willing&rsquo; because we cannot be certain of the future. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> for it only to be a matter of days for s.t. expected to happen to s.o. <i>Puhunpuhúnun na lang ang gilaygay. Dì nà madúgayng mamatay,</i> It's only a matter of days till the patient dies. He'll pass away soon.

<p><form>puhúnan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>capital</tr> invested in a business or gambling. <number>2</number> any source of profit. <i>Láway ray ákung puhúnan kay maáyu kung muulug-*úlug,</i> I had no capital other than my gift of gab because I'm good at flattery. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for an investment to <tr>reach</tr> a certain amount. <i>Dílì gamay ang nigusyu nga mupuhúnan ug nuybinta mil,</i> A business that has ninety thousand for capital is not small. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get a certain amount as capital. <i>Nakapuhúnan na ku pára sa súgal,</i> I was given some money for gambling. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put down a certain amount as capital. <i>Pilay ipuhúnan ninyu sa susyu?</i> How much will you <tr>invest</tr> in the partnership? <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> <tr>use</tr> s.t. as an asset or means to accomplish s.t. <i>Ubang babáyi mamuhúnan sa ílang kagwápa sa panghantuk,</i> Some women use their beauty to land a husband. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> <tr>rest</tr> up in anticipation of work or activity. <i>Namuhúnan kug katúlug pára sa pagbilar rung gabíi,</i> I got some extra sleep because I'm going to stay awake all night tonight. <form>mag-r-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> one who capitalizes.

<p><form>puhúun</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PÚU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puk</form> onomatopoetic word for a rapping sound. <i>Bunálan bítaw nákù siya sa &umacracu;, puk, dà tuwad lagi,</i> I struck him on the head, and <ix>puk</ix>, he fell flat.

<p><form>púk</form> <pos>n</pos> a low <tr>foresail</tr> rigged in front of the mast and ahead of the mainsail. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put up, make into this k.o. sail.

<p><form>puka</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>break</tr> s.t. that is attached to s.t. by holding tight to it. <i>Siyay mipuka sa ákung singsing,</i> She broke my ring. <i>Mapuka nang pul-an sa ímung sundang ug ímung ibughà,</i> The handle of your bolo will break if you use it to split firewood. <pos>a</pos> broken and thus loose.

<p><form>pukak</form> <pos>n</pos> child's word for female genitalia.

<p><form>pukakha</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>fluffed</tr> up, not tamped or packed down. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> be fluffed up, for s.t. in small pieces or powder to be loose and not packed down so that it looks like a large quantity. <i>Diyútay ra apan mu rag daghan kay nagpukakha,</i> It isn't very much, but it looks like a lot because it is fluffed up.

<p><form>púkan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; ab2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>topple</tr> s.t. tall and erect. <i>Hángin ang mupúkan ánang kahúya,</i> The wind will <tr>uproot</tr> that tree. <number>2</number> bring to a downfall in a struggle. <i>Mga Amirikanhun ang nakapúkan sa ribulusiyun,</i> The American forces crushed the revolutionary movement. <i>Mapúkan ra ang hiwing pamunúan,</i> The crooked administration will some day be brought down. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; ab3(1)]</itype> <tr>dishonor</tr>. <i>Ang íyang ámu ang mipúkan sa íyang kaputlì,</i> Her own master violated her. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> downfall, fall from power or loss of honor. <i>Ang kapukánan sa Impiryu sa Rúma,</i> The fall of the Roman Empire. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> trees that have fallen.

<p><form>pukang</form> <pos>n</pos> child's word for female genitalia.

<p><form>pukas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB6; c1]</itype> lift up s.t. that covers or hides s.t., become uncovered. <i>Mipukas (napukas) ang tabun sa pagkáun,</i> The cover of the food was blown <tr>open</tr>. <i>Gipukas sa maldítu ang sayal sa mutsatsa,</i> The bad boy pulled up the maid's dress. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for a <pb n=792>girl's dress to creep upwards uncovering her legs. <i>Kítà íyang páa kay natúlug nagpukas,</i> You could see her thighs, because her skirt crept up as she slept. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>a</pos> allowing the dress to creep up in one's sleep, exposing the body in the process.

<p><form>pukat, púkat</form> <xr>= <sc>PUKLAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púkaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; ab2]</itype> <tr>wake</tr> s.o. up. <i>Pukáwa kug sayu,</i> Wake me up early. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> <tr>awaken</tr> an emotion that had become inactive. <i>Pukáwun nátù ang nindut nátung kagahápun,</i> Let's revive our happy past.[+]

<p><form>pukay</form> <pos>n</pos> child's word for female genitalia.

<p><form>pukdaw, pukgaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fowl <tr>pestilence</tr> that is characterized by drooping of the limbs and head, causes the flesh to turn yellow, and generally kills all the fowl in one place. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a4]</itype> get this pestilence. <form>ting-</form> <pos>n</pos> season when this disease strikes.

<p><form>pukgù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> put the hands around a sack to <tr>clasp</tr> it before tying it firmly. <i>Dì na ku makapukgù sa sáku kay punù na kaáyu,</i> I cannot <tr>gather</tr> and tie the mouth of the sack because it is too full. <i>Pukgúa nang buhuk mu íning lastiku,</i> <tr>Gather</tr> and tie your hair with this rubber band. <i>Gipukgù níya ang tiil sa manuk,</i> He grabbed the chicken by the feet. <number>2</number> <tr>nip</tr> in the bud, cut s.t. short. <i>Ang ákung pagkasakit mauy nakapukgù sa ákung pagtuun,</i> My illness has prevented me from studying. <i>Pukgúa ang íyang pagpanugal sa dì pa siya mahigám,</i> Nip his gambling in the bud before he gets accustomed to doing it.

<p><form>púkì</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> female genital organ (euphemism). <number>2</number> k.o. ornamental <tr>herb</tr>, the leaf and flower of which are reminiscent of the female genitalia: <bio>Rhoeo discolor</bio>.

<p><form>púkir</form> <pos>n</pos> game of <tr>poker</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; a]</itype> play poker.

<p><form>puklat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3B36; c1]</itype> <tr>open</tr> the eyes. <i>Nars mauy nagpuklat sa mata sa babáying mitumar ug islíping tablit,</i> A nurse pried open the eyes of the woman that had taken sleeping tablets. <i>Mipuklat lag kadiyut ang ákung mata apan napilù lang sad dáyun,</i> My eyes opened for a short time but they closed right away. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> <tr>awaken</tr> due to a disturbance. <i>Mipuklat ang bátà sa syágit,</i> The shout woke the baby up. <form>puklatpuklat</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>eyelids</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> start to <tr>wake</tr> up. <i>Wà pa giyud nílay namuklatpuklat pagsubang sa adlaw,</i> Not one of them had begun to wake when the sun rose.

<p><form>puklid, pukling</form> <xr>= <sc>PAKLING</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puklu</form> <pos>n</pos> base of the abdomen just below the <ix>pus-un</ix>, but above the genitalia.

<p><form>puknit</form> <xr>= <sc>PUGNIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pukpuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; ac]</itype> <tr>pound</tr> with the fist or s.t. held in the fist, not necessarily with force. <i>Mipukpuk siya sa lamísa sa kalágut,</i> He pounded on the table in anger. <i>Nagpamukpuk siya sa íyang dughan nga nangadyì,</i> She kept striking her breast while praying. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>masturbate</tr> (slang). <i>Nagpukpuk na sad ka?</i> Have you been beating it again? <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get a good <tr>profit</tr> from the sale of s.t. <i>Nakapukpuk siya sa pamaligyà ug kupras,</i> He made a killing in the sale of copra. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> action of <tr>pounding</tr> or <tr>hammering</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>drumstick</tr>. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>cloth</tr> made from fine abaca fiber that has been pounded after weaving. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> wear, use <ix>pinukpuk</ix> cloth. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make <ix>pinukpuk</ix> cloth.

<p><form>pukpuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> pin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> <tr>fasten</tr> with a <tr>pin</tr>. <i>Ákung pukpúkan ang ákung tahian,</i> I'll put pins where I'm going to sew.

<p><form>puksì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>tear off</tr> s.t. pasted or attached onto s.t. <i>Kusug nga hángin ang nakapuksì sa mga sín sa ílang atup,</i> A strong wind tore the corrugated iron sheets off their roof. <i>Ayaw puksía ang silyu sa subri,</i> Do not <tr>tear</tr> the stamp off the envelope.

<p><form>pukù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. infectious <tr>yaws</tr> characterized by lesions of the skin which are resistant to any topically applied medicine. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> have this infection.

<p><form>pukù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>basket</tr> coming in various shapes and sizes characterized by a tapering mouth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make this sort of basket.

<p><form>púku mas u mínus</form> <tr>more or less</tr>. <i>Púku mas u mínus mga singkwintahun ka táwu ang mitambung sa parti,</i> Fifty persons more or less attended the party.

<p><form>puk-ung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> sit on one's haunches. <i>Ayawg puk-úngi ang inudúru,</i> Don't squat on top of the toilet.

<p><form>pukupúku</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> do s.t. on a small, restrained scale. <i>Ug dì ka mupukupúku sa ímung ínum<corr>,</corr> musamut ang ímung ulsir,</i> If you don't <tr>control</tr> your drinking, your ulcer will get worse. <i>Pukupukúha ang túbig,</i> Use the water sparingly. <i>Pukupukúha ang ímung kalágut básig mahayblad ka,</i> Take it easy on your anger <corr sic=least>lest</corr> you have a heart attack.

<p><form>púkut</form> <pos>n</pos> general term for fish <tr>nets</tr> put s.w., into which the fish are driven and caught by the gills or which are used in trawling. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> fishing with a <ix>púkut</ix>. <form>salim-, salim-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> rope netted around the edges of the <ix>púkut</ix> to give it strength.

<p><form>pukuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>PULUKUY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pukwang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> turn s.t. over on its side. <i>Ang awtu gipukwang sa mga rayutir,</i> The rioters overturned the car.

<p><form>pukwat</form> <xr>= <sc>PUKLAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pukway</form> <xr>= <sc>BUKWAY</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=793>

<p><form>púl<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pull</tr>, <tr>influence</tr> wielded by a person, usually to obtain favors. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> have pull. <i>Ug dì ka makapúl dì ka makatrabahu,</i> You can't get a job without pull.

<p><form>púl<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pool</tr>, k.o. pocket <tr>billiards</tr> played with a cue ball and object balls numbered from 1 to 15. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> play pool. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pool hall</tr>.

<p><form>pula</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>red</tr>. <number>1a</number> any color ranging from dark yellow through orange, red, and brown. <number>1b</number> <formx>&mdash; ug sáya</formx> palm <tr>toddy</tr>, esp. inside a transparent glass container where the redness shows (slang). <i>Puwa ug sáya ang ílang giinum,</i> They drank palm toddy. <number>2</number> not true, <tr>lie</tr> (so called from the color of the <ix>butbut<sub>2</sub></ix> which is homonymous with a word meaning lie, <ix>butbut<sub>1</sub></ix>&mdash;colloquial). <i>Anus-a ku mutúu nga pulus man nà pula?</i> Don't expect me to believe that when it's all lies. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>DÁGIR, 2</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[ABN; ab7]</itype> become red, cause s.o. to do s.t. <i>Akuy mupula sa ímung sapátus,</i> I'll make your shoes red. <i>Mipula siya kay gisugs&umacracu;g,</i> She turned red because they teased her. <i>Napula ang íyang kamut sa dyúbus,</i> Her hands got red with dye. <i>Namula ang ákung nawung sa kaúlaw,</i> My face was red with shame. <i>Nagpula ang langit pagsawup sa adlaw,</i> The sky was all red at sunset. <i>Nagkapula ang binágang puthaw,</i> The iron that was heated is turning redder and redder. <i>Pulahun ta nang putì mung sapátus,</i> I'll make your white shoes red. <i>Gipulahan ku sa ímung sinínà,</i> Your dress looks red to me. <i>Pulahi pa nang ímung ngábil,</i> Put more red on your lips. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> for the voice to <tr>crack</tr> and become discordant. <i>Napula ang íyang tíngug sa kalísang,</i> His voice went off pitch discordantly in fright. <number>3</number> <formx>háin bay na-</formx> expression to show contemptuous disbelief. <i>Ingun siya dúna na siyay awtu, háin bay napuwa?</i> He said he got a car. That will be the day that I believe that! <form>pulapula</form> <pos>n</pos> scattered red spots or dots. <form>puláhan</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the name given to the Filipino fighters for independence against the Spaniards and then the Americans (so called from their red badges). <number>2</number> types of fish with predominantly red hues. <form>puláhay</form> <pos>n</pos> infant. <form>ka-</form> redness. <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> lipstick. <form>pulahun</form> <pos>a</pos> reddish. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>PULÁHAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púlak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>fall</tr> down from a height, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Magpúlak kug mga tambis,</i> I'll knock some tambis fruits down. <i>Mupúlak (mapúlak) ang prutas ug labihan na sa kahinug,</i> Fruits will fall when they are overripe. <i>Napúlak ang misitíra gíkan sa bintánà,</i> The potted plant fell from the window sill. <number>2</number> fail in an examination or subject. <i>Sa nangúhà sa iksámin usa ray napúlak,</i> Of those that took the exam, only one failed. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a nut, fruit that has fallen. <number>2</number> coconuts that have fallen off the tree. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> gather fallen fruits, esp. coconuts.

<p><form>pulákì</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>odd</tr>, not evenly divisible by a given number. <i>Duhay pulákì. Tulu mi, unyà limay inyung gihátag,</i> There are two left over. There <corr sic=is>are</corr> three of us and you gave five. <number>2</number> be the <tr>leftover</tr> when s.t. is divided. <i>Ang pulákì ámù na lang pikásun,</i> Let's just divide the one left over. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; c16]</itype> come out not evenly divisible.

<p><form>pulákut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be <tr>lighted</tr> and <tr>burning</tr>. <i>Dì mupulákut ang tinustus kay basà ang tabákù,</i> The cigars won't burn because the tobacco is wet. <i>Pulakúta (ipulákut) úsà ang káyu úsà sugnúri,</i> Let the fire start burning before you add fuel.

<p><form>pulálak, pulálay</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>PURAY</sc> (humorous euphemism).</xr>

<p><form>pul-an</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>PÚLU<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PUUL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pulána</form> <xr>= <sc>PULÁNU</sc> (female).</xr>

<p><form>pulang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. sharp <tr>machete</tr> with a round or square tip for heavy-duty work. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> make a machete of this type. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> acquire this k.o. machete.

<p><form>púlang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for a baby to learn to <tr>jump</tr>, bounce up and down when held. <i>Mupúlang na ang bátà,</i> The child is now learning to jump. <i>Dì pa makapúlang si Bíbi,</i> Baby can't jump yet. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put a child in a <ix>pulangan</ix>. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> chair attached to a spring pole in which a baby is placed so that it can jump up and down.

<p><form>púlang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>die</tr> from intense cold, feel as cold as if one was about to die. <i>Ang katugnaw mauy mupúlang sa mga háyup,</i> The cold will kill the animals. <i>Gipúlang ku,</i> I'm freezing to death.

<p><form>pulángì</form> <xr>= <sc>PULANGKÌ<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pulangkì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> space under the roof parallel to the ridge pole immediately beneath it. <number>2</number> the space including a platform just below it which forms an attic.

<p><form>pulangkì<sub>2</sub></form> red (humorous). <i>À, kapulangkì nímug sinínà,</i> What a red dress you've got on!

<p><form>pulánu</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to a hypothetical male. <i>Bísag si Pulánu pay muimbitar nímu, ayaw pag-uban,</i> Even if it's Mr. So-and-so that invites you, don't go with him.

<p><form>pulas, púlas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>remove</tr> s.t. from s.t. that covers or encircles it, or remove the covering thing. <i>Napulas ang kálù paghurus sa hángin,</i> The hat was blown away in the wind. <i>Ug ímung pulasun (ipulas) ang ímung kamut sa púsas, muhugut hinúun kini,</i> If you try to slip your hands out of the hand-*cuffs, <pb n=794>they'll just tighten. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> remove the tie from the coconut palm bud to stop the toddy flow and allow the bud to develop fruit. <i>Pulasi ang sanggutan arun mamúnga,</i> Untie the coconut bud so it will bear fruit. <number>2</number> allow s.t. to run over the face to remove s.t. <i>Puwasa ang dágat sa ímung nawung,</i> Let the sea water run over your face. <number>3</number> <itype>[B23(1); c1]</itype> for s.t. to wear off, disappear. <i>Mipúlas ang adlaw sa búkid,</i> The sun disappeared behind the mountains. <i>Wà pa makapulas ang ispiritu sa bínu,</i> The effect of the liquor hasn't worn off yet. <number>4</number> <formx>papulaspúlas</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> rub the hands over the face. <i>Namulaspúlas ku pagpawálà sa katulúgun,</i> I rubbed my hands over my face to get rid of my feeling of sleepiness.

<p><form>pulásik</form> (from <ix>lásik</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S3(1)N; b2c1]</itype> fly apart in various directions because of force. <i>Mipulásik (namulásik) ang lápuk pag-ági sa trák,</i> The mud spattered in all directions when the truck passed by. <i>Pagkahúlug sa búlig, namuwásik ang mga lubi,</i> When the bunch of coconuts fell, the coconuts flew off in all directions.

<p><form>pulaspulas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> do s.t. with hurried motions. <i>Dì ka makapulaspulas ánang ímung líhuk kay dilikádu nang ímung búhat,</i> You can't do that work hurriedly because it is a delicate piece of work.

<p><form>pulaw, púlaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> stay up very late at night or the whole night through. <i>Nagpulaw ku sa bátà gabíi,</i> I stayed up all night to watch the child last night. <i>Dì ku mupulaw (mamulaw) ug tuun,</i> I won't stay up late studying. <i>Gipuláwan (gipamuláwan) sa sastri ang ákung sinínà,</i> The seamstress stayed up late finishing my dress. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> keep a fire or lamp going the night through. <i>Magpúlaw ku arun dúna tay káyu kanúnay,</i> I'll keep a fire burning so that we'll always have fire. <number>3</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> for a feeling to be kept alive. <i>Ang tingúhà sa pag-adtu sa Amirika nagpúlaw sa íyang dughan sukad sa bátà pa,</i> The desire to go to America has been <corr sic=keep>kept</corr> burning in his breast since his childhood. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>-AN(&rarr;)</sc>.</xr> <form>-an(&rarr;), ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> small lamp that is left lighted throughout the night. <number>2</number> log that is kept burning day and night.

<p><form>pulaw-as</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c6]</itype> sell s.t. at a lower than usual selling price. <i>Namulaw-as ku ug baligyà sa ákung awtu kay daghan kug útang balayran,</i> I had to sell my car cheap to get money to pay off my debt. <pos>n</pos> sold at a sacrifice. <i>Maáyu ni nga pagkapalíta kay pulaw-as nga pagkabaligyáa,</i> This is a good buy because it was sold at a sacrifice.

<p><form>pulay</form> <xr>= <sc>PURAY</sc> (humorous euphemism).</xr>

<p><form>pulaynas</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>leggings</tr> to protect the lower legs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab]</itype> use, make leggings.

<p><form>pulbíra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>powder case</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> use a powder case.

<p><form>pulbu</form> <xr>= <sc>PULBUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pulbura</form> <pos>n</pos> explosive <tr>powder</tr>.

<p><form>pulburun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>candy</tr> made of powdered milk, flour, sugar, and butter and roasted. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, serve <ix>pulburun</ix>.

<p><form>pulbus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>powder</tr>. <i>Patúbung pulbus,</i> Baking powder. (Lit. yeast that is powder). <number>2</number> face powder. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> wear face powder, powder s.t. <i>Nagpulbus kug tablítas nga itambal sa samad,</i> I am pulverizing a tablet to put on the wound. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> put face powder on. <i>Ayaw pamulbus sa kadaghánan,</i> Do not powder your nose in public.

<p><form>puldir</form> <pos>n</pos> file <tr>folder</tr>.

<p><form>pulgáda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>inch</tr>. <i>Duha ka pulgáda,</i> Two inches. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>measure</tr> s.t. by inches. <i>Panday ang mipulgáda sa káhuy,</i> The carpenter measured the piece of wood. <i>Pulgadáha (ipulgáda) pagsukud ang íyang láwas,</i> Measure her body by the inches. <form>pulgadahan</form> <pos>n</pos> a stick or tape graduated in inches. <form>-s</form> <xr>= <sc>PULGÁDA</sc> (plural&mdash;used only with numbers of Spanish origin).</xr> <i>Dus pulgádas,</i> Two inches. <form>pulgadíra</form> <pos>n</pos> carpenter's measuring <tr>tape</tr> wound in a case or a folding meter stick. <form>pulgadirista</form> <pos>n</pos> in logging, the person who marks the dimensions of the log or lumber to be cut or edged.

<p><form>pulgas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>flea</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infested with fleas. <i>Nagpangilkil ang irù kay gipulgas,</i> The dog is always scratching because he is <tr>infested</tr> with fleas. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>flea-ridden</tr>.

<p><form>pulhawus</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>full</tr> house, full to capacity. <i>Pulhawus pagsalída sa Binhur,</i> There was a full house when they showed Ben Hur. <pos>n</pos> <tr>full house</tr> in poker. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> for there to be a full house, get filled to capacity.

<p><form>pulhù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> shuck off the outer husks of an ear of corn leaving the white inner leaves. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> ears of corn with the outer husks removed.

<p><form>puli</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> chop the bottom of a coconut to make it easy to husk. <i>Pulihi ang lubi únà bunti,</i> Chop the coconut's bottom before you husk it.

<p><form>púli</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>replacement</tr>, one who spells s.o. <i>Aku ang púli nímu,</i> I am your <tr>substitute</tr>. <form>&mdash; <r>[<ix>noun</ix>]</r></form> vice-. <i>Púli pangúlu,</i> Vice-president. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> take the place of s.t. else. <i>Kinsay mupúli nímug magbakasiyun ka?</i> Who will take your place when you take your vacation? <pb n=795><i>Ang kasadyà gipulíhan sa kaguul,</i> Now his mirth changed to sorrow. <i>Munggus ang ipúli pagtanum sa mais,</i> Plant mung beans after the corn. <number>2</number> (by extension) <tr>replace</tr>. <i>Pulíhan tu nátung pawuntin pin nga nawálà,</i> Let's replace the fountain pen that got lost. <form>pulipúli</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>take turns</tr> in doing s.t., do s.t. alternately. <i>Gipulipulíhan nílag bantay ang masakitun,</i> They took turns keeping watch over the patient. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> do s.t. to s.o. by turns. <i>Pulipulíhun lang sila nákug kasábà,</i> I'll give them a scolding alternately. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> substitute or replacement. <form>kapulíhay</form> in the long run. <i>Sa kapulíhay masáyud ra siya,</i> In the long run, he will surely find out the truth.

<p><form>pulída</form> <pos>a</pos> done with craftsmanship, doing good work (female). <i>Pulída kaáyung trabahúa,</i> Well-executed piece of work. <i>Pulída siyang manahì,</i> She sews with skill.

<p><form>pulídu</form> <pos>a</pos> for workmanship to be neat and well-done. <i>Pulídu kaáyu ning íyang baskit,</i> The basket he made is of excellent workmanship. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> for s.t. to come out excellently done. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> do s.t. with good workmanship.

<p><form>pulíkì</form> <pos>a</pos> extremely <tr>busy</tr>. <i>Pulíkì ku run sa báy kay daghan mig bisíta,</i> I'm extremely busy in the house because we have lots of visitors. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B14]</itype> be extremely busy doing s.t. as much as one can. <i>Nagpulíkì kug tubag sa íyang mga pangutána,</i> I had a hard time answering all his questions. <i>Nagkapulíkì siyag sagang sa latigu,</i> He was busy trying to shield himself from the lashes.

<p><form>púling</form> <pos>n</pos> foreign body or matter in the eye or eyes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a3b4]</itype> have a foreign body in the eye. <i>Makapúling ang abug,</i> Dust can get into one's eyes. <i>Napúling ku, napulíngan ákung mata,</i> I got s.t. in my eyes. <i>Way dakung makapúling,</i> There are some things a small person can do that a big person can not do. (Lit. S.t. big cannot get into the eyes.) <form>&mdash; sa mata</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> offend one's moral sense. <i>Salídang law-ayng makapúling sa mata,</i> A dirty film offensive to the morals.

<p><form>pulípug</form> <xr>= <sc>PILÍPUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púlir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tweezers</tr> for plucking hair out. <form>hir &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>PÚLIR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pulis</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>policeman</tr>. <formx>&mdash; sa bantuk</formx> a two-bit cop (lit. policeman from the uplands). <number>2</number> a wife who checks on her husband (humorous). <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; klírans</formx> <pos>n</pos> police clearance. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be, become a policeman. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN2; a12]</itype> check up on one's husband or children like a policeman (humorous). <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C6]</itype> report s.o. to the police. <i>Láyas na kay ug dílì, ipapulis ta ka,</i> Get out of here or I will report you to the police. <form>-íya</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>KAPULISAN</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>PULIS</sc>, <i>n1, v1.</i></xr> <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> occupation of being a policeman. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> police.

<p><form>pulísa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>policy</tr>, written <tr>contract</tr>. <i>Pulísa sa insyúrans,</i> Insurance policy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> issue s.o. a policy.

<p><form>pulitika</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>politics</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. only as a matter of formality. <i>Ákù lang siyang gipulitikahan ug imbitar,</i> I invited him for formality's sake. <number>2</number> say s.t. in the hopes of obtaining s.t. for it. <i>Pulitikahi lag hangyù si Máma, básig musugut,</i> Try your luck asking Mother because she might agree to it. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> engage in politics or electioneering. <i>Namulitika lang gihápun bísag tápus nang iliksiyun,</i> They are still engaging in politics even though the elections are over. <number>n</number> <tr>politicking</tr>, electioneering. <form>pulitikanhun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>political</tr>. <i>Partídung pulitikanhun,</i> Political party.

<p><form>pulitiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>politician</tr>. <number>2</number> one who promises but accomplishes nothing. <i>Ayawg sálig ánang pulitiku nga musáad ug bísan unsa,</i> He'll promise just about anything, but don't count on it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a politician.

<p><form>pulka</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>polka</tr> dance or music.

<p><form>pulkas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>annihilate</tr>, <tr>destroy</tr> utterly. <i>Ang mga girilya nagpulkas sa usa ka trák nga Hapun,</i> The guerrillas annihilated a truckload of Japanese soldiers. <i>Mahinánuk na ku nga napulkasan na sa dughù ang ákung katri,</i> I sleep soundly now that my bed has been rid of bedbugs. <number>2</number> remove a fish corral from the sea. <i>Pulkása nag inyung bungsud kay tinghabagat na,</i> Remove your fish corral now because the windy season is setting in. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> pay off debts. <i>Nakapulkas siya sa útang pagkadaug níya sa swipstik,</i> He managed to pay off his debts when he won the sweepstakes.

<p><form>pulkum</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for <ix>pulis kumisyunir</ix>, member of the Police Commission.

<p><form>pulmun, pulmunya, pulmuníya</form> <pos>n</pos> diseases of the lungs, esp. <tr>pneumonia</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a4]</itype> get pneumonia or other <tr>pulmonary diseases</tr>.

<p><form>pulpitu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pulpit</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make the pulpit in the church.

<p><form>pulpug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>break</tr> s.t. brittle into tiny pieces. <i>Napulpug ang básung nahagbung,</i> The glass fell and broke into <tr>smithereens</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> tap, knock off fine particles. <i>Akuy mupulpug sa ágiw sa ákung sigarilyu,</i> I'll knock off the ashes of my cigarette. <i>Ákung gipulpúgan ug sulpanilamáyid ang ákung samad,</i> I tapped sulfanilamide powder onto my wound. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> cave under a river bank <pb n=796>where crocodiles make their abode (and bring their prey to destroy them).

<p><form>pulpul</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> not bright. <i>Pulpul kaáyu nang batáa sa klási,</i> That child is very <tr>dull</tr> in class. <number>1a</number> <tr>unskillful</tr> in doing or executing things. <i>Pulpul kaáyung mikaniku kay wà kaáyu sa dyíp,</i> The mechanic was no good. He could not repair the jeep. <number>2</number> for vehicles or animals to be slow in running speed. <i>Pulpul kaáyung mudágan nang kabayúa,</i> That horse runs very slow. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become mentally slow, unskilled, slow in movement.

<p><form>pulríra</form> <xr>= <sc>PLURÍRA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pulsíras</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bracelet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> wear a bracelet. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> get a bracelet.

<p><form>pulsu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pulse</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>wrist</tr>. <form>maáyu ug &mdash;</form> <pos>a</pos> having steady hands. <i>Hantir kaáyu nang tawhána kay maáyu man kaáyug pulsu,</i> That man is a sharpshooter because he has steady hands. <form>pugung sa &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. to stave off hunger (lit. hold back the pulse). <number>2</number> s.t. done temporarily in the absence of s.t. better. <i>Náay íyang trabáhu apan pugung lang nà sa pulsu kay wà may láin,</i> He has a job but it is just temporary because he doesn't have anything else. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; c]</itype> <number>1</number> stave off hunger. <i>Mupugung (mupapugung) sa pulsu ang kindi,</i> Candies will stave off hunger. <number>2</number> <tr>make do</tr> with s.t. <i>Ígù pang makapugung sa pulsu ning diyútayng gasulína sa gasulinahan,</i> This little gasoline is enough to get us to the gas station. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> take s.o.'s pulse. <i>Ang duktur ang muhimulsu (manghimulsu) nímu,</i> The doctor will feel your pulse. <form>rilu di-</form> <pos>n</pos> wrist <tr>watch</tr>.[+]

<p><form>pulta</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>door</tr>, <tr>doorway</tr>. <formx>&mdash; mayur</formx> main door. <number>2</number> admission fee. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>PWIRTU<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> pay admission. <i>Akuy mupulta nímu sa sini,</i> I'll pay your way to the show. <form>pultahan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> doorway. <number>2</number> store space used as a retail establishment. <i>Duha ka náyung pultahan ang ílang giabángan,</i> They rented two adjacent store spaces. <form>pultíra</form> <xr>= <sc>PULTÍRU</sc> (female).</xr> <form>pultíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>doorkeeper</tr>, <tr>usher</tr> who collects admission tickets. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; bc1]</itype> be a ticket collector.

<p><form>pultri</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> one's fowls and the equipment to maintain them. <i>Nasúnug ámung pultri gabíi,</i> Our chicken coop burnt down last night. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> operate a poultry business. <i>Magpultri ku arun ku makabaligyag mga itlug,</i> I want to raise poultry so that I can sell eggs. <number>2</number> set up a poultry house. <i>Magpultri kug kabutangan sa mga manuk,</i> I'll make a coop to shelter the chickens.

<p><form>púlu<sub>1</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> short-sleeved sport <tr>shirt</tr>. <form>&mdash; barung, barung &mdash;</form> short-sleeved <ix>barung</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> get, make into a <ix>púlu</ix>. <form>puluhun</form> <pos>n</pos> material to make into a <ix>púlu</ix>.

<p><form>púlu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>handle</tr> of bladed instruments. <number>2</number> <tr>butt</tr> of a pistol or a revolver. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make, supply the handle of a bladed instrument. <i>Íya nang gipulúan (gipul-ánan) ang ímung sundang,</i> He has made a handle for your bolo. <form>puluan, pul-an</form> <xr>= <sc>PÚLU</sc>, <i>n, v.</i></xr> <form>mag-/nagdáyig ug pul-an ug guna</form> extolling the virtues of one's own possessions. <i>Ang amahan nga nagdáyig sa kagwápa sa íyang kaugalíngung anak mu rag nagdáyig ug puluan ug guna,</i> A father who praises his own daughter's beauty is like a man who praises a bolo handle he made himself.

<p><form>pulù</form> <pos>n</pos> island. <form>ka-an, kapupud-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>archipelago</tr>. <i>Ang kapupud-an sa Pilipínas,</i> The Philippine Islands.

<p><form>púlù</form> <ix>numeral</ix> ten. <pos>v</pos> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PITU</sc>.</xr> <pos>n</pos> ten-peso bill. <form>ika-</form> <pos>a</pos> the tenth. <form>ka-, maka-</form> ten times. <form>na-</form> <xr>= <sc>PÚLÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pulud, púlud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>cut down</tr> plants, esp. large and tall ones. <i>Magpulud mig usa ka púnù nga lubi,</i> We'll cut down a coconut tree. <pos>n</pos> trunk of a plant that has been cut down. <i>Usa ka púlud nga káhuy,</i> A <tr>log</tr>.

<p><form>pulug</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dye</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>color</tr>. <i>Musíga na ang pulug nga pula sa sugà sa trapiku,</i> The traffic light is red. <number>3</number> <tr>power</tr> or <tr>strength</tr> to do s.t. or produce an effect. <i>Pila ra may pulug sa linúgaw nga ipanihápun?</i> There is nothing to a dinner of mere rice porridge. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> dye, color s.t. with a dye. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> give s.t. its appearance by its very presence. <i>Mga púlung nga gipulug sa pagmáhay,</i> Words that were fashioned by her deep remorse. <i>Ang tibuuk palíbut gipulug sa langitnung katahum,</i> Heavenly beauty that bathed the surroundings. <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> picture, describe s.t. in words. <i>Dì mapulug ang ílang gibátì,</i> What they felt was beyond description. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> consider s.t. carefully in the mind. <i>May mga púlung nga manlugwà sa bàbà nga dì pulugun sa hunàhúnà,</i> Words that come out of the mouth without having been carefully thought over in the mind.

<p><form>pulúhu</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lazy</tr>, not eager or willing to work or exert oneself. <number>2</number> mentally <tr>slow</tr>. <i>Pulúhu kaáyu nang batáa sa klási,</i> That boy is very weak in class. <number>3</number> not knowing how to do anything. <i>Pulúhu nang bayhána. Dì gánì kahibáwung mulung-ag,</i> That woman has no skills. She doesn't even know how to cook rice. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become lazy. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> become slow in learning. <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> done in a lazy, indolent way. <i>Pinuluhu man nang ímung linaktan!</i> Hurry up! You are walking so lazily. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> do s.t. in a lazy and indolent manner.

<pb n=797>

<p><form>pulukuy</form> child's word for male genitalia.

<p><form>púlun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>wind</tr> a string or rope into a ball.

<p><form>púlung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>word</tr>. <i>Maáyu ka lang sa púlung,</i> You are only good in talking. <number>1a</number> Word, as used in theology. <i>Sa sinugdánan mau ang Púlung,</i> In the beginning was the Word. <number>2</number> <tr>statement</tr> or <tr>message</tr>. <i>Unsay íyang púlung?</i> What did he say? <form>&mdash; <r>[<ix>gen.</ix>]</r></form> [gen.] <tr>said</tr>. <i>&lsquo;Asa ka?&rsquo; púlung níya,</i> &lsquo;Where are you going?&rsquo; said he. <number>3</number> word received as a point of honor. <i>Bakákun ka kay wà kay púlung,</i> You're a liar because you didn't keep your word. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12C; c]</itype> have a <tr>dialogue</tr>, <tr>conference</tr>. <i>Nagpúlung ang mga tinugyánan sa duha ka násud,</i> The representatives of the two nations had a conference. <i>Gipulúngan námù ang ímung suliran,</i> We discussed your problem in a conference. <form>pulungpúlung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; bc]</itype> engage in a conversation. <i>Wà siyay ikapulungpúlung sukad mabálu,</i> He had no one to talk to after his wife died. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> deliver a speech, say s.t. before an audience. <i>Siya ang únang namúlung,</i> He was the first one to speak to the group. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> say s.t. about s.t. <i>Unsay ímung ikapamúlung niánà<corr sic=",">?</corr></i> What can you say about that? <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> speak to the parents asking for their daughter's hand. <i>Nakapamúlung na siya sa ginikánan sa babáyi,</i> He has already asked the parents for the girl's hand. <pos>n</pos> celebration held in asking a girl's hand from her parents. <form>tigpaN-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>speaker</tr> in a program. <number>2</number> one who speaks for others. <form>-in-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>language</tr>, way of speech. <number>2</number> word of honor. <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> speaker, <tr>orator</tr>. <form>pakig-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>speech</tr>. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>saying</tr>. <i>Dúnay pulungun nga nag-ingun, ang nagputak mauy nangitlug,</i> There is a saying that goes, the one who cackles laid the egg (i.e. whoever complains the loudest must be the culprit).

<p><form>pul-ung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>lop</tr> off with one or two strokes. <i>Nagpul-ung ang hardiníru sa mga balasbas,</i> The gardener is trimming the hedge. <i>Gipul-úngan sa líug si Karlus Únu,</i> Charles I was beheaded. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pruned</tr> or <tr>trimmed</tr>.

<p><form>pulúris</form> <xr>= <sc>PLÚRIS</sc>, 2.</xr> <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> attend a flowers of May celebration.

<p><form>pulus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b8]</itype> <tr>be of use</tr>, do. <i>Kining kahúya dílì magpulus sa halígi,</i> This piece of wood will not do for a post. <i>Láing táwu ang makapulus sa kwarta,</i> S.o. else can make use of the money. <i>Kining likì nga tadyaw dì na kapuslan,</i> This jar is of no use any more because it is cracked. <form>walay &mdash;</form> there is no use, benefit. <i>Wà na nay pús<corr sic=",">.</corr> Ilábay nà,</i> That is no good any more. Throw it away. <form>pahiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make <tr>use</tr> of. <i>Pahimusli (pahimudsi) ang mga taknà sa pagbása,</i> Make use of the hours by reading. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> take <tr>advantage</tr> of. <i>Dílì ku mupahimulus sa kahúyang sa uban,</i> I will not take advantage of others' weaknesses. <i>Pahimudsi ang tanyag,</i> Take advantage of the offer. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> take advantage of a woman sexually. <i>Gipahimuslan ang íyang pagkababáyi samtang gikuyapan siya,</i> She was molested while she was unconscious. <form>puslan (pudsan) man</form> inasmuch as [so-and-so] has happened, [such-and-such] might just as well happen, too. <i>Puslan (pudsan) man nga nahumud ku maáyu pa ug malígù,</i> Now that I got wet, I might as well go in all the way (i.e., since I started it, I might as well go the whole hog). <form>kapuslánan</form> <pos>n</pos> use or <tr>benefit</tr> that can be gotten from s.t. <i>Unsa may kapuslánan ánang ímung paglakwatsa?</i> What good is it for you to roam about? <form>mahimuslánun, mapahimuslánun</form> <pos>a</pos> inclined to avail oneself of any opportunity that comes one's way. <form>mapuslánun, mapudsánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>useful</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be useful. <i>Ihátag nà nákù kay magmapuslánun (magmapudsánun) ra gihápun nà,</i> Give it to me because it is still of use.

<p><form>pulus<sub>2</sub>, púlus<sub>1</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) be all s.t. <i>Pulus babáyi mi dinhi,</i> We are all women here. <i>Pulus ka lang balíbad dà,</i> You always say no. <i>Pulus dáan ang ákung libru,</i> My books are all old. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; c16]</itype> be <tr>covered</tr> all over with, be all full of s.t. of one kind. <i>Napulus patik ang buktun sa prísu,</i> The prisoner's arms are all covered with tattoos.

<p><form>pulut</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <xr>= KAPULUT.</xr>

<p><form>púlut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1b6]</itype> <tr>pick up</tr> s.t. with the hand(s). <i>Mipúlut kug batu pagdúul sa irù,</i> I picked up a rock when the dog came toward me. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> <tr>come across</tr> s.t. by accident. <i>Íyang giúlì ang pitáka nga íyang hipulutan,</i> She returned the wallet that she had found. <form>paN-</form> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>gather</tr> by picking up. <i>Mamúlut kug dalag sa lumbuy pára líkin,</i> I will gather yellowed lumbuy leaves for cigars.

<p><form>pulyitu, pulyítus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>leaflet</tr>, <tr>handbill</tr>.

<p><form>pulyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>polio</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> get polio.

<p><form>pumáda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pomade</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make into, apply pomade. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> put pomade on oneself.

<p><form>pumpung</form> <xr>= <sc>PALUNGPUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púna</form> <xr>= <sc>PÚLUNG NÍYA</sc>.</xr> <xr>see <sc>PÚLUNG</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr>

<p><form>púnà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> replant spaces in a field where a seed or plant failed to grow. <i>Íya nang gipunáan ang dapit nga wà tugki,</i> She has already replanted the places where nothing sprouted. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> repair a fishnet. <i>Gipunáan <pb n=798>pa ang púkut,</i> They're still mending the net.

<p><form>púnà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> dye and strengthen a fishline or net by rubbing it with the scrapings from the bark of a k.o. mangrove (<ix>tabígì</ix>). <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> bark scrapings from mangrove for fishlines.

<p><form>púnas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>wash</tr> the face and limbs with a soapy washcloth. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> wash oneself off with a washcloth. <i>Mamúnas lang ku kay diyútay ra ang túbig,</i> I'll just wipe myself off with a washcloth because there isn't very much water. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having no pubic hair. <number>2</number> in the game of <ix>balinsay</ix>, failure to catch s.t. on the back of the hand. <i>Kurug man gud kaáyu ang ákung kamut mau nga kanúnay lang punas inigbalinsay nákù,</i> My hands are shaky. That's why I always catch nothing at the back of my palm (get a bald head) when I play <ix>balinsay</ix>.

<p><form>punaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible <tr>clam</tr> about 1&frac12;&Prime; in diameter. It is a dark reddish-brown color.

<p><form>púnaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126; a4b4]</itype> feel <tr>faint</tr>. <i>Gipúnaw (gipunáwan) ku sa kabúhì,</i> I felt faint from my stomach pain. <number>2</number> <itype>[b4(1)]</itype> be overcome by a strong emotion. <i>Napunáwan siya sa hilabihang kasubù,</i> She was overcome with grief. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be overcome by shame. <i>Mu rag napúnaw ku sa íyang tinutukan,</i> The way he stared at me, I wanted to sink into a crack in the floor. <form>punawpúnaw paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> go far away from s.o. to the horizon or upper spaces where the image is blurred. <i>Namunawpúnaw ang langgam sa kahitas-an,</i> The bird soared up to the highest reaches of the sky. <form>kapunawpunáwan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> horizon, upper reaches of heaven. <number>2</number> deepest recesses of one's consciousness (literary). <i>Ang íyang tíngug mikulíkut sa kapunawpunáwan sa ákung katúlug,</i> Her voice pierced into the depths of my slumber.

<p><form>punay, púnay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; ab36c]</itype> do s.t. always, keep on doing s.t. <i>Ngánung nagpúnay ka mag tan-aw níya<corr sic=",">?</corr></i> Why are you always looking at (keep on looking at) her? <i>Unsay ímung gipunáyan ug hílak<corr sic=",">?</corr></i> What are you always crying about? <i>Ayaw ipúnayg kalígù sa dágat ang ímung hubag,</i> Don't keep going swimming in the ocean with that boil of yours.

<p><form>púnay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. bird, the pink-necked green <tr>pigeon</tr>: <bio>Treron vernans</bio>.

<p><form>punda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pillow case</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put on, use, make into a pillow case.

<p><form>pundadur</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. imported <tr>liquor</tr>.

<p><form>pundahan</form> <pos>n</pos> small variety <tr>store</tr> that also sells food and drinks.

<p><form>pund&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>found</tr> or set up an organization. <i>Nagpund&acaron;r sila ug kaugalíngun nílang iskuylahan,</i> They founded their own school.

<p><form>pundasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>foundation</tr>, supporting material. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> apply a foundation before putting cosmetics on. <i>Nahámis ang íyang náwung kay nagpundasiyun man,</i> Her face is smooth because she is using a foundation. <number>2</number> make a foundation for a structure. <i>Malig-un ang balay ug pundasiyunan,</i> The house will be strong if it has a foundation.

<p><form>pundídu</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>PUNDIR<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.

<p><form>pundilyu</form> <xr>= <sc>PUNDÍYU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pundir<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>melt</tr> and <tr>cast</tr> metal. <i>Pundíhun ni námung brunsig kampána,</i> We will cast this bronze slab into a bell. <form>pundihan, pundihánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>foundry</tr>. <form>pundídu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cast iron</tr>. <i>Ang gigáwì sa paghímù sa kaláhà pundídu kay muagwanta ug ínit,</i> They use cast iron for frying pans because it can take heat.

<p><form>pundir<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; ab4(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>burn out</tr> a bulb, <tr>use up</tr> a battery, machine; become burnt out or used up. <i>Ilísi ang bumbilyang napundir,</i> Replace the bulb that burnt out. <i>Nagkapundir ang mga makina kay dáan na man,</i> The engines are going out of commission one after another because they are so old. <number>2</number> knock s.o. out of commission. <i>Uy, makapundir sa láwas ning álak,</i> This liquor can put you out of commission. <pos>a</pos> <tr>burnt out</tr> of commission. <form>pundídu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get burnt out.

<p><form>pundíyu</form> <pos>n</pos> length in pants from the waist along the fly to the crotch. <form>pundiyúhan</form> <xr>= <sc>PUNDÍYU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pundu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>anchor</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>deposit</tr>, amount paid to guarantee the return of s.t. <number>2a</number> <tr>funds</tr>, <tr>money</tr> set aside for s.t. <number>2b</number> <tr>stock</tr>, amount of s.t. set aside. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> make an <tr>anchor</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> drop <tr>anchor</tr>. <i>Mupundu ta dinhi,</i> Let's drop anchor here. <i>Gipundúhan na ang sakayan,</i> The boat dropped anchor. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> stay s.w. for a while. <i>Mupundu ta sa landung kadiyut,</i> Let's rest in the shade for a while. <number>2b</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>settle down</tr>, stop doing s.t. <i>Nagpundu na ang íyang pagtambuk,</i> He has stopped putting on weight. <number>2c</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put animals away for the night. <i>Gipundúhan na ba nímu ang kabáyù?</i> Have you put the horse away for the night? <number>3a</number> lay a vehicle or machinery aside. <i>Ámung gipundu ang ámung kutsi samtang nagbakasiyun mi,</i> We stored our car while we were on vacation. <number>3b</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> deposit s.t. as guarantee. <i>Ang butilya gipundúhan ug diyis,</i> They deposited ten cents for the bottle. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> fund a project. <i>Usa ka miliyun ang gipundu álang sa ubras,</i> A million pesos have been funded for public works. <number>4a</number> set aside stock for s.t. <i>Bangà ang gipundúhan sa túbig,</i> They stored <pb n=799>the water in a jar. <form>punduhánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> anchoring place. <number>2</number> place one stays for a while, animals are put away for the night. <number>3</number> place s.t. is stored, deposited.

<p><form>punduk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; b6]</itype> <tr>gather</tr>, <tr>assemble</tr> together in a group. <i>Dì kita makapunduk sa pasilyu,</i> We can't gather in the passageway. <i>Plása ang ílang gipundúkan,</i> They gathered in the town square. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> gather s.t. <i>Pundúka (ipunduk) ang mga sagbut arun daúban,</i> Pile the trash up to burn it. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>group</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>pile</tr>. <number>3</number> <tr>political party</tr>. <i>Mubali ku sa punduk Libiral,</i> I'll cross to the Liberal party. <form>pundukpunduk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> social <tr>gathering</tr>. <i>Sa pundukpunduk dì pud siya mapiri,</i> She would not be out of place in social gatherings. <number>2</number> k.o. small cerith shells (<ix>daludalu</ix>), so called because they are found gathered in bunches.

<p><form>pundul</form> <xr>= <sc>PUNGDUL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pundyi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pongee</tr>, a k.o. thin cloth of raw silk.

<p><form>pung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> onomatopoetic word for an exploding sound, used in children's games. <i>Pung, patay ka na!</i> Bang, you're dead!

<p><form>pung<sub>2</sub>, púng<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> in mahjong, the making of a set of three like pieces (<ix>tríyu</ix>) by adding a discarded piece to one's hand (<ix>káun, 3a</ix>). <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>TRÍYU</sc>.</xr> <form>túdu &mdash;</form> a hand consisting of all <ix><corr sic="tríyu's">tríyus</corr></ix> and an <ix>ay<sub>4</sub></ix> (and thus wins). <form>túdu &mdash; plásis</form> a <ix>plásis</ix> hand which also is a <ix>túdu pung.</ix> <form>túdu &mdash; ul-ap</form> a <ix>túdu pung</ix> hand where no <ix>tríyu</ix> has been laid open on the table. <form>túdu &mdash; uldáwun</form> <pos>n</pos> a <ix>túdu pung</ix> hand where the <ix>tríyus</ix> have all been laid open on the table. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b2c1]</itype> <number>1</number> make a set of three like pieces. <number>2</number> make a <ix>tríyu</ix> hand in card games.

<p><form>púng<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PÚLUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>punga<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>operculum</tr>, a shelly plate attached to the foot of gastropod mollusks which covers the mouth part of the shell when the animal retracts its foot.

<p><form>punga<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PUNGÁNGU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púnga</form> <pos>a</pos> experiencing difficulty in breathing from having too full a stomach or being pregnant. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b4]</itype> experience difficulty in breathing from these causes. <i>Mupúnga (mapúnga) ang pagginháwa ug malabian ug káun,</i> You will experience difficulty in breathing if you overeat. <i>Hala palabiig káun arun pungáhan ka,</i> Go ahead. Eat too much so you'll have difficulty in breathing.

<p><form>pungag, púngag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>break off</tr> a projection, usually s.t. hard, but said also of the part of the water buffalo's nose where the rope is passed or a person's nose. <i>Napúngag ang ákung tangung nasukmagan,</i> My teeth got knocked out when s.o. hit me. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> having s.t. broken off. <i>Pungag ang básu,</i> The glass is <tr>chipped</tr>. <i>Dì na magámit ang kábaw nga pungag,</i> You can't use a carabao any longer if his nose has been ripped open.

<p><form>púngal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a]</itype> <tr>break off</tr> s.t. from its place of attachment, usually s.t. firmly attached. <i>Binúkal túbig ang nakapúngal (nakapapúngal) sa kuku sa báka,</i> We got the hoofs off the cow's feet with boiling water. <i>Pungála lang ang ruska ug dì na maibut,</i> Break the screw off if you can't get it out.

<p><form>pungángu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pedicel</tr> or <tr>peduncle</tr> of flowers and fruits, the stalk which attaches the fruit or flower to the larger peduncle or to the branch. <i>Lig-un ug pungángu ang nangkà,</i> The jackfruit is attached to the branch with a strong stem. <form>punganguhan</form> <pos>n</pos> place where the pedicel attaches to the branch or peduncle.

<p><form>pungàpungà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>gasp</tr> for breath in drowning or in a heavy wind or onrush of water. <i>Nagpungàpungà ang bátà nga gipaatubang sa bintiladur,</i> The baby was gasping for breath because it had been placed in front of an electric fan. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> having difficulty eluding a flurry of punches or strokes. <i>Nagpungàpungà ang buksidur sa kúmù ni Ilurdi,</i> The boxer had his hands full dodging Elorde's blows. <form>ka-</form> <xr>= <sc>PUNGÀPUNGÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pungasì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be coming in fast and in rapid succession. <i>Nagpungasì ang mga bala sa masinggan,</i> The machine gun bullets are coming in rapid succession. <i>Nagpungasì ang ulan,</i> The rain is coming down <tr>relentlessly</tr>. <i>Nagpungasing kaínit,</i> The <tr>relentless</tr> heat.

<p><form>pungdul</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>blunt-ended</tr>. <i>Lisud itahì ang dágum nga pungdul,</i> It is difficult to sew with a <tr>blunt</tr> needle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB1; b5]</itype> be, become blunt-ended. <i>Gipungdul (gipungdúlan) ku ang mga tumuy sa kural arun way matúsuk,</i> I cut the sharp ends off of the fence posts so no one could get hurt on them.

<p><form>pungga</form> <pos>n</pos> game of shooting pebbles into holes using a stone to knock the opponent's stones (<ix>pangának</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; b6]</itype> play this game.

<p><form>punggak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1b7]</itype> knock s.t. down by breaking it off at its base or from its attachment. <i>Makapunggak ka ba ánang manggag pusil gamítun?</i> Can you knock that mango down with a gun? <i>Punggakun (punggákun) ta nang balay sa lapínig,</i> Let's knock the beehive down. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> for the seat of the pants to be worn out. <i>Nagkapunggak na ang lubut sa ákung karsúnis,</i> The seat of my trousers is gradually wearing out. <pos>a</pos> worn-out at the seat.

<p><form>punggit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> <number>1</number> hit s.t. with a missile <pb n=800>to knock it down or off. <i>Wà siya makapunggit sa iruplánu sa kaáway,</i> He was not able to shoot down the enemy plane. <i>Batu ray ákung ipunggit ánang bayábas,</i> I'll knock that guava down with a stone. <number>2</number> <tr>hit</tr> s.t. directly. <i>Punggíta ang úlu sa manuk,</i> Hit the chicken in the head. <number>3</number> break, cut s.t. off. <i>Ang hitabù nakapunggit sa íyang ambisiyun,</i> The event cut down his soaring ambition. <number>4</number> <tr>mark</tr> s.o. for s.t. bad. <i>Ug mapildi ang Libiral punggítun siya sa ubus nga pwistu,</i> He's marked for demotion to a low position if the Liberal Party loses.

<p><form>punggud</form> <xr>= <sc>PUGUD</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PÚGUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>punggut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> <tr>behead</tr>. <i>Ayaw punggúta ang líug sa inusinti,</i> Don't cut off the head of an innocent man.

<p><form>púngì, púngil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>detach</tr> or <tr>break off</tr> s.t. from an attachment or joint, esp. s.t. delicate or breakable. <i>Akuy nagpúngil sa lugpit sa pawuntin pin,</i> I broke the clip off the fountain pen. <i>Ayaw pungíla ang mga gihay sa mga búlak,</i> Don't <tr>pluck</tr> the petals off the flowers.

<p><form>pungíngi</form> <xr>= <sc>BUNGÍNGI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pungkay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>summit</tr>. <i>Naabut na ang pungkay sa Mawunt Ibirist,</i> They have reached the <tr>top</tr> of Mount Everest. <number>2</number> highest degree of s.t. <i>Ang pungkay sa kalampúsan,</i> The highest point of success. <form>kina-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>topmost</tr> part, as of a summit, highest degree of s.t. <i>Kinapungkayan sa lamì,</i> At the highest point of ecstasy.

<p><form>pungkay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> child's word for female genitalia.

<p><form>pungkù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>squat</tr>. <i>Nag-alírung silang nagpungkù nga nagtan-aw sa hantak,</i> They were squatting in a circle watching the tossing of the coins. <number>2</number> <tr>sit down</tr>. <i>Mahugnù ang lamísag inyung pungkúan,</i> The table will collapse if you <tr>sit</tr> on it. <number>3</number> sit idly doing nothing. <i>Ang ímu dihang gipungkù ug gihinayhínay pa nímug trabáhu may ági ka na,</i> The time you wasted sitting around, if you had used it to start work little by little, you would have had s.t. to show for it by now. <number>4</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> <formx>&mdash; sa bilangguan</formx> be willing to go to prison just so s.t. is accomplished. <i>Pungkúan lang nákù ang Bilíbid, basta lang mapatay siya,</i> I'm willing to go to Bilibid prison as long as he dies.[+]

<p><form>pungkul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> lacking a limb. <i>Ang pungkul makasulat gihápun,</i> The <tr>amputee</tr> can still write. <form>ságing &mdash;</form> k.o. short and thick banana growing closely packed in large bunches, eaten when ripe: <bio>Musa sapientum var. humilis</bio>. <number>2</number> <tr>short pants</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126; b4]</itype> get <tr>amputated</tr>. <i>Gipungkúlan (napungkul) ang kamut sa kawatan,</i> The hand of the thief was cut off. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> wear, make short pants.

<p><form>pungkuy</form> <pos>n</pos> child's word for the penis.

<p><form>pungli</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>aspiration</tr> to become a certain sort of person, reach a high degree of virtue in s.t. <i>Adúna siyay pungli sa pagkasantus,</i> He has the aspiration to become a saint.

<p><form>pungpung</form> <xr>= <sc>PALUNGPUNG<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pungpungáya</form> <pos>n</pos> game played with a baby where one takes the hands and the feet, bunches them saying a rhyme and letting them go: <ix>pungpungáya, pungpungáya, bukhad iláwum, Pungpungáya,</ix> open underneath. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> play <ix>pungpungáya</ix> with a baby.

<p><form>pungpung lálung</form> <xr>= <sc>PUNGPUNG PYÁNGAW</sc>, <i>n, v.</i></xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12C2]</itype> <tr>have sexual intercourse</tr> (humorous). <i>Bag-u tingáling nakapungpung lálung kay gipaningut man,</i> He probably played <ix>pungpung pyángaw</ix> because he is perspiring.

<p><form>pungpung pyángaw</form> <pos>n</pos> a game of the hands played by children wherein the players put their fists one on top of the other. A child not participating is the leader (<ix>abat</ix>) and recites a verse after which the fist at the bottom opens; the verse is repeated and the next fist opens, and so forth, until everybody has opened his fist. Then the leader inserts his index finger into the pile of hands letting the players guess in turn if his finger have touched bottom. The verse recited goes: <i>Pungpung pyángaw, Bukadbukad iláwum, Kulítug kulítug, Lagbas na ba? Pungpung pyángaw,</i> Open up the lowest hand, Thrust the finger in, Has it reached the bottom? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> play <ix>pungpung pyángaw</ix>.

<p><form>pungtud</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>hill</tr>, a natural raised part of the earth's surface often rounded, smaller than a mountain. <number>2</number> <tr>anthill</tr>. <number>3</number> <tr>shoal</tr> or <tr>sandbar</tr>, an island-like formation in shallow seas, visible during low tide. <i>Manginhas ku sa pungtud inighunas,</i> I'll gather shells at the shoal during low tide. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be formed into a hill. <form>kapungtúran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hills</tr>. <form>kinapungturan</form> <pos>n</pos> topmost part of the hill.

<p><form>pung-ul</form> <xr>= <sc>PUL-UNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pungun</form> <pos>n</pos> sharp object (<tr>spine</tr>, <tr>thorn</tr>, and the like) that has pricked and is lodged into the body. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a3b4]</itype> <tr>prick</tr> and be lodged in the body. <i>Mupungun gayud ang mga tunuk sa tuyum,</i> The spines of the sea urchins will surely be lodged in the skin if they prick you. <number>2</number> <itype>[b]</itype> for a woman to be had for sexual intercourse (humorous). <i>Kay natúlug siya uban sa íyang trátu, sigúru giyud ku nga gipungnan siya,</i> Because she slept with her lover, I'm sure she had sexual intercourse <pb n=801>with him.

<p><form>púngus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>gather</tr> the hair and tie it in a knot. <i>Mupúngus ku sa buhuk ug inítan ku,</i> I'll knot my hair when I feel warm. <number>2</number> tie up the hair with a ribbon or wig, wiglet. <i>Magpúngus lang ku arun mapangkù ning ákung buhuk,</i> I'll use a wig so that I can wear my hair in a chignon. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wig</tr> or a piece of cloth worn with the hair knotted or swept up.

<p><form>pungut</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>irritating</tr>, <tr>maddening</tr>. <i>Pungut bayà kaáyu nímu nga mukatáwa lag kasab-an,</i> It's maddening the way you simply laugh when you are scolded. <form>pila ray &mdash;</form> how badly did [so-and-so] want to eat it, when he only eats very little (said of things s.o. wanted to eat very much and then when it was served, he didn't eat a great quantity). <i>Manganduy tag inasal apan kun náa na, pila ra giyuy pungut,</i> One yearns for roasted pig, but when it's there, you can only eat so much. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a2b3]</itype> be, become <tr>angry</tr>, highly <tr>irritated</tr>. <i>Kanang sayúpa ang nakapungut (nakapapungut) nákù nímu,</i> That mistake made me mad at you. <i>Unsa may ímung napungtan nákù?</i> What made you mad at me? <i>Gipungtan ku ning trabahúa,</i> I hated this k.o. work. <form>pungutpungut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456; a12]</itype> be in an irritable mood. <i>Nagkapungutpungut ku run sa ákung trabáhung wà magkadimáu,</i> I am in a bad mood now because I didn't do my work properly. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> fly into a <tr>rage</tr>, <tr>fury</tr>. <i>Namungut ang buksidur dihang nagdugù ang íyang ilung,</i> The boxer flew into a rage when his nose was bloodied. <pos>n</pos> fit of rage, fury. <form>pahiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>vent</tr> one's anger on. <i>Aku lay íyang gipahimungtan sa áway sa íyang trátu,</i> He took his anger at his girl friend out on me. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>anger</tr>. <form>pungtánun, pulungtánun, mapungtánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>irritable</tr>, easily getting angry.

<p><form>púngut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>join</tr> things together by tying or pasting them. <i>Magpúngut kug písì nga hayháyan,</i> I'll join together pieces of rope for a clothesline. <number>2</number> <itype>[C; c1]</itype> for two people to have a claim on part of a piece of money for lack of loose change. <i>Ang ímung singkwinta nagpúngut sa písus nga gibáyad nákù,</i> Your payment is included in the peso bill which he paid me. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for a thicket to form with intertwining weeds. <pos>n</pos> thick cluster of intertwining shrubs and grasses. <i>Ságad ang buntug mulukluk sa púngut,</i> Usually the quail hides in the <tr>underbrush</tr>. <form>-ay(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> have intercourse (coarse, but not very much so). <form>kapupungtan, kinapungtan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the endmost part of s.t. long where it joins to s.t. else. <i>Putla ang tinái dihà sa íyang kapupungtan sa túngul,</i> Cut the intestines at the place where they join the stomach. <number>2</number> the <tr>endmost</tr> part of anything very long or high. <i>Didtu níla hiapsi ang kawatan sa kapupungtan sa sapà, nag-inum,</i> They came across the thief at the head of the river, drinking. <i>Ang payag túa gitúkud sa kinapungtan sa búkid,</i> The shack was built at the top of the mountain.

<p><form>pungyut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> for an area of s.t. to sag so as to hang unevenly or make a <tr>bulge</tr>. <i>Nalibang tingálig bátà kay nagpungyut ang panti,</i> The child must have dirtied his pants because they are bulging. <i>Ayawg pungyúta (ipungyut) ang ímung bulsa sa húlin,</i> Don't let your pocket sag with marbles.

<p><form>puni</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tablecloth</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b6(1)]</itype> cover with a tablecloth. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a tablecloth.

<p><form>púni</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>replant</tr> a part of a field where seeds failed to sprout or where plants are damaged. <i>Ákù nang gipuníhan ang mga mais nga gikaun sa kábaw,</i> I replaced the corn plants that the water buffalo ate.

<p><form>punirarya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>funeral parlor</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> make, put up a funeral parlor.

<p><form>punit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>pick up</tr> with the hands. <i>Punita nang ímung duláan sa salug,</i> Pick your toys up from the floor. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> <tr>find</tr> s.t. <i>Nakapunit kug daghang kwarta,</i> I found a large sum of money. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> pick up a lesson, take s.t. and <tr>steal</tr> it. <i>Makapunit kag daghang pagtulun-an niíning sugilambúnga,</i> You can pick up a lot of lessons from this novel. <number>2b</number> choose a girl. <i>Kinsa guy mupunit nákung laksut man ku?</i> Who would ever choose me when I'm so ugly? <number>n</number> action of picking s.t. up. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; b3(1)4(1)c1]</itype> <tr>abort</tr>, <tr>miscarry</tr>. <i>Ang midisína nga íyang giinum mauy nakapúnit (nakapapúnit) sa íyang gisabak,</i> The medicine that she took caused her to abort her child. <i>Napunítan siya kay nang&amacracu; unyà wà matúman,</i> She lost her baby because she didn't get the things she craved. -in- <pos>n</pos> s.t. picked up. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. found. <i>Gisagup sa rayna ang bátang pinunitan,</i> The queen adopted the child that s.o. found.

<p><form>punitil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ponytail</tr> style of tying the hair up and letting it hang down loose. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do one's hair in this style.

<p><form>puniyal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dagger</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> stab s.o. or s.t. with a dagger. <i>Ang táwung gipuniyal sa kasingkásing namatay dáyun,</i> The man who was stabbed in the heart died immediately. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> make into a dagger.

<p><form>punlas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b1]</itype> rinse washed clothes with citrus juice and water, esp. pineapple fiber <pb n=802>cloth to stiffen it. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> apply aromatic leaves, citrus and the like, to the hair after bathing. <i>Mupunlas kug suwà sa ákung buhuk,</i> I rinse my hair with lemon.

<p><form>punpal</form> <pos>n</pos> person whom one calls up regularly to talk to on the phone, but whom one does not know in person. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C1; a12]</itype> be, become a phone pal. <i>Ug makigpunpal ka ayaw gawía ring ákù,</i> If you are calling just to make friends with s.o., don't use my phone.

<p><form>punpun</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>gather</tr> powder, grains into a heap by scooping them together with the hands. <i>Punpúna ang ímung giníuk humay sa taliw&amacrgra; sa banig,</i> <tr>Pile</tr> the rice you threshed in the center of the mat. <number>2</number> [A3 ; a12] <tr>compile</tr>, <tr>collect</tr>. <i>Gipunpun ang tanang mananáug nga sugilánun sa usa ka bulyum,</i> All the winning entries of stories were compiled in one volume. <number>2a</number> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> <tr>accumulate</tr>, <tr>pile</tr> up. <i>Ug sa matag adlaw nga milabay láing kahásul ang mipunpun dihà sa íyang kaisípan,</i> And each day that passed another worry accumulated in her mind. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> in weeding, knock off the soil and heap up the weeds for disposal. <i>Mamunpun (mupunpun) ku sa ímung ginúna,</i> I will knock the soil off the weeds you pulled up and heap them at the side. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> pile of s.t. powdered or in grains. <number>2</number> compilation. <number>3</number> accumulation.

<p><form>punsi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> mix an alcoholic beverage with another drink (but not water). <i>Tubà nga gipunsíhag pitsi,</i> Toddy mixed with pepsi. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make punch. <i>Punsíhun nákù ning diyútay nga bínu ug ang limunsitu,</i> I'll make a punch of this little bit of wine and calamondin juice. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> beverage used as a <tr>mixer</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>punch</tr>.

<p><form>punsísuk</form> <pos>a</pos> for vertical things to be situated packed very closely and tightly. <i>Punsísuk ang púsù sa bukag,</i> The ears of corn were <tr>crammed</tr> into the basket. <pos>n</pos> crowded mass of s.t. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> crowd closely around s.t. or in s.t. <i>Nagpunsísuk (nagpunsisuk) ang mga táwu sa sini,</i> The people <tr>packed</tr> the movie house. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>pack</tr> things close together tightly.

<p><form>punsiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> social function: gathering, reception, banquet. <i>Makabuhung nga punsiyun ang gidálit níla,</i> They served a most satisfactory banquet. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13N; b]</itype> wear s.t. decorative in one's hair. <i>Babáyi nga nagpunsiyun (namunsiyun) ug rúsas sa íyang buhuk,</i> A girl wearing a rose in her hair.

<p><form>punsiyunaryu</form> <pos>n</pos> high-ranking government official.

<p><form>Punsiyu Pilátu</form> <pos>n</pos> Pontius Pilate. <pos>a</pos> wicked. <i>Bísag pakan-un pa nas pád, punsiyu pilátu giyud nang dakù,</i> You might feed him from the palm of your hand, but he's a <tr>wicked</tr> beast.

<p><form>punsu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>poncho</tr>, usually a rubberized one against rain. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> wear, use, make into a poncho.

<p><form>punsu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>PUNSUN</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> the dent mark made by a prick punch.

<p><form>punsun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a long piece for hammering a bolt or bar. <number>2</number> various kinds of punches: <number>2a</number> center <tr>punch</tr> for making holes in sheet metal. <number>2b</number> nail set. <number>2c</number> prick punch. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> use a punch on s.t.

<p><form>punta<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>head</tr> towards a place. <i>Diin siya punta,</i> Where was he <tr>headed</tr>? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> head s.t. s.w. <i>Kanang kahúya mauy puntáhun,</i> Head toward that tree. <i>Ipunta ang sakayan ngadtu,</i> Head the boat in that direction. <number>3</number> <itype>[B12356]</itype> end up with a certain husband or wife. <i>Namílì siyag dátù, nahipunta núug buguy,</i> She tried to get a rich husband but wound up with a tramp. <form>hi-/ha-</form> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <tr>end up</tr> s.w. <i>Nahapunta siya sa bilangguan,</i> He ended up in jail. <form>-da</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>destination</tr>. <i>Basta mag-ispúting, nasáyud na kug ása ang puntáda,</i> I can readily tell where you are headed for when you are dressed up like that.

<p><form>punta<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>pointed</tr>: <number>1</number> <tr>fluke</tr> of anchor. <number>2</number> the pointed end, <tr>tip</tr> of s.t. <i>Nadasmag siya sa punta sa utáwan,</i> He bumped into the pointed end of the ironing board. <number>3</number> <tr>plow-</tr>*share. <number>4</number> <tr>cape</tr>, pointed piece of land that projects into the sea. <number>5</number> <formx>&mdash; pitsu</formx> <pos>n</pos> <tr>brisket</tr> of beef. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> attach or put a plow-*share s.w. <number>2</number> <itype>[APB26]</itype> turn into a cape, cause a place to do so. <form>kinapuntahan</form> <pos>n</pos> the tip of pointed or tapering things.

<p><form>punta blangku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shooting competition</tr> or <tr>target practice</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1C; a2]</itype> hold a shooting competition or target practice.

<p><form>puntaríya</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. at which one aims. <i>Wà kuy puntaríya nga naglakaw,</i> I walked with no fixed direction. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>aim</tr> s.t. or head towards s.t. <i>Kinsa nang nagpuntaríya sa íyang pusil ngari?</i> Who is that fellow aiming his gun this way? <i>Dílì ta makapuntaríya sa píliw,</i> We can not go towards the shore. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> direct one's remarks at s.o. <i>Dílì ku mupuntaríyag táwu kay ang kasábà páras tanan,</i> I am not referring to anyone in particular because the scolding is for everyone.

<p><form>puntik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>spot</tr>, <tr>dot</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> get tiny spots on s.t. <i>Siyay nagpuntik ug pintal sa salug,</i> He was the one who splattered paint on the floor. <form>puntikpuntik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b6c1]</itype> be covered with dots, spots. <i>Nagpuntikpuntik (gipuntikpuntíkan) <pb n=803>sa mga búlak nga lainláin ug kulur ang lagúna,</i> The meadow was dotted with flowers of all colors. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. that is dotted or spotted. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dotted</tr> or <tr>spotted</tr>.

<p><form>puntil</form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>bag</tr> of cloth, paper. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put into a bag. <i>Ipuntil ang mga sinsilyu,</i> Put the change into a pouch. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a bag.

<p><form>punting</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> hit a target. <i>Ákung puntíngun nang langgam nga nagbatug sa sanga,</i> I'll shoot the bird that's perching atop the branch. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>aim</tr> at s.t. <i>Didtu níya ipunting ang íyang panan-aw sa gwápang dalága,</i> He directed his eyes towards the beautiful woman. <number>2a</number> <tr>direct</tr> one's remarks at s.o. <i>Siyay gipunting sa maung biaybíay,</i> She is the one alluded to in the ridicule. <pos>n</pos> in games, action of hitting s.o.'s piece. <i>Ákung punting run kay human na mu,</i> It's my throw now because all of you have finished.

<p><form>puntinpin</form> <xr>= <sc>PAWUNTIN</sc>, <i>n2, v2.</i></xr>

<p><form>puntiríya</form> <xr>= <sc>PUNTARÍYA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puntíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pointer</tr> which indicates the reading on clock, meter, and the like. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> attach a pointer or <tr>indicator</tr> on s.t. <i>Ákung puntirúhan ug luminus ning ákung rilu,</i> I'll have a luminous dial attached to my watch. <form>puntiruhan</form> <xr>= <sc>PUNTÍRU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puntíyas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lace</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> edge s.t. with a lace.

<p><form>puntu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>point</tr>, the important or main idea. <i>Klarúha ang puntu sa buut mung ipasabut,</i> Clarify the point that you want to make. <form>&mdash; dibista</form> <tr>point of view</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>period</tr> in writing. <number>2a</number> <formx>&mdash; ikúma</formx> semicolon. <number>2a1</number> speaking slowly. <i>Puntu ikúma kaáyug sinultihan,</i> Speaking slowly and tediously. <number>3</number> <tr>accent</tr>, <tr>pronunciation</tr>. <i>Puntu sa Dalagit ang íyang sinultihan,</i> She talks with a Dalaguete accent. <number>3a</number> <tr>tune</tr> of a musical piece. <i>Dì nà mau ang puntu,</i> That's not the tune. <number>3b</number> <tr>timing</tr>, <tr>rhythm</tr>. <i>Maáyug puntu ang íyang sinayawan,</i> She dances in a good rhythm. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fitting</tr>, mixed to the right proportion, done at the right time, <tr>right</tr> for the purpose for which it is meant. <i>Puntu kaáyu ang timpla sa sabaw,</i> The soup is perfectly seasoned. <i>Puntu nang aníhun ang humay,</i> Now is just the time to harvest the rice. <i>Dílì puntu ang midisína nga nadápat sa duktur,</i> The doctor did not administer the right medicine. <i>Dílì puntu ang ímung tubag,</i> Your answer is not exactly to the point. <number>2</number> doing s.t. <tr>regularly</tr>. <i>Dílì puntu ang ílang pagpangáun,</i> They don't eat regularly. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>punctuate</tr> with a period. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2B16; c1]</itype> sing with the correct tune and rhythm. <i>Kamau ming mupuntu ug náay musúgud,</i> We know how to get the correct tune if s.o. starts. <i>Ipuntu (puntúha) ang ímung sinayawan sa sunáta,</i> Dance in time to the music. <number>2a</number> <itype>[C; ac]</itype> in <tr>harmony</tr>. <i>Nagkapuntu ang ílang tíngug,</i> They sang in harmony. <number>2b</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> in pounding rice, when s.o. wants to join in pounding together with s.o. else, to tap the side of the mortar each time the other person's pestle is out in order to get the rhythm prior to pounding, so that when the two are pounding together the pestles will not collide. <i>Puntúhi úsà antis ka muásud,</i> Tap your pestle on the mortar to get the rhythm before you enter in. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> add <tr>seasoning</tr> in the right consistency. <i>Lamì ang sálad ug puntúhun (ipuntu) ang asin, súkà, ug asúkar,</i> The salad will come out nice if the salt, vinegar, and sugar are added in the right proportions. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> do s.t. at the right time or in the right way. <i>Mipuntu giyud síyag adtu arun dílì sila magkabaíwas,</i> He went just at the right time so they wouldn't miss each other. <number>3b</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> make a point in an argument, answer to the point. <i>Mipuntu siya niadtung tubága,</i> He hit the point with that answer. <number>3c</number> <itype>[A2N; b(1)]</itype> <tr>score</tr> a <tr>point</tr>. <i>Siyay mamuntu sa baskit kay hingígù,</i> He makes a lot of baskets because he is a crack player. <number>4</number> <itype>[C1]</itype> do s.t. on a regular schedule. <number>5</number> <itype>[c]</itype> <formx>&mdash; ikúma</formx> speak slowly. <form>panghiN-</form> <xr>= <sc>PUNTU</sc>, <i>v2b.</i></xr> <form>di-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>short pants</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> wear short pants. <form>puntíru</form> <pos>n</pos> one who blends the sugar being refined. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> regional pronunciation.

<p><form>puntud</form> <xr>= <sc>PUNGTUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puntun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pontoon</tr>. <i>Ang ílang pantalan hinímus puntun,</i> Their wharf is made of pontoons.

<p><form>puntus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>points</tr> in a game. <number>1a</number> <tr>blow</tr> in boxing as reckoned as a criteria for winning a game. <number>2</number> <tr>mahjong</tr> player. <i>Dì sila makadúlà ug madyung ug kúlang ang puntus,</i> They can't play mahjong if there are not enough players. <number>2a</number> regular <tr>player</tr> at a certain gambling joint. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>superior</tr> in any way (slang). <i>Usa ray ákung uyab piru puntus man sab,</i> I have only one girl but she really is s.t. <i>Ang puntus nga mga bisíta ispisyal giyud nga pagkatagad,</i> <tr>Important</tr> visitors should be given special treatment. <number>2</number> for a statement or opinion to be loaded with bright ideas. <i>Diyútay ra siyag sulti, piru ug mutíngug, puntus pud,</i> He doesn't have much to say, but when he speaks, it is to the point. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> score. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A2N; b2]</itype> land a good blow at s.o. <i>Bísag gamay si Tiryu nakapuntus sab sa íyang kuntra,</i> Though Terry is small he managed to land a blow on his opponent. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> have a player or players for a mahjong game. <pb n=804><form>-ay(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> game played for points. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> play for points.

<p><form>púnu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>phonograph</tr> or <tr>radio-phono</tr>.

<p><form>punù</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>filled</tr>, <tr>full</tr>. <i>Punù ang ímung úlu sa binúang,</i> Your head is filled with all sorts of foolishness. <number>2</number> <tr>covered</tr> with s.t. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB56; a2]</itype> <tr>fill</tr> up a container or space. <i>Siyay nagpunù sa baldi ug balas,</i> He filled up the pail (with sand). <i>Ang lawak napunù sa mga táwu,</i> The room was filled with people. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1246; a12]</itype> be full of s.t., all covered with. <i>Napunù sa kawras ang íyang mga bitíis,</i> Her legs are all covered with scratches. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>add</tr> s.t. to. <i>Íyang gipun-an ang ámung swildu ug tagdiyis písus,</i> He added ten pesos each to our salary. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A23; c]</itype> say s.t. further in a conversation. <i>Wà na kuy ikapunù sa ákung gisulti sa úna,</i> I have nothing further to add to what I said before. <number>3b</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> [so-and-so] is true on top of s.t. else. <i>Gipun-an pa sa íyang pagkadátù ang íyang pagkabrayit,</i> He is rich and also smart. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>amount added</tr> or thrown into a bargain. <i>Pila may ímung punù sa pagbugtì sa ímung báka sa íyang kabáyù?</i> How much money did you <tr>throw in</tr> when you bartered your cow for his horse? <number>2</number> things said in addition to. <i>&lsquo;Kaáyu untang ipuyù dinhi,&rsquo; punù níya nga nanghupaw,</i> &lsquo;How nice would it be to live here,&rsquo; he added, sighing. <form>maka-</form> <pos>n</pos> a variety of coconut, filled with meat which remains soft even when mature. <form>pulun-an, pulun-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> amount to add. <form>pun-unun, pulun-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>container</tr> to be filled up.

<p><form>púnù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>trunk</tr> of a tree, main stem or body of a tree, apart from the limbs and roots. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>PÚNÙ</sc>.</xr> <number>1a</number> the <tr>tree</tr> as a unit for numeration. <i>Tulu ka punúang mangga,</i> Three mango trees. <number>2</number> <tr>base</tr>, <tr>lowest part</tr> of s.t. <i>Balay nga náa sa punúan sa bungtud,</i> A house at the foot of the hill. <i>Punúan sa hagdan,</i> Foot of the stairs. <number>2a</number> <tr>point of attachment</tr> of a part of the body. <i>Gihubagan ku sa may punúan sa ákung páa,</i> I have a boil right at the base of my thigh. <i>Punúan sa buhuk,</i> The roots of the hair. <number>3</number> <tr>officials</tr> in charge of an office. <i>Punúan sa lungsud,</i> The town officials. <number>4</number> main <tr>office</tr> of a company. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>president</tr>, <tr>governor</tr>. <form>paN- lalawígan</form> <tr>governor</tr> of the province. <form>paN- násud</form> <tr>president</tr> of the nation. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> be the president. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get as one's president. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>govern</tr>. <i>Gibutáan tas mga Katsílà sa dihang silay mipamúnù (namúnù),</i> The Spaniards blinded us when they governed us. <form>paN-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> administration of a certain regime. <number>2</number> way of administering. <form>paN-an nga kumpaníya</form> head office, mother company. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> govern. <i>Ug ikay mamunúan, wà kay mahímù,</i> If you are in power, you won't be able to do anything. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get a certain regime as one's government.

<p><form>púnù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ulcerated scalp infection. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b5]</itype> get this infection.

<p><form>punugrapu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>phonograph</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC12; b6]</itype> have a phonograph to supply music. <i>Magpunugrapu ta sa átung parti,</i> We'll have a phonograph for our party.

<p><form>punuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bruise</tr>, a <tr>discoloration</tr> of the body resulting from a contusion. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b(1)]</itype> for the blood to <tr>congeal</tr> under the skin in a contusion. <i>Mipúnuk ang dugù sa íyang tudlù nga nadukdukan sa martilyu,</i> He hit his finger with a hammer, and the blood congealed.

<p><form>púnung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fishpond</tr> for raising fish to eat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make, dig a fishpond. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>organization</tr> or <tr>association</tr> of people. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> organize people into an association.

<p><form>punyal</form> <xr>= <sc>PUNIYAL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>punyímas</form> euphemism for <ix>punyíta</ix>: an expression of anger or discomfort. <i>Punyímas! Ngánung ímu mang gisilihan ang súkà?</i> <tr>Darn</tr>! Why did you put hot peppers in the vinegar?

<p><form>punyíta<sub>1</sub></form> light curse expressing sudden anger. <i>Punyíta! Ímung gipatay ang makina ínay pakusgan,</i> <tr>Darn</tr>. You killed the motor instead of making it run faster. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a2b2]</itype> shout <ix>punyíta</ix> to s.o. <i>Gipunyíta (napunyitahan) ku sa ákung ámu kay nakapildi kug istanti,</i> My boss shouted &lsquo;darn&rsquo; at me because I broke a display case.

<p><form>punyíta<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PUNYÍTI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>punyíti</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> strike s.o. with the fist in the face. <i>Kaáyu giyung punyitíhan ánang bugasun mung nawung,</i> How I'd love to smash your pimply face in.

<p><form>punyitíra</form> <xr>= <sc>PUNYITÍRU</sc> (female).</xr>

<p><form>punyitíru</form> light curse expressing anger, addressed to a male. <i>Punyitíru ning tawhána, ngánung ímung gikuháan sa tabun ang pagkáun?</i> <tr>Darn</tr> this man. Why did you uncover the food? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> call s.o. <ix>punyitíru</ix>. <form>-s</form> <xr>= <sc>PUNYITÍRU</sc> (plural).</xr> <i>Mga punyitírus! Ihúnung na ang inyung pagsyagitsyágit,</i> Stop that shouting, you punks!

<p><form>punyu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>reduce</tr> the intensity, amount of what one does. <i>Makapunyu ka ba sa ímung gastu?</i> Can you reduce your expenditures? <i>Punyúhi ang pagkáun sa tambuk,</i> Reduce your intake of fat. <i>Gipunyúhan ni Bín ang andar sa makina,</i> Ben reduced the speed of the engine. <pos>a</pos> doing s.t., but in <tr>restricted</tr> quantities. <i>Káun nga way punyu,</i> Eating without restraint. <form>&mdash; siráwu</form> <pos>a</pos> doing s.t. on any extremely restricted scale.

<pb n=805>

<p><form>punyus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cuffs</tr> of the sleeves. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make, attach the cuffs of the sleeves.

<p><form>púpa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>stern</tr> of boats. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>APÚPA</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> go toward the stern. <i>Mipúpa ang hángin,</i> The boat sailed into the wind. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make or build a stern for a boat. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> head the stern of a boat s.w. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> go near. <i>Mipapúpa man gud ka sa nag-áway, naapil ka hinúun,</i> You went near the persons quarreling, so you got involved.

<p><form>pupanda</form> <pos>n</pos> rectangular piece of cloth worn by women around the shoulders as a <tr>shawl</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> wear a shawl. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> make s.t. into a shawl.

<p><form>puphu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> <tr>scoop</tr> up with the hands. <i>Siyay mipuphu (namuphu) sa bugas nga naúsik,</i> She scooped up the rice that spilled. <i>Magpuphu ku sa mga sagbut nga ákung sinilhig,</i> I'll <tr>pick up</tr> the trash that I swept. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> <tr>gather</tr> information, earnings. <i>Nakapuphu ang pulis ug dúgang kasayúran báhin sa túlis,</i> The police have gathered additional information on the robbery. <i>Íyang napuphu ang íyang minilyun gíkan sa íyang patigáyun sa trúsu,</i> He earned his millions from his logging business. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>annihilate</tr>, wipe out of existence en masse. <i>Sakit mauy mipuphu sa tanang pumupúyù,</i> Pestilence wiped out the whole population. <form>puphuay</form> <xr>= <sc>BÙBUAY</sc>,</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>BÙBÙ</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see also</ix> <sc>PALUPHU</sc>.</xr>[+]

<p><form>púpù</form> <pos>n</pos> title or address to <tr>grandparents</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> call s.o. <i>púpù.</i>

<p><form>pùpù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>pick</tr> fruits, leaves, flowers from a tree by breaking off the peduncle. <i>Pùpúun ku tung hinug nangkà,</i> I'll pick that ripe jackfruit. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> <tr>gather</tr>, <tr>obtain</tr> s.t. from one's efforts. <i>Nakapùpù kug mga kasayúran báhin sa íyang kagahápun,</i> I have gathered information about his past. <i>Wà kay mapùpù sa pagsúruy,</i> There's nothing you can get out of roaming about. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> yield fruits as produce. <i>Usa ka punúang mangga mupùpù ug usa ka líbu ka búnga,</i> A mango tree yields a thousand fruits. <number>4</number> <itype>[B12; b8]</itype> <formx>&mdash; ang púsud</formx> for the umbilical cord to break off (shortly after birth). <i>Sa ikaupat ka adlaw magkapùpù na ang púsud,</i> On the fourth day the umbilical cord begins to fall off. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>picked</tr> or <tr>excerpted</tr>. <i>Basáha kining mga pinùpù sa Baláang Kasulátan,</i> Read these <tr>excerpts</tr> from the Holy Bible.

<p><form>púpug</form> <xr>= <sc>PULPUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pupular</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>popular</tr>, <tr>beloved</tr> of the people. <i>Pupular kaáyu si Núra Awnur,</i> Nora Aunor is very popular. <i>Pupular nga sáyaw,</i> Popular dance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become popular.

<p><form>pupulasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>population</tr>, number of people s.w.

<p><form>púpus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> coming to its <tr>end</tr>. <i>Napúpus ang tugut sa íyang tabánug,</i> The string of his kite is giving out. <i>Napúpus na ang pabílu sa ákung paílub,</i> My patience is running out. <i>Sa nagkapúpus na ang íyang gininháwa, nisulti siya sa tinúud,</i> When he was about to breathe his last, he told the truth. <form>ka-an, ka-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> coming to an end. <i>Kaguul nga way kapupusun (kapupúsan),</i> Sorrows without end.

<p><form>púpuy</form> <xr>= <sc>PÚPÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pupúyu</form> <xr>= <sc>BARTUNÍKU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pur</form> <ix>word used in reckoning dimensions:</ix> &lsquo;<tr>by</tr>&rsquo;. <i>Dus pur kwatru nga káhuy,</i> Piece of wood two by four. <i>Kwatrung diyis pur katursi piyis,</i> A room ten by fourteen feet.

<p><form>pur-</form> <number>1</number> <tr>per</tr>, by the. <formx>-díya</formx> <tr>by the day</tr>. <i>Purdíya ámung swildu,</i> We are paid by the day. <i>Utsu písus purdíya,</i> Eight pesos a day. <formx>-úra</formx> <tr>by the hour</tr>. <number>2</number> prefix for exclamations. <formx>-bída</formx> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>bída</bx> <pos>a</pos> exclamation of surprise. <i>Purbídang lisúra,</i> <tr>My God</tr>! How difficult it is. <i>Purbídang gwapáha,</i> <tr>Jesus</tr>! How beautiful she is. <number>b</number> exclamation chiding. <i>Purbída sab ka! Wà ka makapakáun sa bátà?</i> <tr>Heavens</tr>! You mean you didn't feed the baby? <form>-pabur</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>PABUR</sc>.</xr> <form>-diyus</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>PURDIYUS</sc>.</xr> <ix>in other phrases:</ix> <form>pur-abir</form> <number>a1</number> <tr>testing</tr> s.t. out, not necessarily in earnest. <i>Wà kuy disíyu nga mupalit íning awtúha. Pur-abir lang tung ákù ug itúgut ba sa ákung hangyù,</i> I did not intend to buy this automobile. I was just trying to see if it could be gotten for the price I offered. <number>a2</number> trying s.t. on a long gamble where there is nothing to lose. <i>Pur-abir ning pagpaupira sa kansir, kay ug dílì upirahan, sigurádu man giyung patay,</i> The cancer operation is just a gamble. If you don't operate, the man will die anyway. <number>b</number> <formx>-ihimplu</formx> <tr>for example</tr>. <number>c</number> <formx>-ingkásu</formx> <xr>= <sc>INGKÁSU</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see also</ix> <sc>PUR-ÍSU, PURLUMÍNUS, PURMIDYU, *PURSIKÁSU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>purà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a]</itype> <tr>indulge</tr> in s.t. to the point of satiety, where one does not desire any more. <i>Nagpurà mig káun sa usa ka batúang mangga,</i> We indulged ourselves eating a large basket of mangoes. <i>Gipurà námù ang ámung mata sa makaiíbug nga talan-awun,</i> We feasted our eyes on the lovely landscape. <i>Napurà na kug babáyi,</i> I've had women until I am sick of them.

<p><form>púrang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> cut fish into halves neatly along the vertebrae and bone structure, usually for drying. <i>Purángun únà ang isdà nga igbubúwad,</i> The fish to be dried should first be cut in two.

<p><form>púras</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> policeman's <tr>billy</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>penis</tr> (humorous). <pb n=806><pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>beat</tr> with a billy or the like. <i>Túbu ákung ipúras níya,</i> I'll bludgeon him with a pipe. <number>2</number> make into a club.

<p><form>purawundir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>boxer</tr> who fights in four-round bouts preliminary to the main event.

<p><form>puray</form> <pos>n</pos> woman's <tr>genitalia</tr> (euphemism). <form>panghiN-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B236]</itype> <tr>bloom</tr> into full womanhood. <i>Nanghimúray na ang íyang anak nga dalagíta,</i> His adolescent daughter is now blooming into full womanhood.

<p><form>purba</form> <xr>= <sc>PRUBAR</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p><form>purbída</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>PUR-</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>purbinggay, purbingguy, purbisgut, purbista</form> euphemism for <xr><sc>PURBÍDA</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PUR-</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>purbitsu</form> <xr>= <sc>PRUBITSU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>purdiyus</form> expression of utter discomfiture, disgust, or disagreement with s.t. over which one has no control. <i>Purdiyus, ngánu gud nga mau niy gidangátan ku,</i> <tr>Heavens</tr>! Why, of all things, did this have to happen to me! <pos>a</pos> making things difficult, giving s.o. a hard time. <i>Purdiyus kaáyu nang tigulángang hangyúag kwarta,</i> That old man gives you a hard time if you ask him for money. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> give s.o. a hard time. <i>Gipurdiyus ku nímu pagpangítà nímu,</i> You gave me a hard time looking for you. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> have a hard time doing s.t. <i>Magpurdiyus giyud tang maghungit íning batáa kay magdagandágang pakan-un,</i> It's an ordeal to feed this child because he runs about when you're trying to feed him. <form>Culu-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> make an honest appeal, plead. <i>Nagpulupurdíyus ang inahan sa bitayun ngadtu sa prisidinti,</i> The mother of the condemned man pleaded to the president for her son's life. <form>&mdash; ipursantu</form> <tr>exclamation</tr> over s.t. overwhelmingly surprising or causing intense discomfiture. <i>Purdiyus ipursantu, ngánung gibúhat mu man tu?</i> <tr>For God's sake</tr>, why did you do that?

<p><form>purga</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>purgative</tr>. <i>Purga sa bítuk,</i> Purgative for intestinal worms. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> administer a purgative. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A]</itype> take a purgative. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> eat s.t. which is unpalatable because it has been served so often. <i>Háy. Ginamus gayud ang sud-an nátù adlaw-adlaw ug magpurga na sad sa tangkung,</i> All we have to eat is fish paste every day, and <ix>kangkong</ix> vegetable as a purgative. <number>2a</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> have so much of s.t. one is sick of it. <i>Dalùdalù mag mangga. Pasagdahan bítaw nákug pagkáun, napurga lagi,</i> He just loved mangoes, so I let him have as many as he wanted and he got sick of them. <form>-nti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>purgative</tr>.

<p><form>purgáda</form> <xr>= <sc>PULGÁDA</sc>.</xr> <form>-s</form> <xr>= <sc>PULGÁDAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>purgas</form> <xr>= <sc>PULGAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>purgaturyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>purgatory</tr>. <number>2</number> place of hardship like purgatory. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be in purgatory.

<p><form>purhan</form> <pos>n</pos> forehand <tr>stroke</tr> in tennis or ping-*pong.

<p><form>purhisyu, purhwisyu</form> <xr>= <sc>PIRHWISYU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>purigit</form> <pos>a</pos> watery bowel movements. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P]</itype> have loose bowel movements. <i>Mupurigit ka giyud ug ímung sagulsagúlun ang ímung kan-un,</i> You'll get <tr>diarrhea</tr> if you eat all different kinds of food at once. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for bowel movements to get watery. <i>Nagkapurigit ang tái sa bátà nga giilísan ug litsi,</i> The child is getting loose bowel movements because they tried a new brand of milk on him.

<p><form>purikit</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. small <tr>banana</tr> about 3 by 6 cm., orange in color when not ripe and darker orange when ripe: eaten boiled or raw.

<p><form>puríku</form> <pos>n</pos> packaged <tr>lard</tr> (so called from the brand name Purico). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> use packaged lard.

<p><form>púril</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab7]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>cut down</tr> plants to exterminate them. <i>Ákung purílun ang mga kawáyan kay magtanum kug ságing,</i> I'll cut down the bamboos to replace them with bananas. <number>2</number> <tr>fell</tr> trees. <number>3</number> <itype>[A3P; a12]</itype> <tr>destroy</tr>, <tr>kill</tr> en masse. <i>Dángan ang mipúril (nagpúril) sa mga tanum,</i> The pest wiped out the plants. <i>Ang dinamíta makapúril (makapapúril) sa mga isdà,</i> Dynamite will wipe out the fishes.

<p><form>purin</form> term of address used only in the expression <ix>manyána ka</ix>. <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>*MANYÁNA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puririt</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> for soft, watery feces to be discharged in a spurt. <i>Wà pa gánì siya makalingkud sa bangkíyu, nagpuririt na ang tái,</i> Before he could even get seated on the toilet, the feces spurted out.

<p><form>púris rindyir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>forest ranger</tr>.

<p><form>purísu, pur-ísu</form> <number>1</number> <tr>therefore</tr>, in that case, <tr>then</tr> ... <i>Pur-ísu magtuun ka arun ka makapasar,</i> Therefore, you must study if you want to pass. <i>Wà ka magtuun. Purísu nahagbung ka,</i> You did not study. Therefore, you failed. <number>2</number> that's exactly what must happen (said in a context where the interlocutor has said, &lsquo;If [so-and-so] does not happen, [such-and-such] a bad outcome will follow&rsquo;). <i>&lsquo;Midalì siyag báyad arun dílì maimbargu&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Purísu.&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;He paid right away to avoid having it repossessed.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Exactly. That's what he had to do.&rsquo;

<p><form>purk an bins</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>baked beans</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> have baked beans.

<p><form>*purki</form> <form>ang &mdash;</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> the only thing wrong. <i>Ang nakapurki ning tawhána kay dì mamínaw ug tambag,</i> The only thing wrong with this fellow is that he won't heed advice.

<pb n=807>

<p><form>purk tsap</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pork chops</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; bc]</itype> have pork chops. <number>2</number> <itype>[a13]</itype> make it pork chops.

<p><form>purlumínus</form> <number>1</number> at the very least. <i>Purlumínus misangpit tà giyud ka nákù,</i> The <tr>least</tr> you could have done was call me. <i>Ug dì ku kaadtu purlumínus magpadá kug kwarta,</i> If I can't go at least I'll send some money.

<p><form>purlun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hearse</tr> to convey the dead to the grave. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; c16]</itype> transport in a hearse.

<p><form>purma</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>form</tr>, <tr>outline</tr>: the way s.t. looks. <number>1a</number> wooden structure used to hold wet cement in place. <number>2</number> a printed document to fill in. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2; c1]</itype> take <tr>form</tr>, <tr>shape</tr>; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Ígù lang kung mupurma sa balay,</i> I'll just form the framework of the house. <i>Mupurma (mapurma) ug maáyu ang ímung dughan ánang brá nga ímung gigámit,</i> Your breasts will get a nice shape with the bra you are wearing.

<p><form>purmal</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> behaving properly according to one's station. <i>Purmal kaáyu siyang manglihuklihuk,</i> She is very <tr>formal</tr> in her ways. <number>2</number> formal, according to ceremony. <i>Purmal kaáyu ang ílang kasal,</i> Their wedding was a very formal one. <number>3</number> formal clothing. <number>4</number> done formally, not off the record. <i>Ang purmal nga pagtiman-anay,</i> Formal signing ceremonies. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B3(1); c1]</itype> be, behaved properly according to one's station. <i>Magpurmal ka. Dì ka magpabuyag,</i> Act properly. Don't misbehave. <i>Dì ku makapurmal uban sa ákung mga gang,</i> I can't behave <tr>prim</tr> and <tr>proper</tr> when I'm with my gang. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> make s.t. formal. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear formal attire. <number>3a</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> make it a party with formal attire. <number>4</number> <itype>[c16]</itype> do s.t. formally, not off the record. <form>-idad(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>formality</tr>, as a matter of form. <i>Purmalidad lang nang íyang pagpangimbitar kanátù. Dì giyud kinasingkásing,</i> He invited us only for formality's sake. He didn't really want us to go.

<p><form>purmalin, purmalína</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>formalin</tr>, k.o. <tr>disinfectant</tr> solution. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> preserve with formalin solution.

<p><form>purman</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>foreman</tr> of a group of workers. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B3(1)6]</itype> be a foreman. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> make s.o., have a foreman. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12; b(1)]</itype> have as a foreman.

<p><form>*purmidiyu</form> <form>&mdash; sa</form> <tr>by</tr> [such-and-such] means. <i>Nidilantu sila purmidiyu sa ílang kakúgi,</i> They prospered by working hard.

<p><form>purmula</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>formula</tr> for the composition of s.t. <number>2</number> formula in mathematics. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> compose s.t. by means of a formula. <i>Dì na mistil purmulahan ang paghímù sa gátas sa bátà,</i> You needn't use a formula to prepare the baby's milk. <number>2</number> solve a problem by using a formula.

<p><form>purpulyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>portfolio</tr>, a flat portable <tr>case</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> use, put in a portfolio. <i>Ipurpulyu (purpulyúha) pagdá ang mga papílis,</i> Carry the papers in a portfolio.

<p><form>pursigir</form> <xr>= <sc>PIRSIGIR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>*pursiakásu, pursikásu</form> <form>&mdash; ug, kun</form> <tr>just in case</tr>. <i>Mag-andam lang ta kay pursikásu ug muanhi siya dúna tay tagána,</i> Let's prepare extra food so that just in case he comes, we have s.t. ready.

<p><form>pursilána</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>enamelware</tr> dishes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> use enamelware dishes.

<p><form>pursilína</form> <xr>= <sc>PURSILÁNA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pursintu</form> <xr>= <sc>PURSIYINTU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pursip</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>forceps</tr> or <tr>tongs</tr> to hold s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> use forceps or tongs, get out with forceps. <i>Magpursip ku iniglimpiyu sa íyang samad,</i> I'll use tongs to clean his wound.

<p><form>pursir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>purser</tr> on a boat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> be, become a purser.

<p><form>pursíras</form> <xr>= <sc>PULSÍRAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pursisyun</form> <xr>= <sc>PRUSISIYUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pursiyintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>per cent</tr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> give a rate of interest. <i>Pursiyintúhan ku ang íyang kwartag diyis ang búlan,</i> I'll pay him (or I will charge him) ten <tr>percent</tr> interest a month. <number>2</number> get or give a percentage commission. <i>Mupursiyintu mig singku káda hálin,</i> We get (or give) five percent commission on each sale. <number>3</number> give or get a <tr>percentage</tr> of the winnings to the owner of gambling equipment. <i>Mupursiyintu silag gamay káda daug,</i> They get (or give) a small percentage of the winning as a fee to the owner of the house. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> borrow money with interest. <i>Mamursiyintu lang ku kay wà kuy láing karimidiyúhan,</i> I'll borrow money because I have no other place to get money from.

<p><form>*pursúsu</form> <form>&mdash; nga anak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>legitimate</tr> child. <i>Tuluy ákung pursúsung anak ug upat sa gawas,</i> I have three legitimate children and four illegitimate ones.

<p><form>pursyut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fighter plane</tr>.

<p><form>purtáda</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. in the front: <tr>front</tr> of a house, <tr>cover</tr> of a magazine, front row of people, or the like. <i>Namungíngi ang purtáda sa balay sa mga bumbilyang dikulur,</i> The front of the house was covered with colored lights. <form>bálak, sugilánun nga &mdash;</form> <tr>feature</tr> poem, story. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> use as feature story, put on the cover. <i>Mupurtáda sila ning sugilanúna?</i> Will they publish this as their feature story? <i>Nagpurtáda silag babáying naghúbù,</i> They used a picture of a nude woman as cover.

<p><form>purtamunída</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>portfolio</tr>, <tr>attach</tr>é case. <number>2</number> purse. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> put, make into a portfolio.

<p><form>purtintúsu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>portending</tr> a major event. <i>Purtintúsu <pb n=808>kunu kining kumíta. Basta musubang, mugíra kunu,</i> They say that this is a portentous comet. Whenever it appears, there's going to be war.

<p><form>purtipayib</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>forty-five</tr> r.p.m. <tr>record</tr> or record player. <number>2</number> forty-five caliber <tr>pistol</tr> or revolver. <form>&mdash; arpíim</form> <xr>= <sc>PURTIPAYIB</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p><form>purtíru</form> <xr>= <sc>PULTÍRU</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PULTA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>purtis</form> <xr>= <sc>PRUTISTANTI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>purtúna</form> it is a good thing; it is a <tr>fortunate</tr> occurrence. <i>Purtúna nga miabut ka kay gikinahanglan ta ka,</i> It is a good thing you came because I need you. <pos>n</pos> <tr>fortune</tr>, <tr>fate</tr>. <i>Ang purtúna sa táwu dílì matag-an,</i> A man's fate cannot be foretold. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> have the luck to have a certain k.o. spouse. <i>Nakapurtúna siyag dátù,</i> She had the fortune to marry a rich man.

<p><form>púru<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pure</tr>, free from adulterants or impurities. <i>Púru giyud ning tabliyáha,</i> This chocolate is pure. <number>2</number> pure of breed. <i>Púrung halsi,</i> Pure Halsey (cock). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6(1)]</itype> be pure, devoid of adulterants or all of the same kind. <i>Ug mapúru bastus ang ímung baráha,</i> If your hand is all clubs.

<p><form>púru<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PULUS<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puruhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>probability</tr> that s.t. will happen. <i>Dakù kag puruhan nga mudaug ning iliksiyúna,</i> There's a great likelihood that you'll win in this election.

<p><form>púruk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>district</tr>, a geographical or political division made for a specific purpose.

<p><form>purúkù</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>stocky</tr> and <tr>short</tr>. <i>Purúkù na kaáyu siya sa katambuk,</i> He is very short and thickset because he is so fat. <number>2</number> s.t. low and short like a short person. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become short and thickset.

<p><form>purul</form> <pos>n</pos> short <tr>pants</tr> or <tr>drawers</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> wear, use short pants or <tr>underpants</tr>. <i>Magpurul run ang mga babáyi,</i> Women wear short pants nowadays. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make into short pants.

<p><form>purung, púrung</form> <pos>n</pos> cloth wrapped around the head like a <tr>turban</tr> or <tr>bandana</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> wear s.t. wrapped around the head. <i>Ságad sa mga sabungíru magpurung ug panyù,</i> Cockfighters usually wrap a <tr>handkerchief</tr> around their heads. <form>purungpúrung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>crown</tr> s.o. <i>Ang mayur ang nagpurungpúrung sa rayna,</i> The mayor crowned the beauty queen. <i>Si Hisus gipurungpurúngan sa mga maidlut nga mga tunuk,</i> Jesus was <tr>crowned</tr> with sharp thorns. <pos>n</pos> s.t. worn around the head like a crown. <i>Purungpúrung sa mga dáhun,</i> A wreath of leaves worn as a crown.

<p><form>purus, púrus</form> <xr>= <sc>PULUS<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puruspurus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>hurry</tr> up doing s.t. or s.o. into accomplishing s.t. <i>Anam-anamun nátù ni arun dílì ta magpuruspurus sa katapúsan,</i> If we do it little at a time, we won't be rushed at the end.

<p><form>purward<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>forward</tr> in games where there are players positioned toward the front. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); c1]</itype> play the position of forward.

<p><form>purward<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>forward</tr> to a new address. <i>Wà níla ipurward ang ákung sulat,</i> They didn't forward my letter.

<p><form>purya</form> <xr>= <sc>PUYRA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puryut</form> <xr>= <sc>PUDYUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pús<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PULUS<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pús<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> strike a <tr>pose</tr> for a picture. <i>Nagpús na bayà siya nga wà pa ang mangungúdak,</i> My, you are posing even if there is no cameraman around.

<p><form>pusà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>crush</tr> or <tr>squash</tr> s.t. soft. <i>Sabaw nga gipus-ag síli,</i> Soup into which crushed chili was added. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>break</tr> s.t. fragile. <i>Akuy mipusà sa plátu,</i> I broke the plate. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6c1]</itype> <tr>hatch</tr> an egg. <i>Ang himungáan mauy mipusà sa mga itlug sa bíbi,</i> The hen hatched the duck's eggs. <number>3a</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> for eggs to break in the hen's womb. <i>Napus-an (hipus-an) nang manuk nga nagbasà ang lubut,</i> That hen that has a wet bottom had an egg break in its womb. <pos>a</pos> <tr>broken</tr>, esp. eggs.

<p><form>pusak, púsak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; a]</itype> <tr>break</tr> s.t. hard. <i>Ikaw bay nagpusak sa pinggan<corr sic=",">?</corr></i> Were you the one who broke the plate into pieces? <i>Másu ang ipusak sa simintung salug,</i> Use a hammer to break up the cement flooring. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APN]</itype> <number>1</number> come in <tr>abundance</tr>. <i>Muhimúsak (muhimusak) na gánì ang ulan, malígù ku,</i> If the rain falls in torrents I'll bathe in it. <i>Naghimusak ang búnga sa mga mangga run,</i> Mangoes are <tr>plentiful</tr> now. <number>2</number> for flowers or young fruit to come out. <i>Ígù lang nakahimusak ang púsù sa mais dihang gidagsángan sa mga dúlun,</i> No sooner had ears of corn <tr>developed</tr>, when the locusts descended on them. <pos>a</pos> being <tr>crowded</tr>, <tr>numerous</tr>. <i>Himusak sa táwu ang lungsud sa baryu,</i> The town has more people in it than the village.

<p><form>pusamánu</form> <xr>= <sc>PASAMÁNU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púsas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>handcuffs</tr>, <tr>shackles</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>handcuff</tr> or <tr>shackle</tr>. <i>Gipusásan sa pulis ang mga binilanggù,</i> The policeman put handcuffs (shackles) on the prisoners.

<p><form>pusaw</form> <pos>n</pos> bud of a coconut tree from which the cluster develops. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; cN]</itype> for coconuts to develop. <i>Mipusaw (namusaw, gipusawan) na ang lubi,</i> The coconut tree is developing buds now. <i>Ang primírung ipusaw (ipamusaw) ánang lubíha way búngang mahímù,</i> The first bud that coconut tree will bring forth will not develop fruit.

<pb n=809>

<p><form>pus-aw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> for a color to <tr>fade</tr>. <i>Mipus-aw (napus-aw) ang sinínà sa dúgay nga uran,</i> The dress faded after long use. <number>2</number> for liquids to become <tr>clear</tr>, less murky. <i>Mupus-aw ang túbig kun papundúhun,</i> Water will become clear if you let the mud settle. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>faded</tr> in color. <number>2</number> <tr>light-colored</tr>. <i>Angayan ka sa pus-aw ug kulur nga sinínà,</i> You look becoming in a light-colored dress.

<p><form>pusbútun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>push button</tr>, done by push <tr>button</tr>. <i>Pusbútun na ang pagpalákaw íning pabrikáha,</i> Everything is done in this factory with push buttons.

<p><form>pusdak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> let s.t. fall with a crash either by slamming it down or just dropping it if it is heavy. <i>Ákung gipusdákan ug dakung batu ang úlu sa hálas,</i> I bashed the head of the snake with a big stone. <i>Ayaw ipusdak nang usa ka sákung kamúti,</i> Don't slam that sack of sweet potatoes down. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>stamp</tr> one's feet. <i>Mamusdak na gánì nà, sukù na nà,</i> If she stamps her feet, that means she is angry.

<p><form>pusdù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; c6]</itype> put s.t. down with considerable force. <i>Ayaw ug ipusdù ang sag-ub arun dì mabuak,</i> Do not put the bamboo water container down hard or it will break. <number>2</number> <itype>[bc]</itype> <tr>invest</tr> all of a sum on s.t. <i>Gipusdù ni Tátay ang íyang ritayirmint ug yútà,</i> Father invested all of his retirement pay on a piece of land.

<p><form>pusgay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3PB12; c16]</itype> <tr>break</tr> into many pieces, <tr>shatter</tr>. <i>Napusgay ang búlig paghiantug sa yútà,</i> The coconuts broke off the stem when the whole bunch hit the ground. <i>Mapusgay na gánì ang kristal, dì na maúlì,</i> Once the glass is shattered, it can't be repaired. <i>Nagkapusgay na ang mga simintu sa dáyik,</i> The cement on the dike is slowly crumbling. <number>1a</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> for liquid to <tr>splatter</tr> against s.t. <i>Napusgay ang mga balud sa kabatuan,</i> The waves broke on the rocks. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> <tr>ruin</tr> one's reputation, good name. <i>Tabì nga makapusgay sa kadunggánan,</i> Gossip that can ruin one's reputation.

<p><form>pusgù</form> <pos>a</pos> for sacks to be filled up to the neck so that only a small bit can be gathered at the top to tie. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2; c16]</itype> for sacks to be filled up with a little part left for tying. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>hit the jackpot</tr> in business, fishing, or any endeavor. <i>Ug mupusgù ning ákung bungsud rung tingbungsud mupalit kug dikarga,</i> I'll buy a cargo truck if I hit the jackpot with my fish corral. <i>Nikalit nag kasapíang tawhána kay nakapusgù nà siya sa ismagling,</i> He got rich suddenly because he made a killing in smuggling.

<p><form>pusibilidad</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>possibility</tr>. <i>Dakù ang pusibilidad nga mahagbung ku,</i> There is a great possibility that I will fail.

<p><form>pusibli</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>possibly</tr> happening. <i>Pusibli kaáyu nga mitan-aw tu sa sini,</i> It's very <tr>possible</tr> that she went to the show. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> may possibly happen. <i>Mapusibli nga milakaw sila,</i> It may be possible that they went out. <i>Pusiblíhan ku nga siya mauy mikúhà sa kwarta,</i> To me it's possible that she stole the money.

<p><form>pusil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>firearm</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>shoot</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23; a1c]</itype> shoot a question or an answer in a classroom (colloquial). <i>Ug pusilun si Nílu ug pangutána mupusil man sag bawus,</i> If a question is fired at Nilo, he fires back an answer. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>masturbate</tr> (slang). <form>(&larr;)</form> <itype>[A1]</itype> have a question and answer session in a class (colloquial). <i>Magpúsil run, unyà wà ra ba ku katuun,</i> There will be a question and answer session in class now, and I have not studied my lesson. <pos>n</pos> question and answer session in class. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2C12; b6(1)]</itype> go <tr>hunting</tr> with firearms. <i>Makigpamusil siya nákug langgam,</i> He wants me to go hunting birds with him. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>shoot</tr> as a character trait. <i>Ayawg pangingkwintru níya kay mamusil,</i> Don't tangle with him because he shoots. <form>pusilpúsil, Culu-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> toy <tr>gun</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>spear</tr>, powered by a rubber sling, the general form of which resembles a rifle. <number>3</number> anything shaped like a rifle. <i>Pulupúsil (pusilpúsil) nga laytir,</i> A pistol-shaped lighter. <form>di-</form> <pos>n</pos> armed with a gun. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> a cut in men's trousers which is tight on the legs (like a rifle). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> wear, make trousers in this style.

<p><form>púsing</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> strike a <tr>pose</tr>, pose to have one's picture taken. <i>Mupúsing giyud nang bayhána ug náay láking mutan-aw,</i> That woman will strike a pose whenever there's a man looking at her. <pos>n</pos> action of striking a pose.

<p><form>pusísit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S]</itype> for watery feces to jet out in a thin stream continuously. <i>Mupusísit ang tái basta mag-ígit,</i> If one has loose bowel movements, his feces jet out in a thin, continuous stream.

<p><form>pusisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>position</tr>, the manner in which s.t. is placed. <i>Hiwì ang pusisiyun sa ritrátu,</i> The photograph has been pasted in crooked. <number>2</number> <tr>position</tr> in which one is employed. <i>Taas siyag pusisiyun ánang kumpanyáha,</i> He has a high <tr>position</tr> in that company. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> move into position. <i>Magpusisiyun na gánì ang mga bátà sa ílang sáyaw, isúgud dáyun ang sunáta,</i> When the children are in position for their dance, start the music. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get a position in a firm.

<pb n=810>

<p><form>pusit</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small <tr>squid</tr>.

<p><form>pusitib</form> <xr>= <sc>PASITIB</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pusitíbu</form> <pos>n</pos> positive <tr>pole</tr> of batteries.

<p><form>pusiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fusion</tr> of two political groups. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> for two political groups to form a fusion.

<p><form>puskay</form> <xr>= <sc>PUSGAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pusmastir</form> <xr>= <sc>PUSTMASTIR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pusngà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P]</itype> <tr>gasp</tr> for breath. <i>Mipusngà siya sa dihang naigù sa kutukutu,</i> She gasped for breath when she was hit in the pit of the stomach. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>squirt</tr> liquid out through a small opening. <i>Pagbantay mu kay mupusngà (mamusngà) nà rung núkus ug átà,</i> Watch out! The squid will squirt ink at you. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> <tr>gasp</tr> for breath frantically.

<p><form>puspas</form> <pos>n</pos> dish composed of rice porridge together with chicken and optionally other ingredients. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> have, make <ix>puspas</ix>.

<p><form>puspun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> <tr>postpone</tr>, <tr>put off</tr> until later. <i>Ayaw na ipuspun (puspúna) ang kasal,</i> Don't postpone the wedding further.

<p><form>puspuru</form> <pos>n</pos> box of <tr>matches</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> use, make matches. <form>bilug, bílug, gúngì, palítu sa &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>matchstick</tr>.

<p><form>puspus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; b(1)]</itype> <tr>strike</tr> hard with s.t. stiff and long. <i>Puspúsan ku siyag alhu,</i> I'll beat him with a pestle. <number>2</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> be dashed onto s.t. <i>Giísa ang sakayan sa balud ug napuspus sa batu,</i> The boat was lifted by a wave and <tr>dashed</tr> onto the rocks. <number>2a</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <tr>fall</tr> heavily. <i>Nadalispang siyas pálut ságing ug napuspus sa asíras,</i> He slipped on a banana peel and fell to the sidewalk with all his force. <number>3</number> <itype>[ABN; a12]</itype> for leaves to be violently <tr>torn</tr> to shreds; cause them to be so. <i>Mipuspus (namuspus) ang mga dáhun human sa bagyu,</i> The leaves were torn to shreds after the typhoon. <number>4</number> <itype>[B2N]</itype> for leaves to <tr>wither</tr> and fall, leaving only the stalk or trunk. <i>Mupuspus (mamuspus) ang dáhun sa gábi basta magúlang na,</i> The leaves of taro wither when the plant matures. <pos>n</pos> club, staff, stick, and the like.

<p><form>puspuygu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>match</tr> (word play on <ix>puspuru</ix> and <ix>puygu</ix>&mdash;humorous).

<p><form>pusta</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bet</tr>, <tr>wager</tr>. <i>Pilay ímung pusta?</i> How much do you bet? <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; ku sa</formx> think [so-and-so] is likely to happen. <i>Pusta ku sa muulan,</i> I bet it's going to rain. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> <tr>bet</tr>. <i>Kabáyung ákung gipustáan (gipustáhan),</i> The horse I betted on. <i>Pilay ímung ipusta?</i> How much will you bet? <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> think s.t. is likely to happen. <form>&mdash; dirikta</form> direct bet. <form>-da</form> <xr>= <sc>PUSTA</sc>.</xr> <form>ig-r-, ig-l-</form> <pos>n</pos> money to bet.

<p><form>pustal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>postal</tr>. <form>&mdash; aydi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>identification</tr> card for a post office. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> issue a postal ID. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get a postal ID. <form>&mdash; kard</form> <tr>post card</tr>. <form>híru <corr sic="->">&mdash;?</corr></form> <tr>money order</tr>.

<p><form>pusti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>post</tr>. <i>Pusti sa iliktrisidad,</i> Electric light post. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put up, make into, use a post.

<p><form>pustir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>poster</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> make, put up posters.

<p><form>pustísu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>false teeth</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make false teeth. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> fit with false teeth. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126; c16]</itype> be false teeth. <i>Ug mapustísu gánì ang ímung ngípun, lisud nang ikáun,</i> It is hard to eat with false teeth.

<p><form>pustmastir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>postmaster</tr>, person in charge of a post office. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> become postmaster.

<p><form>pustri<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. served for <tr>dessert</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> have, make s.t. for dessert.

<p><form>pustri<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>electric light</tr>, <tr>telephone post</tr>.

<p><form>pust-úpis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>post office</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make, install a post office.

<p><form>pustúra</form> <pos>n</pos> the way s.o. looks all <tr>dressed up</tr>. <i>Nindut tag pustúra run. Mamisíta ka?</i> You are all dressed up. Going s.w.? <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> get all dressed up. <i>Mamustúra ka gánì, magwápa kag samut,</i> If you <tr>dress up</tr>, you'll look more beautiful. <pos>n</pos> way of carrying oneself. <i>Mu ra sa inahan ang pamustúra ánang bayhána,</i> That girl has her mother's <tr>bearing</tr>. <form>-wu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>chic</tr> and smart-looking. <i>Pusturáwu kaáyu ka sa ímung hirdu,</i> You look very chic with your hairdo. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> look <tr>smart</tr>, chic. <i>Mamusturáwu ang balayg pintálan,</i> The house will look <tr>nice</tr> when it is all painted.

<p><form>púsu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>artesian well</tr>, naturally flowing or operated with a pump. <number>2</number> hand <tr>pump</tr> used to draw water from under the ground. &mdash; <form>artisyánu</form> <xr>= <sc>PÚSU</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> construct an artesian well.

<p><form>púsù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>banana blossom</tr> including the petals. <number>2</number> <tr>ear of corn</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2N; b(1)]</itype> for corn to have ears or bananas to develop their blossoms. <i>Daling mamúsù (mupúsù) ang mais nga masurku,</i> Corn will quickly bear ears if the soil around it has been dug up. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> rice cooked in woven coconut leaves formed like a banana blossom. <number>2</number> woman's <tr>breast</tr> (euphemism). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make, have rice of this type. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> gather, get banana blossoms for food. <form>pusùpúsù sa bitíis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>biceps</tr> or the <tr>muscles</tr> of the lower legs. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> by the ears. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c16]</itype> count, share corn by the ears. <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> large ears of corn. <i>Ipanglain ang mga pinusù sa mga buging,</i> Separate the large ears of corn from the small ears.

<p><form>púsud</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>navel</tr>. <number>2</number> center point of s.t. <i>Púsud <pb n=811>sa syudad,</i> The center of the city. <number>3</number> the filament-like structure found at the tip of bananas. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> cut the umbilical cord. <pos>n</pos> instrument for cutting the umbilical cord. <form>kinapusuran</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>centermost</tr> portion. <i>Didtu siya dágan sa kinapusuran sa lasang,</i> She ran deep into the <tr>innermost</tr> part of the forest. <number>2</number> s.t. at the very <tr>heart</tr>. <number>3</number> <tr>core</tr>, <tr>innermost</tr>; <tr>heart</tr> of the thing. <i>Abtun giyud íning tambála ang kinapusuran sa sakit,</i> This medicine will reach down to the heart of the pain.

<p><form>pus-un</form> <pos>n</pos> the outside region of the body in the front, just below the stomach, and by extension, the part underneath. <i>Musakit ang pus-un ug dúgay tang walà kaihì,</i> Your lower stomach hurts if you go long without urinating. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> have a prominent belly. <form>pus-únun</form> <pos>a</pos> having a prominent belly. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to have a prominent belly.

<p><form>púsung</form> <pos>a</pos> a person who is good in putting up a front of innocence when committing mischief, so called from the character <ix>Huwan Púsung</ix> of folk tales who is always getting the better of people in high places. <i>Púsung kaáyu siya ug hitsúra mu rag dílì mauy nagtágù sa ákung sapátus,</i> He looks innocent, as if he did not hide my shoes. <form>papusungpúsung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> pretend to be innocent. <i>Nagpapusungpúsung siya, mu ra ug walà ku makakità sa íyang gibúhat,</i> He is pretending to be innocent as though I had not seen what he did.

<p><form>pus-úpis</form> <xr>= <sc>PUST-ÚPIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pusut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b26]</itype> for liquid to <tr>spurt</tr> out. <i>Mipusut ang dugù sa ákung tudlù nga naputul,</i> Blood spurted out from the cut in my finger. <form>(&larr;), pusutpusut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; c16]</itype> come in rapid succession, come thick and fast. <i>Mipusutpusut ang mga pangutána sa abugádu,</i> The lawyer fired off his questions in rapid succession. <i>Nagpusutpusut lang ang íyang anak,</i> Her children came one after another in rapid succession.

<p><form>put</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bribe</tr> (slang). <i>Dílì sila mutrabáhu sa mga lún kun walay put,</i> They won't act on the loan application unless they are given a bribe. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; c]</itype> <tr>bribe</tr>.

<p><form>pút</form> <xr>= <sc>PÚLUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púta<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>whore</tr> (coarse). <number>2</number> <tr>curse</tr> word to express anger, disgust. <i>Púta, ngánung aku pa ang nadisgrasya,</i> <tr>Damn</tr>! Why did it have to be me that had the accident! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become a whore, <tr>prostitute</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b6]</itype> engage in prostitution. <form>íhu di-</form> <tr>son of a bitch</tr>; reference to s.o. whom one wishes to curse or a curse expressing anger (coarse).

<p><form>púta<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> <tr>shatter</tr>, <tr>crush</tr> s.t. to bits. <i>Krásir ray makapúta niánang mga dagkung batu,</i> Only a stone crusher can crush those large rocks. <i>Way mapunit sa butilya kay napúta giyug maáyu,</i> No one can pick up that bottle because it was smashed to smithereens.

<p><form>*putablis</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>AGWAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pútad</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>squat</tr> because of short legs. <i>Ang pútad níyang payag,</i> His shack, elevated only slightly above the ground. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be squat. <i>Ngánu kahang napútad man ang anak nga tag-as man ang ginikánan?</i> I wonder why the child is squat when the parents are tall.

<p><form>putáhi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a dish consisting of <tr>meat</tr> as a main ingredient. <number>2</number> especial <tr>treat</tr>, anything that gives great or unusual pleasure. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> have, eat a meat dish.

<p><form>putak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> <number>1</number> for chickens to keep squawking, as when laying eggs. <i>Ayaw ug pakurati ang mungáan kay muputak,</i> Don't frighten the hen because it will <tr>squawk</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>complain</tr>, talk, or <tr>protest</tr> loudly. <i>Muputak dáyun siya basta maalkansi sa báhin,</i> She complains loudly right away if she doesn't get her share. <number>3</number> <tr>nag</tr>, <tr>scold</tr> by babbling. <i>Milakaw dáyun ang bána dihang giputakan na siya sa íyang asáwa,</i> The husband went out immediately when his wife started to nag him. <number>4</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> talk or <tr>butt in</tr> in a conversation which is not one's business. <i>Muputak ka man lang bísag wà kay lábut,</i> Why do you butt in when I'm not talking to you?

<p><form>putaputa</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> be easily torn or <tr>tattered</tr> from age or decay. <i>Naputaputa na ang mga papílis sa kaban,</i> The papers in the trunk are all <tr>brittle</tr> with age. <number>2</number> <itype>[c16]</itype> <tr>tear</tr> paper or cloth into pieces.

<p><form>putbul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>soccer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> kick s.o. out. <i>Putbúlun ka dinhi ug magtinapulan ka,</i> You will be kicked out if you are lazy in your work.

<p><form>puthaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>iron</tr>, <tr>steel</tr>. <i>Taytáyang puthaw,</i> A steel bridge. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c16]</itype> make s.t. of iron or steel.

<p><form>púti</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>break off</tr>, but not with a snap. <i>Kinsay nagpúti sa gítung sa sundang?</i> Who broke the tongue of the knife? <i>Napúti ang dágum sa makina,</i> The needle of the sewing machine broke. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB126; ab4]</itype> <tr>abort</tr> a fetus. <i>Arun dì mainahan ílang putíhun ang ílang giburus,</i> To escape mother-*hood they abort the life they are carrying in the womb. <i>Bag-u nà siyang naputíhan,</i> She just had a <tr>miscarriage</tr>. <pos>n</pos> aborted fetus. <i>Gilábay sa basúra ang púti,</i> They threw the fetus into the garbage.

<p><form>putì</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>white</tr>. <number>1a</number> in plant description, green varieties of plants that have green varieties <pb n=812>and red or brown varieties. <i>Síling putì,</i> Green peppers. <i>Mandalúsang putì,</i> The <ix>mandalúsa</ix> with green leaves (as opposed to the species with red leaves). <number>2</number> white race. <i>Ságad sa mga putì taas ug ilung,</i> Most white people have long noses. <form>&mdash; pay agipu, lubut sa kúlun, urasiyun</form> dark skinned (lit. a firebrand, the bottom of a kettle, the evening prayers [said after dark] are whiter). <i>Putì pay agipu ning bána mu,</i> Your husband is darker than the tip of a firebrand. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> white vaginal discharge. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>ISPÍHU</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB; b6]</itype> be, become white, cause s.t. to become so. <i>Klúruks ang muputì (mupaputì) sa ímung sinínà,</i> Chlorox will make your dress white. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> wear s.t. white. <i>Magputì ang mga nars,</i> Nurses wear white. <number>3</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> tell s.o. frankly of his anger or hurt feelings toward him. <i>Giputian (gipaputian) ku siyag sulti nga naglágut ku sa íyang gibúhat,</i> I had it out with her because I was angry at what she did. <form>&mdash; ug itlug, lisik</form> <pos>a</pos> cowardly. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2456]</itype> <tr>chicken out</tr>. <i>Miputì ang itlug ni Krustsib dihang naninuud si Kinidi,</i> Khrushchev chickened out when Kennedy showed that he meant business. <form>&mdash; ang kiting, tiil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B246]</itype> <tr>run away</tr> in fright. <i>Miputì ang íyang tiil pagkakità níya sa íyang kuntra,</i> He turned tail when he saw his adversary. <form>&mdash; nga tábil</form> <tr>movies</tr>. <i>Bitúun sa puting tábil,</i> Movie star (lit. star of the white screen). <form>-anay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c3]</itype> have it out with s.o. <form>-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> variety of <tr>coconut</tr> and <tr>pineapple</tr> more orange in color than the ordinary. <form>-in-(&larr;)</form> long, slender, sharp <tr>sword</tr>. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>whiteness</tr>. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>whitish</tr>, <tr>fair-skinned</tr>.

<p><form>putik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rectum</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c16]</itype> put, insert s.t. into the rectum. <i>Putika (iputik) ang tirmumitru pagbutang,</i> Insert the thermometer into the rectum.

<p><form>putikar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>mortgage</tr> one's property as security, usually to a bank. <i>Miputikar mig yútà sa bangku nga gipalit ug láing yútà,</i> We mortgaged a piece of land to the bank to buy another lot. <form>putikádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>mortgaged</tr>, esp. to a bank.

<p><form>púting</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>footing</tr>, the cement base in which a post is set. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make the footing of a post.

<p><form>pútis</form> <xr>= <sc>PULAYNAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>putítu tri</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>potato tree</tr>, an ornamental shade tree bearing violet inflorescences with yellow centers: <bio>Solanum macranthum</bio>.

<p><form>putlì</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pure</tr>, free from sin or guilt. <i>Putlì kaáyug kasingkásing ning bayhána,</i> This woman is pure-hearted. <number>2</number> <tr>immaculate</tr>, <tr>chaste</tr>. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>purity</tr>, <tr>virginity</tr>. <i>Íyang gimahal ang íyang kaputlì,</i> She treasures her chastity.

<p><form>putput<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> piece of <tr>wood</tr> or <tr>stick</tr> which has been cut from a larger piece. <number>2</number> person of no consequence in society (just as a <ix>putput</ix> is a piece of wood not good for anything except fuel). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>cut</tr> into pieces, esp. for firewood. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> be a person of no consequence. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> <tr>hit</tr> with a stick. <i>Putputun tikaw run,</i> I'll hit you with a stick.

<p><form>putput<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PALUTPUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>putput<sub>3</sub></form> euphemism for <sc>PÚTA<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><form>putris</form> mild cuss word, euphemism for <ix>púta<sub>1</sub></ix>. <i>Ay, putris! Nasayup na sad ku,</i> Darn! I made a mistake again.

<p><form>putru</form> <pos>n</pos> adolescent <tr>colt</tr>. <i>Muúlag na ning kabayúa ánang bayi kay putru na,</i> This horse will cover that female because it is an adolescent now.[+]

<p><form>putsíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> dish of stewed beef and vegetables. <number>2</number> the fleshy part of the leg between the knee and the ankle of a cow. <i>Linat-ang putsíru ang sud-an nátù karun,</i> We have stewed beef shanks for dinner today. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> prepare putsíru.

<p><form>pútu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cake</tr> made of steamed starches, coconut, and other optional ingredients. <form>&mdash; nga balanghuy</form> <i>pútu</i> made from shredded cassava. <form>&mdash; nga binangkung</form> <i>pútu</i> made from cassava flour. <form>&mdash; kutsinta</form> <i>pútu</i> made from ground rice mixed with brown sugar. <form>&mdash; máya</form> <i>pútu</i> made from <ix>pilit</ix> rice and coconut extract. <form>&mdash; nga pinalutaw</form> steamed rice cake. <form>&mdash; sulut</form> <i>pútu</i> made from cassava flour with water or milk and fried. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make <ix>pútu</ix>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> engage in the business of selling <ix>pútu</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> go s.w. to eat <ix>pútu</ix>. <pos>n</pos> business of selling <ix>pútu</ix>.

<p><form>pútu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bankrupt</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> be, become bankrupt. <i>Putúhun man ta ánang ímung bisyu,</i> Your vices will send us to the poor-*house.

<p><form>pútù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>break</tr>, <tr>cut</tr> into lengths. <i>Putúun ku ning káhuy pára sa halígi,</i> I'll cut this timber into lengths for the posts. <pos>n</pos> a <tr>length</tr> of s.t. cut from a bigger or longer piece.

<p><form>putud</form> <xr>= <sc>PUTUL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>putugrapiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>photographer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; c16]</itype> be, become a photographer.

<p><form>putugrapu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>photograph</tr>.

<p><form>putuk</form> <pos>n</pos> small arms, esp. a handgun (slang).

<p><form>pútuk</form> <xr>= <sc>TÚTUK<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>put-uk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b8]</itype> swallow air or jump involuntarily from surprise. <i>Naput-uk ang ákung buut sa íyang gisulti,</i> I was dumb-*founded with what she said. <i>Hiput-ukan (himut-ukan) ang maistra sa kalit nga pagbisíta sa supirbisur,</i> The teacher was taken aback <pb n=813>by the unexpected visit of her supervisor. <i>Nahimut-ukan aku sa íyang pirsunal nga pangutána,</i> I was <tr>dumbstruck</tr> by his personal question.

<p><form>putukputuk</form> <pos>n</pos> rapid beating or <tr>throbbing</tr> of the heart. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B456]</itype> for the heart to throb. <i>Nagputukputuk ang íyang dughan sa kalípay,</i> Her heart was throbbing with joy.

<p><form>putul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>sever</tr> with a bladed instrument or by snapping. <i>Dì makaputul ang ákung ngípun sa hílu,</i> My teeth can't break the thread. <i>Putlag kaduha arun matulu ka pútù,</i> Cut it twice to make three pieces. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> cut down. <i>Kinsay nagputul sa mangga?</i> Who cut the mango tree down? <number>1b</number> <itype>[A; b7]</itype> <tr>cut</tr> s.t. out of s.t. <i>Ákung giputlan ang pálu kay taas ra,</i> I cut a length from the mast because it was too long. <number>1c</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cut s.t. out of s.t. <i>Giputul sa sinsur ang mga báhing law-ay,</i> The censors cut out the lewd parts. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>break</tr> a connection. <i>Giputlan mig sugà,</i> Our electricity was cut off. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12; a]</itype> <tr>cut</tr> s.t. short. <i>Naputul ang ámung isturya pag-abut sa mga bisíta,</i> Our conversation was cut short by the arrival of the visitors. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A12; a1]</itype> <tr>put an end to</tr> s.t. <i>Putlun ku ang ímung ngil-ad nga batásan,</i> I'll <tr>put a stop to</tr> your bad manners. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. cut off from s.t. or s.t. which had s.t. cut off of it. <i>Putul ug íkug ang irù,</i> The dog has a <tr>stubbed</tr> tail. <number>2</number> the other one of two things which had been cut from one piece. <i>Háin man ang putul ári?</i> Where is the other piece of this stick that had been cut in two? <form>&mdash; sa adlaw</form> half a day. <form>&mdash; sa píkas</form> a <tr>quarter</tr>. <number>3</number> s.t. said in cutting in. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c16]</itype> <tr>divide</tr> s.t. into, between two. <i>Magpútul ta ánang isdà,</i> Let us divide that fish between us. <pos>n</pos> <form>&mdash; ug tinái</form> <tr>sibling</tr>. <i>Pútul mu ug tinái, búsà ayaw mu pag-áway,</i> You are sisters, so don't quarrel. <form>putulputul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>cut</tr> into small pieces. <form>putulpútul</form> <corr><pos>v</pos> </corr><itype>[B16]</itype> be intermittently discontinuous. <pos>a</pos> <tr>intermittent</tr>, <tr>discontinuous</tr>. <i>Putulpútul man tung salída nga sikan ran,</i> The second-run movie kept being interrupted. <form>ig-(&larr;) ug tinái</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>relative</tr>. <i>Igpútul ku siya ug tinái,</i> She is my relative. <form>ka-, ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> the other half of a piece cut off.

<p><form>putung</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>quick-tempered</tr>, immediately resorting to violence when provoked. <number>2</number> <formx><r>[<ix>verb</ix>]</r> lang ug &mdash;</formx> do s.t. in a rage without the slightest thought of changing one's mind. <i>Kun mulagiw ka, kágiw lámang ug putung, kay kun mubálik ka patyun ta ka,</i> If you run away, run away and don't ever think of coming back, for if you do, I will kill you.

<p><form>pútung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> tie s.t. around the head. <i>Nagpútung ug tualya ang draybir,</i> The driver tied a towel around his head. <i>Gipútung sa babáyi ang íyang buhuk,</i> The woman knotted her hair at the top of her head. <form>(&rarr;)</form> s.t. worn wrapped around the head. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make s.t. into a <tr>headband</tr>, <tr>bandana</tr>, or the like. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. tied around the head.

<p><form>put-ung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> <tr>pile</tr> things up. <i>Put-únga ang mga mangga sigun sa ílang gidak-un,</i> Pile the mangoes into heaps according to their size. <number>2</number> <itype>[C; b6]</itype> <tr>gather</tr> together in a group. <i>Dì ta makaput-ung dinhi sa daplin sa dálan kay abug kaáyu,</i> We can't gather here at the side of the road because it is too dusty.

<p><form>putuputu</form> <pos>n</pos> the smallest pieces of <tr>banana</tr> located at the tip of the bunch, usually the last two or three hands. <pos>a</pos> persons that are short in height and small in build (humorous colloquial).

<p><form>putus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>wrapper</tr>. <number>1a</number> membranous <tr>covering</tr> of organs or parts of organs in the body of animals. <number>2</number> small <tr>bundle</tr>, <tr>package</tr>. <number>3</number> male genitalia (humorous). <i>Mihulma nang putus mu ánang hugut nímung karsúnis,</i> Your pants are so tight they show your genitals. <number>4</number> an infant born wrapped inside a thin membranous covering which must be pinched open to save the infant from suffocating. A baby born in this manner is said to be likely to grow into a strong and quick-tempered adult. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>wrap</tr> s.t. <i>Unsa may ímung gipustan (giputus) sa kík?</i> What did you use to wrap the cake? <number>2</number> <itype>[B1245; c1]</itype> be full of or <tr>covered</tr> with. <i>Naputus ang bátà sa núka,</i> The child is covered with sores. <i>Pustun tikag haluk,</i> I will <tr>smother</tr> you with kisses. <form>paN-</form> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>pack</tr> up for a journey. <i>Mamutus na ku pára sa byáhi,</i> I'll pack up for the trip.

<p><form>putust&acaron;t</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>photostat</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make a photostatic copy.

<p><form>putut</form> <pos>a</pos> full-grown person that is <tr>short</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become a short person. <i>Naputut ku kay putut man ang ákung nánay,</i> I am short because my mother was short. <form>(&larr;), ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be short (said in derision).

<p><form>pútut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a small <tr>coconut</tr>. <i>Maáyu pay maglána kag pútut,</i> It is about as easy as extracting coconut oil from the small fruit (i.e. impossible). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2N; b(1)]</itype> bearing forth small coconuts. <i>Mipútut (namútut) na ang lubi. Dì na madúgay may butung,</i> The coconut tree has nuts. We'll have young coconut to eat soon. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for flowers to form <tr>buds</tr>. <i>Musúgud nag pangalimyun ug mupútut (mamútut) na ang búwak,</i> A flower begins to smell sweet when it begins to form buds. <pb n=814><form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> young, inexperienced, and uninitiated (literary). <i>Sa putútung salabútan,</i> In the young, innocent mind.

<p><form>pútut<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>BANTUT</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr> <form>-un</form> <xr>= <sc>BANTUTUN</sc>, <i>a1.</i></xr>

<p><form>putyúkan</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. <tr>bee</tr> forming hives hanging from the branches of trees, fiercer than the ligwan. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>slim-waisted</tr> like a wasp.

<p><form>púu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>exterminate</tr> all things of a certain kind. <i>Ang iring ray nagpúu sa mga ilagà ning baláya,</i> It was the cat that annihilated the rats in this house. <i>Nagkapuu na ang tamaraw,</i> The tamaraw is becoming <tr>extinct</tr>. <i>Puúhan ang syudad sa mga buguy,</i> They will <tr>get rid of</tr> the thugs in the city. <number>2</number> get rid of completely. <i>Ngil-ad nga batásan nga ángay puhúun (puúhun),</i> Bad manners that should be gotten rid of. <number>3</number> <tr>ruin</tr> a business. <i>Ang ímung pagkasugarul mau ray makapúu sa ímung nigusyu,</i> Your gambling is enough to ruin your business. <form>puuhun nga apilyídu</form> a family name that is disappearing (because of lack of males).

<p><form>púuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; c16]</itype> <tr>cut</tr> s.t. short close to the base. <i>Ang mga úlud nagpúuk ug putul sa mga turuk nga pugas mais,</i> The worms cut the corn sprouts right down to the ground. <number>2</number> <itype>[AP2B2SN; c1P]</itype> drive s.t. so deep that the end is level. <i>Akuy mupúuk (mupapúuk) ánang lansánga,</i> I'll <tr>drive</tr> that nail all the way in. <i>Lisud pag-ibut sa nagpuuk nga lansang,</i> It is difficult to pull out a nail that is <tr>driven</tr> all the way in. <i>Ákung puúkun (papuúkun, ipapúuk, ipúuk) ang gasulinadur arun kusug ang dágan,</i> I'll push the gas pedal to the floor to go full speed. <number>3</number> <itype>[BN]</itype> for the nits to be right at the roots of the hair. <pos>a</pos> <tr>cut</tr> close to the base, <tr>driven</tr> down even with the base. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>PÚUK</sc>, <i>a</i>.</xr> <number>2</number> for nits to be located right in the scalp at the base of the hair. <i>Wà ka katli nga puuk man kaáyu ning ímung mga lusà?</i> Isn't it itchy? Your nits are right in your scalp. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>tie</tr>, hold a tethered animal close to the attachment. <i>Nagpuuk ku sa kábaw sa káhuy arun dì siya makaabut pagkáun sa mga gagmayng lubi,</i> I'm tying the carabao close to the tree so that it can't reach the small coconut plants. <i>Ákung puk-an ang irù inig súd ninyu,</i> I'll hold the dog close to me when you enter the house.

<p><form>puul</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>boring</tr>, <tr>wearying</tr> by being <tr>dull</tr> and <tr>uninteresting</tr>. <i>Puul kaáyu ning kinabúhì ug wà kay lingawlingaw,</i> Life is very boring if you have no leisure. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12C3; b4(1)]</itype> be, become boring. <i>Nagkapuul na man ning trabahúa,</i> This work is becoming boring. <i>Nagpúul na sila kay nag-áway na man,</i> They must be sick of each other because they are already quarrelling. <i>Wà siya pul-i ug tan-aw sa íyang katahum,</i> He never got <tr>tired</tr> looking at her beauty. <form>pul-ánun</form> <pos>a</pos> easily <tr>bored</tr>.

<p><form>púung</form> <xr>= <sc>PUL-UNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>airless</tr>, lacking fresh air. <i>Púut ning kwartúha kay usa ray bintánà,</i> This room lacks air because it has only one window. <number>2</number> for gases or some other congesting thing to be s.w. or for a place to be <tr>congested</tr> with s.t. pent up in it. <i>Púut kaáyu ang asu sa kusína (or Púut sa asu ang kusína),</i> The kitchen is full of smoke. <i>Púut kaáyu ning ákung ilung sa sip-un,</i> My nose is congested with mucus. <number>3</number> for an emotion to be <tr>pent up</tr> s.w. or for the breast to have an emotion pent up in it. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B3]</itype> be, become <tr>airless</tr> or having s.t. <tr>pent up</tr> in it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; c16]</itype> be, become pent up. <i>Kaguul nga nagpúut sa ákung dughan,</i> Sorrows pent up in my breast. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> put a dog's nose into a container filled with burning feathers in order to make it come to hate the smell of chickens. <i>Puútun ku ning irúa arun dì na manukub ug manuk,</i> I will asphyxiate this dog with burning chicken feathers so it won't prey on chickens.

<p><form>puwa-</form> <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>PULA-</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puwak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tonsure</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> tonsure s.o.

<p><form>puwi</form> sound used to represent spitting, said as a gesture of scorn. <i>Puwi, nagpauluininglis pa nákù ag dakug bàbà arun mahibalu ang uban nga antígu siya,</i> Phooey, the big mouth has to go speaking English just to show everybody that he knows how.

<p><form>puwi-</form> <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>PWI-</sc></xr> <ix>and</ix> <xr><sc>PUY-</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púwin, púwint</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>point</tr> in a score. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23P; a2]</itype> score a point in a game. <i>Matabla silag mupúwint ang nagpawul syát,</i> They will be <corr>in </corr>a tie if they make a point with this foul shot. <i>Wà pa makapúwint ang ámung magdudulà,</i> Our players have not scored a point.

<p><form>puwis</form> <xr>= <sc>PWÍS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puwit</form> <xr>= <sc>PUYIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puwíta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>poet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become a poet.

<p><form>puya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>infant</tr>, esp. a newly born <tr>baby</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>child</tr>, <tr>offspring</tr>. <i>Wà siyay natígum sa íyang kinitáan kay daghan siyag puya nga buhiun,</i> He has not saved anything because he has so many <tr>children</tr>.

<p><form>puyasut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>weak</tr>, <tr>thin</tr>. <i>Puyasut ug tíngug,</i> <tr>Weak-voiced</tr>. <i>Puyasut ug láwas,</i> <tr>Thin-bodied</tr>. <number>2</number> for seeds, fruits to be <tr>stunted</tr> and lacking fullness. <number>2a</number> for a child to be thin and <tr>stunted</tr> in growth from malnutrition. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> <number>1</number> be, become weak and thin. <i>Nagpuyasut man ang ímung mga buktun,</i> Your arms <pb n=815>are mighty thin. <number>2</number> come out thin and stunted. <i>Nagpuyasut ang búnga sa ságing kay walà ulana,</i> The bananas are undersized because they didn't get enough rain.

<p><form>púyat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a]</itype> <tr>flatten</tr> s.t. soft into a soft mass. <i>Puyátan ta kag kamúti ipakáun sa bátà,</i> I'll <tr>squash</tr> cooked sweet potatoes for you to feed the child. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> bananas that are <tr>thin</tr> and lacking in flesh from improper development, and by extension, other fruits and vegetables. <i>Puyat ning sagínga kay búnga sa ting-init,</i> These bananas are <tr>fleshless</tr> because they grew in the dry season. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> come out thin and lacking in flesh.

<p><form>puyay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> name given to Japanese <tr>money</tr> during the war. <number>2</number> any fake money. <number>3</number> money that is all wrinkled and dirty. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> look like funny money. <i>Gipuyayan ku sa mga bag-ung kwarta karun,</i> The new type of notes issued recently look funny to me. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> for money to get all crumpled and dirty.

<p><form>puydi</form> <number>1</number> it is <tr>all right</tr> to do. <i>Káun, puydi apan way ínum,</i> It is all right to eat. But no drinking. <number>1a</number> <formx>&mdash; nga</formx> <tr>may</tr> do. <i>Puydi ba nga makagawì ku sa ímung tilipunu?</i> May I use your phone? <number>2</number> be very <tr>possible</tr>. <i>Puydi kaáyung muanhi siya,</i> He may <tr>well</tr> come here. <form>nu-</form> it is not possible. <i>Nupuydi, kay ginadilì ang pagsúgal dinhi,</i> You can't because gambling is not allowed here. <i>Nupuydi, dílì nà mahitabù,</i> <tr>Never</tr>. That will never happen. <i>Nupuydi katabuk dundi gabahà,</i> You can't have intercourse when your wife is menstruating. (Lit. You can't cross a river in flood.)

<p><form>puydut</form> <xr>= <sc>PUDYUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puygu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>matches</tr>. <i>Nangáyù siyag puygu nga iháling,</i> She asked for matches to build the fire. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>*APUNTIN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puyit</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> first grade child. <number>2</number> being last in line or coming in <tr>last</tr> in a contest. <number>3</number> <tr>anus</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa anay</form> <xr>= <sc>LUBUT SA ANAY</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>LUBUT</sc>.</xr> <number>3a</number> <tr>female genitalia</tr> (euphemism). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B56]</itype> be, become a <tr>first grader</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126N; c1]</itype> come out last in a contest, be last in line. <i>Naúlaw ku kay namuyit ku sa banggà,</i> I was embarrassed because I came out last in the race.

<p><form>puypuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B24N; c16]</itype> for the muscles to become weak from fatigue or nervousness. <i>Mipuypuy (namuypuy) ang ákung mga buktun,</i> My arms grew heavy with <tr>fatigue</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; c16]</itype> <tr>placate</tr>, <tr>calm</tr> s.o. down. <i>Puypúya (ipuypuy) ang ímung kasukù pinaági sa pagsuruysúruy,</i> Let your anger calm down by taking a walk. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23P; c1]</itype> <tr>relieve</tr>, <tr>alleviate</tr> pain. <i>Puypúyun (ipuypuy) sa hílut ang ímung pamául,</i> Massage will relieve your muscle pains. <pos>a</pos> <tr>weak</tr>, lacking strength. <i>Puypuy kaáyu ang ákung mga tiil,</i> My legs are very weak.

<p><form>puyra</form> <pos>n</pos> place <tr>away</tr> from home. <i>Kúlang sa disiplína ang mga anak nga may mga ginikánan nga atúa kanúnay sa puyra,</i> Children lack discipline if their parents are always away from home. in phrases: <number>1</number> <tr>get out</tr>! <i>Puyra! Dì ku gustu nga náay hubug dinhi sa balay!</i> Out! I want no drunks in this house! <number>1a</number> <formx>&mdash; bisíta</formx> <tr>all ashore that's going ashore</tr>. <number>1a1</number> bell announcing that the visitors must get off the boat. <number>1a2</number> after visiting hours in a hospital. <number>1b</number> [so-and-so] keep away, may [so-and-so] not happen despite the fact that s.t. is being said to make it happen (said in the belief that the mention of s.t. may cause it to happen unless the formula <ix>puyra</ix> [<ix>so-and-so</ix>] is said). <i>Puyra báliw ang duha ka manag-ágaw nagminyù,</i> May lightning not strike them, the cousins married. <i>Puyra búsung, natumban ang kan-un,</i> May you not get divine punishment. You stepped on the rice. <i>Puyra buyag nindut kaáyu kag mata,</i> Evil spirits keep away. You have beautiful eyes. <i>Puyra dámag, hisgútan nátù ang kamatáyun ni Pulánu,</i> Pulanu, keep away. We will talk about your death. <i>Puyra damgu, si Pulánung namatay nagdiwal ang dílà,</i> Pulanu died with his tongue hanging out, may we not dream of him. <i>Puyra gábà,</i> May you not reap divine punishment. <i>Puyra handum (hisgut), labaw pa tu ka grábi ang ákung sakit kay sa ímu karun,</i> Sickness keep away despite our talking about it, I was even sicker that time than you are now. <i>Puyra patrun, pubri kaáyu nang lungsúra,</i> May the patron saint not get angry at us. That is a terribly poor town. <i>Puyra pungag nakabahù kug humut agwa sa taliw&amacrgra; sa lasang,</i> May my nose not be knocked off, I smelled a most delicious odor in the middle of the forest. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; sa</formx> <number>2a</number> <tr>aside from</tr>, <tr>in addition to</tr>. <i>Puyra sa panaptun náa pay balayran sa butúnis ug sípir,</i> Aside from the cloth, you still have to pay for the buttons and zipper. <number>2b</number> <tr>excepting</tr>. <i>Púrus mga tapulan puyra sa pipila ka lugas,</i> They're all lazy <tr>except</tr> for a couple. <number>2b1</number> <formx>&mdash; lus buynus</formx> except for a few good ones. <i>Puyra lus buynus, kábaw ray but-an sa taga Líti,</i> With some exceptions, only the water <corr sic=buffalos>buffaloes</corr> in Leyte have good morals (from the notion that formerly prostitutes in Cebu used to say they were from Leyte). <number>2b2</number> <formx>&mdash; dáyig</formx> modesty aside. <i>Puyra dáyig akuy nangháwud sa ámung klási,</i> Modesty aside I am at the top of my class. <number>2b3</number> <formx>&mdash; uluúlu</formx> <tr>no kidding</tr>. <pb n=816><i>Puyra uluúlu tinúud kang gwápa,</i> No kidding. You're very beautiful. <number>3</number> <formx>únu &mdash;, dus &mdash;, tris &mdash;, kwatru &mdash;</formx> in tallying by fives, the number in addition to the groups of five. <i>Singku kahúnis, tris puyra. Sa átù pa, bayinti utsu,</i> There are five blocks of five and three extra. In other words, twenty-eight. <form>itsa &mdash;</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ITSA</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>eliminate</tr>, <tr>dismiss</tr>. <i>Huwis ang nagpuyra sa íyang sumbung kay way ígung kamatuúran,</i> The judge dismissed his complaint for lack of evidence. <i>Puyráha (ipuyra) sila sa átung punduk,</i> Eliminate them from our group. <i>Napuyra ang maung tápad kay gamay ra ug pusta ang kuntra,</i> The fight was cancelled because not enough people bet on one of the cocks. <number>2</number> <itype>[AP; c1]</itype> dismiss s.o. from his job. <i>Dì ku mupapuyra (mupuyra) nímu sa ímung trabáhu,</i> I won't dismiss you from your job.

<p><form>puyrut</form> <xr>= <sc>PUDYUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puyu</form> <xr>= <sc>BARTUNÍKU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bag</tr>, <tr>sack</tr>, or anything that can be put together at the ends and closed. <number>2</number> <tr>hammock</tr> tied up like a sack to hold a baby. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> make a <ix>púyu</ix>. <number>2</number> put s.t. in a bag or in a hammock. <i>Puyúha (ipúyu) ang bulingun sa hábul,</i> Wrap the dirty clothing in a sheet. <i>Puyúha (ipúyu) ang bátà,</i> Put the baby in its hammock.

<p><form>puyù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> <tr>live</tr>, <tr>reside</tr> s.w. <i>Unsa pay ákung gipuy-an ning kalibutána?</i> What am I in this world for? <i>Balay nga ákung gipuy-an,</i> The house I am staying in. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>stay</tr> s.w. <i>Mupuyù ku sa báy ug dúna kuy trabáhu,</i> I'll stay home if I have s.t. to do. <number>3</number> <itype>[A]</itype> be, become <tr>still</tr>. <i>Ug dì ka mupuyù, latiguhun ta ka,</i> If you don't <tr>keep still</tr>, I'll whip you. <number>4</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> be willing to go to prison just to get s.t. <i>Puy-an ku ang prisuhan basta lang makabalus ku,</i> I am willing to go to prison just so I can get revenge. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <i>1</i> <itype>[C2; ac4]</itype> live together with s.o. <i>Dílì ku makigpúyù ug táwung palaaway,</i> I don't want to <tr>live with</tr> a quarrelsome person. <i>Lisud kang igpúyù,</i> You're a hard person to live with. <number>2</number> <itype>[C; a1c]</itype> <tr>live with</tr> s.o. as husband and wife. <i>Nagpúyù lang mi ug wà lang pakasal,</i> We just lived as husband and wife and we didn't get married. <form>puyùpúyù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>common-law</tr> husband, common-law wife. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; a1c]</itype> live together as common-law spouses. <form>hiN-/haN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>stay</tr> in a place. <i>Dì ku mahimuyù sa balay kay pul-an ku,</i> I can't <tr>hang around</tr> the house because I get bored. <number>2</number> <formx>dílì, walà &mdash;</formx> be <tr>restless</tr>. <i>Walà siya mahimuyù kay dúgayng naulì ang íyang anak,</i> She was restless because her daughter stayed out late. <form>paniN-, paniN-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>reside</tr> and have one's livelihood in a certain area. <i>Adtu sila sa Mindanaw manimuyù,</i> They are going to Mindanao to <tr>live</tr>. <number>2</number> live in a certain style. <i>Malináwun silang nanimuyù,</i> They live a peaceful life. <pos>n</pos> one's family life. <i>Ang sugal mauy nakabungkag sa ílang panimuyù,</i> Gambling destroyed their home life. <form>higN-, hagN-, sagN-</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>SAGMUYÙ</sc>.</xr> <form>puy-anan, puluy-ánan, pinuy-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>residence</tr>, dwelling place. <form>paN-</form> <xr>= <sc>PANIN-</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <form>pag-</form> <number>1</number> action of staying s.w. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>PANIN-</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <form>maN-r-/l-, -um-r-/l-, mulupyù, lumulupyù, tagpúyù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>residents</tr>, <tr>inhabitants</tr>.

<p><form>púyù</form> <xr>= <sc>PÚYU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puyuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> get a favor or a favorable reaction by saying the right thing. <i>Gipuyuk nákug kindi ang ákung anak arun magpatupi,</i> I bribed my son with candy so that he would agree to get his hair cut. <i>Hipuyukan ku sa ákung anak maung milugwag ákung diyísun,</i> My son talked me out of a ten-peso bill.

<p><form>púyung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>gather</tr> the ends of a sack or bag to <tr>close</tr> it up or take s.t. flat and fold up the ends to put s.t. inside it. <i>Ákung gipúyung ang mga daplin sa bàbà sa puntil,</i> I closed the sack by gathering the upper edges. <number>2</number> pull one's hair back, gathering the ends and tying or clipping them. <pos>n</pos> <tr>clip</tr>, <tr>ribbon</tr>, or the like to hold the ends of gathered hair in place.

<p><form>púyus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>carry</tr> s.t. in a piece of cloth or paper by pulling up the edges. <i>Gipúyus níya ang siriguylas sa íyang sayal,</i> She carried the small fruits in the folds of her skirt. <number>2</number> carry a child in the womb (humorous). <i>Nagpúyus na siyag tulu ka búlan pagkasal níya,</i> She was three months <tr>pregnant</tr> when she was married. <number>3</number> harbor emotions, <tr>rain</tr> (literary). <i>Dag-um nga hingbug-atan sa gipúyus nga ulan,</i> Clouds weighted down with the rain they were carrying.

<p><form>puy-us</form> <xr>= <sc>BAYÚUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pwí, pwì</form> <xr>= <sc>PUWI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pwídi</form> <xr>= <sc>PUYDI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pwintsitya</form> <xr>= <sc>PASKUWAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pwinti<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fountain</tr>. <number>2</number> a short-spanned stone <tr>bridge</tr> with thick stone walls dating from the Spanish era. <number>2a</number> the <tr>bridge</tr> of a boat.

<p><form>pwinti<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. treatment for rheumatism whereby the impurities which are thought to cause it are drained from the afflicted area by making a wound and wrapping it with a banana trunk and other medicinal herbs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>treat</tr> a patient with <ix>pwinti</ix>. <i>Naáyu ang riyúma sa tigúlang human pwintíhi ang bitíis,</i> The old man was cured of <pb n=817>his rheumatism after he was treated with <ix>pwinti</ix>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> get this treatment.

<p><form>pwíra</form> <xr>= <sc>PUYRA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pwirsa</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>strong</tr> in intensity, force. <i>Pwirsa kaáyu ang hángin sa miáging bagyu,</i> The last typhoon brought very strong winds. <number>2</number> <tr>plenty</tr> in quantity. <i>Pwirsang táwu sa plása,</i> There are <tr>lots</tr> of people in the plaza. <form>&mdash; rimidiyu</form> <pos>a</pos> with the utmost effort. <i>Ang pagpaiskuyla ug siyam ka anak pwirsa rimidiyu giyud,</i> Seeing nine children through school takes the utmost effort. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[BN(1); b47]</itype> become strong. <i>Mupwirsa (mapwirsa, mamwirsa) na gánì ang ulan, mubahà giyud,</i> If the rain pours down hard it is likely to flood. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN2; ab]</itype> <tr>force</tr> s.t., do s.t. forcibly. <i>Ayaw pwirsaha pag-abri (pwirsahag abli) kay mabúngì nyà,</i> Don't force it open because it might break off. <i>Ayaw pwirsaha (ipwirsa) ang pag-ukang sa bindáhi arun dì mudugù ang samad,</i> Don't take off the bandage <tr>forcibly</tr> so the wound won't bleed. <number>3</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> be <tr>overworked</tr>. <i>Hipwirsahan siya sa trabáhu mau nga nalúya,</i> She was overworked. That's why she is fatigued. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>strength</tr>. <i>Way pwirsa ang ákung buktun,</i> My arms have no strength. <number>2</number> <tr>armed force</tr>. <form>&mdash; militar</form> <tr>military force</tr>. <form>&mdash; nabal</form> <tr>naval force</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa kahangínan</form> <tr>air force</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> exert effort. <i>Dì ku makapamwirsa kay bag-u pa kung naáyu,</i> I should not <tr>strain</tr> myself because I have just recovered from an illness. <form>-du</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> working, forcing oneself to exert more than proper effort. <i>Daut siya kay pwirsádu siya sa trabáhu,</i> He is skinny because he works harder than he should. <number>2</number> <tr>strong</tr>, possessing great strength.

<p><form>pwirta<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PULTA</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr>

<p><form>pwirta<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PWIRTU<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pwirti</form> <number>1</number> doing s.t. vigorously, to a great extent, existing in great quantities or being to a great degree. <i>Pwirting hílak sa bátà,</i> The child cried <tr>hard</tr>. <i>Pwirting mukáun ning batáa,</i> The child eats a <tr>lot</tr>. <i>Pwirting mahála sa isdà run,</i> Fish is <tr>terribly</tr> expensive these days. <i>Pwirting pagkadusmúa sa dyíp sa pusti,</i> How hard the jeep smashed into the post! <i>Pwirting ulána gahápun,</i> How it rained yesterday! <number>2</number> do s.t. very <tr>well</tr>. <i>Pwirting mubayli si Pidru ug tanggu,</i> Peter dances the tango very well. <number>2a</number> having s.t. that enhances one's standing, <tr>terrific</tr>. <i>Sigúrung madáwat si Míli kay pwirti siya ug rikumindasiyun,</i> Millie will surely get the job because she has terrific recommendations. <i>Pwirti siyag tútuy,</i> She has <tr>magnificent</tr> breasts.

<p><form>pwirtu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>port</tr>, <tr>harbor</tr>. <number>1a</number> a city or town that is a port. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> make a place into a port of call, make a port for a place.

<p><form>pwirtu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the opening in the vagina through which the baby passes in childbirth.

<p><form>pwís</form> <tr>so</tr>, <tr>therefore</tr>, for that reason. <i>Pwís, átung buhátun arun mahuman,</i> So, let's do it so that it will be finished. <i>Kun tinúud kang nahigugma, pwís, dawáta,</i> If it is true you like him, accept him.

<p><form>pwistu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>place</tr>, <tr>position</tr>. <i>Ang mga gwardiya mitultul dáyun sa ílang pwistu,</i> The guards found their posts. <number>2</number> position, <tr>job</tr>. <i>Dúgay na siya ánang pwistúha,</i> He has been employed in that job for a long time. <form>&mdash; sa f.o.b</form>., reckoned at [such-and-such] a price at a certain place. <i>Kanang prisyúha pwistu sa pabrika,</i> That price is what you pay at the factory. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b6]</itype> get a job. <i>Gipwistuhan man gáling kug trabáhu apan túa sa búkid,</i> I was given a job, but in the mountains.

<p><form>pyádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>caretaker</tr> of lands, estates. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB156; a2]</itype> make s.o. the caretaker or overseer, become such.

<p><form>pyahuk, pyáhuk</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>depressed</tr>, <tr>sunken</tr>. <i>Pyahuk ug mata,</i> <tr>Sunken-eyed</tr>. <i>Pyahuk ug hubun,</i> Having a sunken fontanel. <i>Pyahuk ug áping,</i> <tr>Sunken-cheeked</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> get depressed or sunken. <i>Nagpyahuk ang tiyan sa munyíkang hitumban,</i> The doll's stomach is all <tr>squashed</tr> because s.o. stepped on it. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having s.t. depressed or sunken.

<p><form>pyáit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>squeal</tr> to the authorities, <tr>betray</tr> a secret about a crime. <i>Mipyáit ang kaúban sa mga tulisan nga hidakpan,</i> The accomplice of the robbers squealed when he was arrested.

<p><form>pyakpak</form> <xr>= <sc>PAYAKPAK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyamríra</form> <xr>= <sc>TIMBRÍRA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyangà</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>flat-nosed</tr> (humorous). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be flat-nosed. <i>Siya ray napyangà nílang tanan,</i> She is the only one in the whole family that has a flat nose.

<p><form>pyangaw</form> <pos>n</pos> yellowish-green insect about 1&Prime; long, that is a rice pest, preying on the sheaths before the grain develops. They have an unpleasant odor which permeates the rice field. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infested with <ix>pyangaw</ix>.

<p><form>pyangguy</form> <pos>a</pos> tall and thin, <tr>lanky</tr>. <i>Musalir tingáli kas baskit kay pyangguy kaáyu ka,</i> You might do for basketball because you are lanky. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become lanky.

<p><form>pyanghaw</form> <pos>n</pos> a winning hand in mahjong with no flower piece (<ix>búlak, 2a</ix>.). <form>&mdash; mídul kard</form> <pos>n</pos> a <ix>pyanghaw</ix> composed entirely of <ix>mídul kard</ix>'s. <form>búnut &mdash;</form> a <ix>pyanghaw</ix> in which the piece one is waiting for is drawn.

<p><form>pyanguk</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= [+]<sc>PUNGAW</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=818>

<p><form>pyangut</form> <pos>a</pos> having a look of <tr>distaste</tr> on the face. <i>Pyangut ang íyang dagway kay gibahuan siya,</i> He has a look of distaste on his face because it stinks here. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> get a look of distaste on the face. <i>Mauy ipyangut ug kasab-an ku,</i> I get a <tr>sour</tr> look on my face if I'm cussed out.

<p><form>pyanista</form> <xr>see <sc>PYÁNU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyansa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bail</tr>, financial guarantee for a released prisoner. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> put up bail. <number>2</number> guarantee s.o.'s debt. <i>Dílì ku mupyansa nímu kay wà kuy ikabáyad ug mupalya ka,</i> I won't guarantee your debt because I will not be able to pay if you default. <form>-du</form> <pos>a</pos> be out on bail. <i>Nakasuruysúruy gihápun ang kriminal kay pyansádu man,</i> The criminal still roams around because he is out on bail. <form>-dur(&rarr;)</form> <number>1</number> one who posts bail. <number>2</number> one who guarantees s.o. else's debts. <i>Ang pyansadur pagadur,</i> The one who guarantees winds up paying the debt.

<p><form>pyánu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>piano</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> play the piano. <form>pyanista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pianist</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> be a pianist.

<p><form>pyanúnu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jelly roll</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make, have jelly rolls.

<p><form>pyapi</form> <pos>a</pos> be <tr>flat</tr> instead of round as it should be. <i>Pyapi ug píkas úlu ang ímung anak,</i> Your son's head is flat on one side. <form>(&larr;)<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; a]</itype> come out flat, <tr>flatten</tr> s.t. <i>Ang bumba mipyápi sa tibuuk balángay,</i> The bomb levelled the whole village. <i>Napyápi ang bibingka. Wà makatúbù,</i> The rice cakes came out flat.

<p><form>pyápi<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> tree of saltwater swamps: <bio>Avicennia officinalis</bio>.

<p><form>pyásà</form> <xr>= <sc>PYÁSAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyásat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB16; a]</itype> <tr>smash</tr>, <tr>crush</tr> or <tr>flatten</tr> s.t., be <tr>crushed</tr>, <tr>mashed</tr> or <tr>flattened</tr>. <i>Dì ku makapyásat sa láta,</i> I can't flatten the can. <i>Íyang pyasátun ang hinug ságing úsà ipakáun sa bátà,</i> She'll <tr>mash</tr> the ripe bananas before feeding them to the child. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> fruit of any plant with a shell or husk that has failed to develop. <i>Pyasat man lagi ning mais. Way unud,</i> This corn is defective. There are no grains.

<p><form>pyasut</form> <xr>= <sc>PUYASUT</sc>, <i>a2, v2.</i></xr>

<p><form>pyaus<sub>1</sub>, pyáus<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>BAYÚUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyaus<sub>2</sub>, pyáus<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for the voice to be <tr>grating</tr> and weak, usually as a result of strain. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S; c1]</itype> for the voice to be <tr>hoarse</tr> in this way. <i>Nagpyaus nag íyang tíngug sa paghinílak,</i> She lost her voice from crying so much.

<p><form>pyí</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>measure</tr>, about a <tr>foot</tr>. <i>Duha ka pyí,</i> Two feet. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6c1]</itype> buy, measure s.t. by the foot. <form>di-</form> <tr>foot-powered</tr>, esp. by means of a treadle. <form>-s</form> <xr>= <sc>PYÍ</sc> (plural&mdash;used only after Spanish numbers).</xr> <i>Dus pyís,</i> Two feet. <form>pyís dil pátu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ornamental palm around 2&prime; high with semi-circular leaves, slit nearly to the base: <bio>Rhapis excelsa</bio>.

<p><form>pyimríra</form> <xr>= <sc>TIMBRÍRA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyirdi</form> <xr>= <sc>PILDI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyirdigána</form> <xr>= <sc>PIRDIGÁNA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyirnu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bolt</tr>, a threaded metal pin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> fasten with a bolt.

<p><form>pyís</form> <xr>= <sc>PYÍ</sc> (plural).</xr>

<p><form>pyísa</form> <xr>= <sc>PÍSA<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyista</form> <xr>= <sc>PISTA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyunggut</form> <xr>= <sc>PYUNGKUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyungkù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> sit on one's <tr>haunches</tr>. <i>Pyungkúi ang inudúru, ayaw lingkúri,</i> <tr>Squat</tr> on the toilet, don't sit on it.

<p><form>pyungkut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB6; c16]</itype> get <tr>bunched up</tr>, <tr>gathered</tr> into folds and <tr>wrinkled</tr>, cause s.t. to become so. <i>Mupyungkut (mapyungkut) nang ímung buldáhan ug dílì ka mugámit ug bastidur,</i> You are going to sew wrinkles into your embroidery if you don't use an embroidery frame. <i>Pyungkúta (ipyungkut) lang ang bàbà sa sáku arun dì mayabu ang bugas,</i> <tr>Bunch</tr> up the mouth of the sack and tie it so the rice won't spill.

<p><form>pyúr</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>unadulterated</tr>, <tr>pure</tr>. <i>Pyúr tablíya ang ákung palitun,</i> I'll buy pure chocolate. <number>2</number> <tr>virgin</tr>, <tr>chaste</tr>. <i>Pyúr siyang pagkababáyi,</i> She is a virgin. <number>3</number> the <tr>genuine</tr>, unmixed breed. <i>Pyúr nga danggit,</i> The <tr>genuine</tr> <ix>danggit</ix> fish (not the one that looks similar to it and which may still be so called but is not the real one). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c16]</itype> drink liquor <tr>straight</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; c1]</itype> be pure, <tr>unmixed</tr>. <i>Ug mapyúr ang ímung tubà mailhan ku,</i> I can recognize unadulterated toddy. <pos>n</pos> winning hand in mahjong consisting of only one design.

<p><form>pyuríya</form> <xr>= <sc>PAYURÍYA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyúrus</form> <xr>= <sc>BAYÚUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyuus, pyúus</form> <xr>= <sc>BAYÚUS</sc>.</xr>






<pb n=819>
<div1>
<head>R</head>


<p><form>ra</form> particle following the first word of a predicate. <number>1</number> <tr>only</tr> [predicate] and nothing else. <i>Si Pidru ra ang mitábang nákù,</i> Pedro was the only one that helped me. <i>Mau ray ákung gianhi,</i> That is all I came to get. <i>Ginúu ray mahibalu ug unsáun nà,</i> Only the Lord knows what to do with that. <number>1a</number> [so-and-so] did it himself. <i>Siya ray nag-unay sa íyang anak,</i> He raped his own daughter. <number>1b</number> <formx><r>[<ix>preposed gen. pronoun</ix>]</r> &mdash;</formx> it is all my, your, his, our, etc. very <tr>own</tr>. <i>Ang mais, ímu ra pud diayng abut?</i> Oh, is the corn your own product, too? <number>1b1</number> <formx>íya &mdash;</formx> may this bad thing happen only to him (phrase to ward off the possibility that the bad thing may happen to s.o. else). <i>Ag íyang úlu, íya ra, maáyung pagkapusà,</i> He got his head completely smashed&mdash;may it only happen to him. <number>1c</number> <formx>&mdash; hinúun</formx> <number>1c1</number> it's <tr>merely</tr>, <tr>only</tr>. <i>Sitinta ra hinúun ning íyang ámut apan makatábang ug tapal sa galastúhan,</i> He only contributed seventy, but it can help cover the expenses. <number>1c2</number> oh, it's nothing (said in modesty or sarcastically about s.t. impressive). <i>Rulsruys ra hinúun ang íyang awtu,</i> His car is only a Rolls Royce. <number>2</number> <tr>exactly</tr> [so-and-so]. <number>2a</number> with measurements: [so-and-so much] and no more. <i>Tulu ray makaadtu,</i> Only three people can go. <number>2a1</number> with words referring to fitness, sufficiency, preciseness: just exactly <tr>right</tr>, fitting, etc. <i>Hustu ra ning tulu,</i> Three is just the right number. <i>Paríha ra ang duha,</i> The two are <tr>exactly</tr> alike. <i>Mahímù ra nang gidak-úna,</i> That size will do perfectly. <number>2b</number> <ix>with words referring to location:</ix> it is right here, there. <i>Día ra ku,</i> I'm over here. <i>Náa ra sa ímung atubángan,</i> There it is, right under your nose. <number>2b1</number> no <tr>further</tr> than [such-and-such a place]. <i>Anhi ra kútub ang dálan,</i> The road doesn't go any further than this. <i>Didtu ra mi manáug,</i> We got off there and went no further. <number>2b2</number> <formx>anáa &mdash; <r>[<ix>dat.</ix>]</r></formx> it is <tr>up to</tr> [so-and-so]. <i>Náa ra níya ug mupalit ba siya,</i> It is up to him if he wants to buy. <i>Náa ra nímug mupadáyun ka,</i> It's entirely up to you if you will continue. <number>2c</number> <formx>mau &mdash; ug, nga</formx> just exactly like, as if. <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>MAU</sc>, <i>3, 4.</i></xr> <number>2d</number> <formx>maáyu &mdash;</formx> it would be just the right thing. <i>Maáyu rag mamatay siya,</i> It would serve him right if he died. <i>Maáyu rang napildi siya,</i> Serves him right that he lost. <xr>(<ix>see also</ix> <bx>3c</bx> <ix>and</ix> <bx>4d</bx>.)</xr> <number>3</number> [so-and-so] is certain to happen. <i>Muanhi ra nà,</i> He'll come, don't worry. <i>May adlaw rang gabáan ka,</i> The day will come when you get yours. <i>Magkítà ra tag usab,</i> We'll <tr>surely</tr> see each other again. <number>3a</number> <formx>&mdash; gayud</formx> [so-and-so] will, did finally happen, <tr>despite everything</tr>. <i>Nakatápus ra giyud ku,</i> I finished, despite everything. <i>Gimahalan ra giyud mi sa tambal,</i> Much as we needed it, we found the medicine too expensive. <number>3b</number> <formx>bantug &mdash;</formx> <tr>no wonder</tr>. <i>Bantug rang nagdalì. Mamisíta diay siya,</i> No wonder he was in such a rush. He wants to visit s.o. <number>3b1</number> <formx>kanyáhay &mdash;</formx> <tr>no wonder</tr> [such-and-such] a thing always happens. <i>Kanyáhay rang dì padúul nang batáa nímu, kay hingúsì ka,</i> No wonder that child won't let you get near him. You keep pinching him. <number>3c</number> <formx>maáyu &mdash;</formx> some day it will be good for s.t. <i>Ayg ilábay kay maáyu ra unyà nà,</i> Don't throw it away because someday it will be of some use. <number>4</number> <formx><r>[<ix>adj.</ix>]</r> &mdash;</formx> <number>4a</number> <tr>too</tr> or more [adj.] than satisfactory. <i>Ang sapátus dakù ra kaáyu pára nákù,</i> The shoes are too big for me. <number>4b</number> <ix>with adjectives indicating the smaller, the easier, cheaper, lesser of two opposites:</ix> only a (small, light, short) very (easy, cheap, etc.). <i>Kanang Tuway gamay ra nang baryúha,</i> Toway is just a small barrio. <i>A, sayun ra kaáyu,</i> Oh, it's so easy. <number>4b1</number> <formx>láin, lahì &mdash;</formx> very much <tr>different</tr>. <i>Lahì ra ang ímung batásan kay sa ákù,</i> Your ways are very different from mine. <formx>subra &mdash;</formx> much too much. <i>Subra ra ang ímung gihátag,</i> You gave much too much. <number>4b2</number> <formx>layù &mdash;, walà &mdash;</formx> very far <tr>behind</tr> in, not anywhere near as good as. <i>Ang inyung balay layù ra sa ámù,</i> Your house isn't anywhere near as nice as ours. <i>Walà ka ra sa kumingking itandì nákù,</i> You're nothing compared to me&mdash;not even up to my little finger. <number>4c</number> <formx>sámuk &mdash;</formx> leave me be. (You're too much of a nuisance.) <i>Sámuk ra. Magtuun ku,</i> Leave me alone. I want to study. <number>4d</number> <formx>maáyu &mdash;</formx> very <tr>nice</tr>. <i>Maáyu rang ipakung nang úlu mu sa bungbung,</i> How nice it would be to smash your head against the wall. <number>5</number> <ix>with imperatives:</ix> particle taking <pb n=820>the abruptness out of a command but definitely a command given to s.o. who doesn't have the right to refuse. <i>Ambi ra nang kutsilyu,</i> Let me have that knife. <number>5a</number> <formx>&mdash; ugud</formx> <xr>= <sc>RA</sc>, <i>5,</i> but with slightly less curtness.</xr> <i>Kuháa ra gud ri,</i> Would you come get this, please. <number>5b</number> <formx>tan-áwa &mdash;, &mdash; gud</formx> can you beat that! <i>Tan-áwa ra, siyay nangúna siya pay nangísug,</i> Take a look at that! He started it and now he gets mad! <number>5c</number> <formx>&mdash; gánì</formx> go on now and do [so-and-so]. <i>Lakaw ra ngánì kay dúru na nílang paábut,</i> Go on now. They have been waiting forever. <i>Ayaw ra gánì nag garùgarúa,</i> Stop jiggling that. You know you shouldn't. <number>6</number> <formx>yátì, yáwà, yátis &mdash;</formx> I don't believe it. <i>Kadaug kas swipstik? Yátì ra!</i> You won the sweepstakes? I don't believe it. <number>6a</number> in accepting a challenge: I don't believe you dare challenge me! <i>Yátì ra! Makigsumbagay ka nàkù?</i> You mean to say you dare challenge me to a fight? <number>7</number> <formx>&mdash; ba</formx> <number>7a</number> particle with a reason which is given as advice or warning. <i>Higúpa dáyun kay ínit pa ra ba,</i> Eat it right away because it's still warm. <i>Mangísug ra ba tug madúgay ka,</i> He will get angry if you take too long. <number>7b</number> ordinarily [so-and-so] would have been OK, but ... <i>Sus, nía na ang mga bisíta. Wà ra ba tay giandam,</i> My! The visitors have arrived and here we don't have anything to give them. <i>Dà, nag-uwan na hinúun. Wà ra ba kuy páyung,</i> Darn! It's raining, and I don't have an umbrella. <number>7c</number> particle with an apology. <i>Wà ra ba diri si Nánay,</i> I'm <tr>sorry</tr>, Mom's not here.

<p><form>rabana</form> <xr>= <sc>GWAYABANU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>rabanit</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> in <tr>rags</tr>, <tr>tatters</tr>. <i>Kadtung bátà kanhi nga rabanit, karun maáyu na nga mamisti,</i> That child used to be in tatters, but now he dresses well. <number>2</number> <tr>poor</tr>, <tr>destitute</tr>. <i>Napútu mi, ug karun rabanit na,</i> We went bankrupt. And now we're destitute. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> <number>1</number> be in rags. <number>2</number> be <tr>penniless</tr>. <form>ka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be all in rags.

<p><form>rabanus</form> <xr>= <sc>LABANUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>rabatikung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>porridge</tr> of sticky rice and mung beans boiled with coconut milk and brown sugar. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make, have rabatikung.

<p><form>*rábir</form> <form>&mdash; plant, tri</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rubber tree</tr> planted as an ornamental: <bio>Ficus elastica</bio>.

<p><form>rábis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rabies</tr>.

<p><form>rábit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rabbit</tr>.

<p><form>rábuls</form> <pos>n</pos> breed of fighting <tr>cock</tr>.

<p><form>rabunit</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>grass</tr> grown potted, of two kinds: one with yellow and green leaves, the other with all green leaves.

<p><form>radar, rádar</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>radar</tr>. <number>2</number> the <tr>ears</tr> or any way one has of picking up gossip or conversation. <i>Ngilngig kaáyug radar ni si Asay kay daghag tabì nga mahípus,</i> Asay has terrific radar when it comes to picking up gossip. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> do s.t. by radar.

<p><form>radikal</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>radical</tr>, one who wants to change the social structure radically, or for ideas to be radical. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become radical or a radical.

<p><form>rádis</form> <xr>= <sc>LABANUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>radiyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the <tr>radio</tr> business. <i>Usa ka mag-aawit sa radiyu,</i> A singer on the radio. <number>2</number> radio set. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>broadcast</tr> over the radio. <i>Giradiyu nga may bagyung umaábut,</i> They broadcast that a storm was approaching. <form>&mdash; baktas</form> one who repeats idle talk. <form>&mdash; balágun (kawáyan)</form> the <tr>grapevine</tr>, orally repeated news. <i>Sa panahun sa girilya ang ámung nutisya gíkan sa radiyu balágun (kawáyan),</i> During the war we got our news over the grapevine. <form>-gram</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>radiogram</tr>. <form>-púnu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>radio-</tr>*phono. <form>-upirítur</form> <pos>n</pos> radio <tr>operator</tr>.

<p><form>radya</form> <xr>= <sc>RÁHA<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>radyaw</form> <xr>= <sc>ÁYU</sc> (dialectal &mdash; from <ix>dáyaw</ix>).</xr>

<p><form>rágid</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>rugged</tr>, <tr>strong</tr> and <tr>robust</tr>. <i>Ang gustu níyang mabána kanang laláking rágid,</i> She wants a rugged man for a husband. <number>2</number> not polished, <tr>coarse</tr>. <number>3</number> <tr>ragged</tr>, <tr>shabby</tr>, <tr>worn-out</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become rugged. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1B12]</itype> dress in old clothes. <i>Magrágid tag sinínà sa búkid,</i> We'll wear old clothes to the mountains. <i>Narágid na ang mga bátà nga walay inahan nga mag-atiman,</i> The children have become shabbily dressed because they lack a mother's care. <form>ka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be all shabby.

<p><form>ráha<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the rajahs of pre-Spanish Filipinos.

<p><form>ráha<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wood</tr> cut from freshly cut ipil-ipil (<ix>byatilis</ix>) or mangrove (<ix>bakhaw</ix>) trees, peeled and dried for firewood. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cut and sell mangrove or ipil-ipil commercially.

<p><form>rak-an rúl</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rock and roll</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2C; c6]</itype> dance the rock and roll. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for the stomach to be rumbling from indigestion. <i>Nagrak-an rúl ang ákung tiyan tungud sa sagulságul nga pagkáun,</i> My stomach is doing the rock and roll from all the things I ate.

<p><form>rak-in rúl</form> <xr>= <sc>RAK-AN RÚL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>rákit<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>racket</tr> for tennis, pingpong, and the like. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> have, make into a racket.

<p><form>rákit<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rocket</tr> ships or bombs.

<p><form>rákit<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>racket</tr>, fraudulent means of obtaining money. <i>Rákit lang giyud nang kapunúngan. Pangwarta lang,</i> Their organization is just a racket to get money. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c16]</itype> dishonestly take money entrusted to one. <i>Girákit lang ang ámung ámut,</i> The man just pocketed our contribution.

<pb n=821>

<p><form>rakrak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> fire bullets rapidly in bursts. <i>Balay nga girakrakan,</i> A house riddled with bullets. <number>2</number> in billiards, hit the target ball forcefully so as to scatter the balls that surround it with the hope that one or two of these balls will go into any of the holes. <pos>n</pos> bursts of rapid rifle fire.[+]

<p><form>rám</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rum</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> have rum.

<p><form>ráma</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> set flowers on a palm leaf as decorations. <i>Nagráma mig búwak sa kapilya,</i> We set some flowers on palm leaves in the chapel.

<p><form>rambul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>rumble</tr>, <tr>free-for-all</tr> fist fight. <number>2</number> in Jai-alai, betting on the first three players out of a series such that whatever order they are in, the bet wins&mdash;e.g. if one bets that players 3, 6, and <number>2</number> are the first, second, and third place, his bet wins as long as this is so, no matter which one was first, which was second, and which was third. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; a12]</itype> engage in a rumble. <i>Ang ílang punduk mauy mirambul sa nangharána,</i> It was their group which engaged the serenaders in a <tr>brawl</tr>. <i>Nagrambul ang magtiáyun,</i> The husband and wife had a brawl.

<p><form>rambul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> take a ride with s.o. on his bicycle or motorcycle. <i>Magrambul lang tas ímung bisiklíta,</i> Let us just ride double on your bicycle. <i>Irambul (rambúla) ning tutú ka bátà dihas ímung mutur,</i> Take these children on your motorcycle.

<p><form>rami<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shrub</tr> cultivated for its fiber, which is made into blankets, cloth, and string. Rami cloth is coarse, but very sturdy: <bio>Boehmeria nivea</bio>.

<p><form>rami<sub>2</sub>, rámi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> game of <tr>rummy</tr>. <number>2</number> situation where one goes <tr>rummy</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC2; ac3]</itype> play rummy. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; ab2]</itype> go rummy.

<p><form>rámids sil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rummage sale</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c6]</itype> hold a rummage sale.

<p><form>*ramus</form> <form>Duminggu di-</form> <pos>n</pos> Palm Sunday.

<p><form>rán</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>run</tr> in stockings or knitted fabrics. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> develop a run. <i>Kausa pa gánì nákù masul-ub narán dáyun,</i> I only wore the stockings once and they got a run right away.

<p><form>ran-abáwut</form> <pos>n</pos> an automobile with a rumble seat.

<p><form>ranggu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>rank</tr>. <number>2</number> high position in society, high standing, <tr>eminence</tr>. <i>Ang nanambung sa kasal púrus táwung may ranggu,</i> The wedding guests were all persons of rank. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> have a rank of.

<p><form>ráning</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>running</tr>, a violation in basketball wherein a player takes more than two steps while the ball is in his hands. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> commit the running violation.

<p><form>ráning burd</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> board laid along a bridge for vehicles to pass over. <number>2</number> boards put underneath a passenger bus running parallel to the chassis, one on either side, between the front and rear wheels, used for cargo. <number>2a</number> <tr>running board</tr> of cars.

<p><form>ransiyu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> spoiled meat or cooked food. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become <tr>rancid</tr>. <i>Muransiyu (maransiyu) ang karni kun dílì ipridyidir,</i> The meat will <tr>spoil</tr> if you don't put it in the frigidaire.

<p><form>ransiyu<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>RANSU<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ransu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ration</tr>, <tr>share</tr> of food given out. <i>Ang ransu sa mga nasunúgan,</i> The ration for the fire victims. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> give rations. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain a ration.

<p><form>ransu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ranch</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> have a ranch. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>associates</tr>, <tr>friends</tr> (slang). <i>Walay táwu nga manghilabut níya sa piyir kay pulus karansu níya ang mga buguy didtu,</i> No one will harm him at the waterfront because all the tough guys there are his friends.

<p><form>rantsu</form> <xr>= <sc>RANSU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ranwi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>runway</tr> in an airport.

<p><form>rapal</form> <xr>= <sc>ARAPAL</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p><form>rapdrap</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rough draft</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> make a rough <tr>draft</tr>.

<p><form>rapidu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> fire a <tr>volley</tr>. <i>Rapiduha ninyu ang miláyas nga kriminal,</i> Fire a volley on the escaping criminal. <number>2</number> do s.t. in rapid succession, like the firing of a volley. <i>Nagrapidu siyag búnal niánang maldítung dakù,</i> She gave that naughty child a sound whipping. <i>Girapidu nílag káun ang inasal,</i> They consumed the roast pig with machine gun-like rapidity. <pos>a</pos> done machine gun-like. <i>Rapidung pagkasábà,</i> A scolding like the burst of a <tr>machine gun</tr>. <form>di-</form> <pos>n</pos> weapon that is capable of automatic fire.

<p><form>rápir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wrapper</tr> for manufactured goods or gifts.

<p><form>rás</form> <pos>a</pos> rushing, doing s.t. hastily. <i>Kanúnay ka lang kabuk-an ug plátu kay rás ka man gud kaáyug líhuk,</i> You keep breaking plates because you work in such a <tr>rush</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> do s.t. in a hasty, rushing way. <i>Kinsa ka gud nga murás ka man lang dáyun ug súd nga way pupananghid?</i> Who are you just to rush in without asking permission? <i>Ámung girás ang masakitun sa uspital,</i> We rushed the patient to the hospital.

<p><form>rása</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>breed</tr> of animals or fowl. <i>Unsang rasáha nang ímung sunuy?</i> What breed is your rooster? <form>di-</form> of a special breed, <tr>pedigreed</tr>.

<p><form>rásak</form> <pos>n</pos> RASAC, acronym for a government organization: the Regional Anti-Smuggling Action Center.

<p><form>rasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>allotment</tr> given out for subsistence. <number>2</number> one's <tr>share</tr> of s.t. rationed. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <pb n=822>give out <tr>rations</tr>. <i>Girasyunan lang intáwun ang mga sundálu ug mais ug bulad,</i> The soldiers were being given corn grits and dried fish as their ration. <number>1a</number> <itype>[c]</itype> <tr>cater</tr> food on a regular basis. <i>Mahal, piru maáyu ang ílang irasiyun,</i> It's expensive, but the food they <tr>cater</tr> is good. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> ration s.t. in short supply. <i>Rasyunan ang túbig sa tinghuwaw,</i> Water is rationed during droughts.

<p><form>raspa<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> scraping of the womb (<tr>dilation and curettage</tr>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> perform the <xr><sc>D</sc></xr> and <xr><sc>C</sc></xr> on s.o. <i>Raspahan ang babáying talinug-an,</i> A woman with excessive bleeding has to get a <xr><sc>D</sc></xr> and <xr><sc>C</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <tr>trim</tr> and thin the hair with a razor. <number>3</number> <tr>shred</tr> papayas or other things in a similar way. <form>raspahan, -dur</form> <pos>n</pos> papaya <tr>shredder</tr>.

<p><form>raspa<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>LASPA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>rasun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>reason</tr> that s.t. happened. <i>Unsa may rasung mipalta ka?</i> What is the reason you were absent? <number>2</number> <tr>reasoning</tr>. <i>Ang íyang rasun walà makakumbins&icaron;r nákù,</i> His reasoning was not convincing to me. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2N; c6]</itype> give reasons why s.t. is or is not. <i>Ngánung murasun (mangrasun) ka pa man nga naabtan man ka?</i> Why do you keep trying to <tr>explain</tr>, when I caught you red-handed? <i>Mau tuy ákung girasun níya nga nasakit ka,</i> The excuse I gave to him was that you were sick. <form>-abli</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>reasonable</tr>. <i>Rasunabli ang íyang gibúhat kay maalkansi man tà tug wà,</i> What he did was <tr>reasonable</tr> because he would have lost money if he hadn't. <number>2</number> tending to give excuses, reasons why s.t. was or was not.

<p><form>ratatat</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> rattling sound of a machine gun. <number>2</number> rattling off scoldings. <i>Ayg kan-a nang kík, ratatat ra ba kaáyu si Tiyà,</i> Better not eat that cake. Your aunt is great at reading lectures. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> for a machine gun to <tr>rattle</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> scolding in a rattling way.

<p><form>ratipikar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>ratify</tr>. <number>2</number> approve an action after it has been carried out by a subordinate. <i>Núlu ang kuntrátung dílì ratipikahan sa manidy&icaron;r,</i> The contract is null and void if the manager doesn't ratify it.

<p><form>ratsáda</form> <tr>everybody</tr> [do]. <i>Bugsay, ratsáda,</i> Everybody row. <i>Ratsáda, bira,</i> Everybody pull. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> be included in s.t. that is supposed to have happened to s.o. or s.t. else. <i>Naratsáda ku sa ákung ábin pagkapildi sa íyang manuk,</i> I lost the amount I put in on his bet when his cock lost. <i>Naratsáda núun ku sa kasábà bisag wà kuy salà,</i> I was scolded as well, even though I hadn't done anything. <i>Daghang mga way lábut ang nangaratsáda sa pinusílay,</i> A lot of innocent people got caught up in the crossfire. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> win successively in a mahjong game. <i>Wà ka makaratsáda sa wà pa ka muílis sa ímung silya,</i> It was only when you moved to another chair that you started winning successively.

<p><form>ratsar</form> <xr>= <sc>RATSÁDA</sc>, <i>v1, 2.</i></xr>

<p><form>*rátu</form> <form>káda &mdash;</form> <tr>each time</tr> s.t. happens. <i>Káda rátu na lang kung gikasab-an bísag dílì ákung s&amacrgra;,</i> I'm <tr>always</tr> scolded even if I'm not at fault. <form>&mdash; ug</form> each time [so-and-so] is done. <i>Káda rátug ínum, mahubug giyud,</i> Each time he drinks, he gets drunk.

<p><form>rauk</form> <pos>n</pos> money (slang). <i>Wà giyud kuy rauk,</i> I don't have a cent.

<p><form>raw</form> <xr>= <sc>DAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>rawraw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> talk <tr>nonsense</tr>. <i>Sabà dihà! Nagrawraw ka man lang,</i> Shut up! You are just talking nonsense. <pos>n</pos> <tr>nonsense</tr>.

<p><form>rawun, ráwun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>round</tr> in sports. <i>Gipahaplà sa ikalimang ráwun,</i> The boxer was knocked down in the fifth round. <number>1a</number> round in mahjong in which all four players have had the deal. <number>1b</number> <formx>walay &mdash;</formx> no chance of winning. <i>Wà giyud kay ráwun kun makig-áway kag buksidur,</i> You don't have a chance if you fight with a boxer. <number>2</number> one complete sexual act. <i>Nanghambug siyang makalima siya ka ráwun,</i> He boasted that he could do it five times. <number>3</number> a complete round of a circular course. <i>Duha ka ráwun ang ithandrid,</i> The 800-meter run is two rounds of the track. <pos>a</pos> <tr>good</tr> in many things. <i>Ráwun siya sa tanang sabdyik,</i> He is good in all his subjects. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> make a complete circuit around. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make the rounds of. <i>Nagráwun ang mga bumbíru sa syudad,</i> The <corr sic=fireman>firemen</corr> are making regular <tr>rounds</tr> in the city. <i>Giráwun námù ang tanang nayit klab,</i> We made the rounds of the night clubs. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> get to be good in many things. <form>&mdash; rúbin</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tournament</tr> done such that each contestant is paired off with every other contestant. <number>2</number> session practicing basketball in which every player has a chance to shoot in turn. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> hold a <ix>rawun rúbin</ix> practice in basketball. <form>rawunrawun</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> keep going around and around. <i>Nagrawunrawun ang mga bátà líbut sa balay,</i> The children kept running around the house. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; c6]</itype> go round for a walk, pleasure. <i>Mintras wà pay abri ang mga sinihan magrawunráwun lang únà ta sa syudad,</i> Let's <tr>walk</tr> around downtown until the movie houses open. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> spend money going about. Girawunráwun sa istudiyanti ang kwartang pangmatrikula, The student squandered the money for tuition fees by gallivanting around.

<p><form>*rawundir</form> <form>pur, payib, siks &mdash;</form> boxing match of four, five, six (etc.) rounds.

<p><form>ráya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> long narrow band or streak. <number>2</number> game <pb n=823>of chance played by tossing coins on a surface marked with criss-crossing lines. Coins that land on the lines are given to the opponent. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> mark stripes. <i>Ang bandíra sa Amirika girayáhan ug putì ug pula,</i> The American flag has red and white stripes. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC; b(1)]</itype> play <ix>ráya</ix>. <form>-du, rinaháyan, nirayáhan</form> <pos>n</pos> having stripes.

<p><form>rayadilyu</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>strip</tr> of ribbon sewn along the side seams of trousers, as in uniforms. <i>Pula ang rayadilyu sa unipurmi sa písi,</i> The P.C. have red stripes on their trousers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> attach, make a <tr>stripe</tr> on trousers.

<p><form>rayban</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sunglasses</tr> (so called from the brand name). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6(1)]</itype> wear sunglasses.

<p><form>rayit han</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>right-hand man</tr>. <i>Ang banggiítang kriminal ug ang íyang rayit han nadakpan na,</i> The notorious criminal and his right-hand man have already been arrested. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; c16]</itype> be, become s.o.'s right-hand man.

<p><form>rayit huk</form> <pos>n</pos> right <tr>hook</tr> in boxing.

<p><form>rayna</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>queen</tr>. <number>1a</number> <tr>beauty queen</tr>, woman reigning over a celebration. <number>2</number> woman that is foremost like a queen. <i>Si Glurya Sibilya mauy rayna sa pilikulang Binisayà,</i> Gloria Sevilla is the queen of the Visayan screen. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> be, become a queen; make into a queen. <form>&mdash; ilína</form> <pos>n</pos> the queen of the feast of the Holy Cross as practiced with a procession in Manila (<ix>Santa Krúsan</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> be made the Queen Elena. <form>&mdash; sa panimalay</form> <pos>n</pos> wife as the head of the family. <form>&mdash; sa kalibángan</form> <pos>n</pos> ugly woman (lit. queen of the toilet&mdash;humorous).

<p><form>ráyu íkis, rayuiks</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>x-ray</tr>. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> get an x-ray.

<p><form>rayúma</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rheumatism</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a4]</itype> cause, become affected with rheumatism. <form>rayumahun</form> <pos>a</pos> suffer from rheumatism.

<p><form>ráyus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>spokes</tr>.

<p><form>ráyus<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a two-wheeled <tr>cart</tr> usually drawn by a water buffalo or ox. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> travel by cart.

<p><form>ráyus íkis</form> <xr>= <sc>RÁYU ÍKIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ráyut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>riot</tr>, wild or violent <tr>disorder</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> riot. <i>Nagráyut ang mga pinirísu,</i> The prisoners are rioting. <i>Ug dílì sila makigdayalug rayútun nátù,</i> If they don't have a dialogue with us, we'll riot. <form>anti &mdash; iskwad</form> <pos>n</pos> anti-riot squad. <form>&mdash; gan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>riot gun</tr>.

<p><form>Rdu</form>. abbreviation for <ix>Ribirindu</ix>, <tr>Reverend</tr>.

<p><form>ri<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the note <tr>re</tr> in music. <form>&mdash; minur</form> <pos>n</pos> d minor. <form>&mdash; mayur</form> <pos>n</pos> d major.

<p><form>ri<sub>2</sub></form> short for <ix>kiri</ix>.

<p><form>riaksiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>reaction</tr>. <i>Nagkalainláin ang riaksiyun sa namínaw,</i> The audience responded with various reactions. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b4]</itype> give s.o. a reaction. <i>Wà siya riaksiyuni sa tambal,</i> He was unaffected by the medicine.

<p><form>riay</form> <xr>= <sc>DIAY</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p><form>Rib</form>. <xr>= <sc>RDU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ribáha</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>discount</tr>. <i>Adúnay singku pursintung ribáha ug bayran ug kás,</i> There is a five percent discount if you pay cash. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> allow a discount on s.t. <i>Iribáha ang útang sa swildu,</i> Deduct the debt from the salary. <i>Ribahái ang prisyu kay sigunda mánu man ni,</i> Give me a discount because it is second hand. <number>2</number> deduct the <tr>tare</tr> weight. <i>Dus kílus iribáha sa pisáda pára sa sáku,</i> They will allow two kilos for the weight of the sack.

<p><form>ríbal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rival</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; b(1)]</itype> be, become rivals; engage in rivalry. <i>Ákung ribálan nang nangulitáwu ni Tinay,</i> I'll <tr>compete</tr> with him for Tinay's hand. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rival</tr>.

<p><form>ribansa, ribansin</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> play a game again with the same adversaries. <i>Makigribansa ug dúlà ang mga pildíru,</i> The losers want to have a <tr>replay</tr>. <number>2</number> do s.t. a second, third, or more time around. <i>Human sa usa ka básu miribansa pag katulu,</i> After the first glassful, they had another three. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> in games, the second time around. <i>Isyút ang pusta kay way ribansa ning duláa,</i> Bet all you're going to bet because there is going to be no <tr>replay</tr>. <number>2</number> s.t. done the second or more time around.

<p><form>ribáwun</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23; b6]</itype> <tr>bounce</tr>. <i>Hínay na muribáwun ning buláha,</i> This ball bounces poorly. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> get the <tr>rebounds</tr> in basketball. <i>Hawud siyang muribáwun kay taas,</i> He is good in catching the rebounds because he is tall. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> bounce. <number>2</number> <tr>rebounds</tr> in basketball. <form>-ir</form> <pos>n</pos> a ball that rebounds in basketball.

<p><form>ribildi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rebel</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC1; b6]</itype> rebel. <i>Muribildi ang bátà nga pinugngan,</i> A child that is repressed usually rebels.

<p><form>ribilyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rebellion</tr> against the government in power. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> hold a rebellion. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> settle s.t. with a rebellion.

<p><form>ribintadur<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. reddish <tr>fish</tr> with a cylindrical body about the size of a firecracker.

<p><form>ribintadur<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>LIBINTADUR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ribirb</form> <pos>n</pos> electronic mechanism which causes the sound to <tr>reecho</tr> or <tr>resound</tr>, usually used for guitars.

<p><form>Ribirindu</form> <pos>a</pos> Reverend.

<p><form>ribisar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>inspect</tr>, <tr>examine</tr> s.t. closely. <i>Nagribisar ang isklibinti sa mga papílis kay dúnay impurtanting dukumintu nga nawani,</i> The clerk is examining all the papers because an important document was misplaced. <number>2</number> <tr>revise</tr>, make changes. <i>Naribisar ang ubang sirimunyas sa simbahan,</i> They have revised some of the Church ceremonies. <form>ribisádu</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>revised</tr>. <i>Libru nga ribisádu,</i> <pb n=824><tr>Revised</tr> edition books.

<p><form>ribisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>revision</tr>.

<p><form>ribista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>magazine</tr>.

<p><form>ribíti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>edgings</tr>, <tr>trim</tr>. <i>Ribíting pula iláwum sa kurdísu,</i> A red trim underneath the window sill. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> put edgings on. <number>2</number> take a strip off s.t.

<p><form>ribulbir, ribulb&icaron;r</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>revolver</tr>. <number>2</number> prominent hipbone. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> carry a revolver. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain a revolver.

<p><form>ribultu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sculptured figures used as sacred objects. <i>Ribultu sa mga santus,</i> Images of the saints. <number>2</number> <tr>sculpture</tr>, <tr>statue</tr>. <i>Ribultu ni Husi Risal,</i> The statue of Jose Rizal.

<p><form>ribulusiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>revolution</tr>, complete political or social change. <number>2</number> <tr>revolution</tr> of a machine. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C2; b35]</itype> have a revolution. <i>Háyang magribulusiyun dinhi ug way kausában,</i> They will surely have a revolution here if things don't change. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> make the engine <tr>turn over</tr>. <number>2a</number> for an engine to <tr>turn over</tr>. <form>-aryu</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>revolutionary</tr>, one who wants a social revolution. <form>gubyirnu -aryu</form> <tr>government</tr> of the revolutionaries.

<p><form>ríbun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> decorative <tr>ribbon</tr>, ribbon of honor. <form>&mdash; dans</form> <pos>n</pos> benefit ball where the gentlemen wear ribbons of different colors. Each ribbon has a price and before each dance the color of the ribbon is announced, for which the men must pay the specified price. <number>2</number> <tr>typewriter ribbon</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, make into a ribbon. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b(1)]</itype> obtain a ribbon in a contest. <i>Nakaríbun ku sa dibit,</i> I got a ribbon in the debate. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> pin a ribbon on. <number>3</number> <itype>[b]</itype> put a typewriter ribbon in.

<p><form>ribunit</form> <xr>= <sc>RABUNIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ribyú</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>study</tr> one's lesson for <tr>review</tr>. <i>Muribyú ta pára sa tist,</i> We'll review for the test. <number>1a</number> hold a review class. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> attend review classes for board exams. <number>3</number> <itype>[AC12; a12]</itype> stay to see a movie for a second time. <i>Muribyú ku kay wà kung kasabut sa isturya,</i> I'll see the movie again because I didn't get the story the first time around. <number>3a</number> eat again. <i>Human na ku makapaniudtu apan muribyu ku kay wà pa ku mabusug,</i> I've already had my lunch, but I'll eat some more because I'm still hungry. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> review classes. <number>2</number> action of <tr>studying</tr> for review. <number>3</number> action of seeing s.t. or eating a second time around.

<p><form>ríd</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> police <tr>raid</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>raid</tr> on the enemy in war. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> conduct a police raid. <i>Giríd sa mga pulis ang sugálan,</i> The police raided the gambling den. <number>2</number> conduct a <tr>raid</tr> against the enemy. <i>Giríd ang kampu sa mga kaáway,</i> The enemy raided the camp.

<p><form>rid drágun</form> <xr>= <sc>DÁGIR</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr>

<p><form>ridhart</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>suit</tr> of <tr>hearts</tr>.

<p><form>rídi</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>ready</tr>, <tr>prepared</tr> for use or action. <i>Rídi na ang paniudtu,</i> Dinner is read now. <i>Rídi na ku. Mularga na ta?</i> I'm ready now. Shall we go? <i>Rídi, ím, payr,</i> Ready, aim, fire. <form>&mdash; mid</form> <tr>ready-made</tr> clothes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B136; c1]</itype> be, get <tr>ready</tr>.

<p><form>ridiskwintu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b]</itype> give a second discount. <i>Dílì na mi makaridiskwintu kay maalkansi na mi,</i> We can't give any further discounts because we will lose.

<p><form>ridiyu upirítur</form> <xr>= <sc>RADIYU UPIRÍTUR</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>RADIYU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>rid karpit</form> <pos>n</pos> in boxing, cockfights, and other spectator sports, the seats nearest the ring or platform.

<p><form>rid krus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Red Cross</tr>.

<p><form>ridyist&icaron;r</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>record</tr>, <tr>list</tr> of names and personal particulars of items. <i>Káda absin italà sa ridyist&icaron;r,</i> Each absence is listed in the <tr>register</tr>.

<p><form>ridyistir-ub dids, ridyistir-up dids</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>register of deeds</tr>.

<p><form>ridyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>region</tr>, certain large <tr>area</tr>.

<p><form>ridy&ucaron;s</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B24]</itype> for the body to <tr>reduce</tr> in weight. <i>Miridy&ucaron;s siya pagkasakit níya,</i> She lost weight when she got sick. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> go on a <tr>diet</tr> to lose weight.

<p><form>*ridyuyridy&ucaron;y</form> <form>ka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be in a <tr>miserable</tr> condition, esp. financial. <i>Nagkaridyuyridy&ucaron;y siya sukad mawad-ig trabáhu,</i> He has been miserable ever since he lost his job.

<p><form>rigadíra, rigadur, rigadúra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sprinkling can</tr>.

<p><form>rigálu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>gift</tr>, <tr>present</tr>. <number>2</number> in games, a <tr>free ball</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give as a present. <i>Sa kasal ninyu murigálu kug inasal,</i> On your wedding day, I'll give you roast pig as a present. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b6(1)]</itype> get a free ball.

<p><form>rigla</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> principle of almost established certainty. <i>Mauy ílang rigla nga kun manggulà ang mga ípus, mag-ulan,</i> <tr>As a rule</tr>, when winged termites come out in the open, it will rain. <i>Sumálà sa rigla, ang sunud háyan hárì,</i> According to the pattern, the next one is <tr>sure</tr> to be heads. <number>2</number> <tr>menstruation</tr> (normal, untinged word). <form>Birhin sa &mdash;</form> the Guiding Mother, the patron saint of missionaries and of Opon (now Lapulapu City). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a4]</itype> <tr>menstruate</tr>. <i>Ug magrigla (riglahun), dílì malígù,</i> Don't bathe when you are menstruating. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>deviate</tr> from the usual norm of conduct, do things not in the usual way. <i>Muparigla kug pakítà sa ákung katapúsang baráha,</i> I'll do s.t. <tr>unusual</tr>. I'll show my last card to everybody. <number>2</number> <tr>destroy</tr> s.t. belonging to s.o. else maliciously. <i>Dúna giyuy nagparigla sa mutur kay nagáras man,</i> S.o. must have messed around with this motorcycle because it is all full of scratches. <number>3</number> attack <pb n=825>passers-by and unknown people without provocation and for no purpose. <i>Mga buguy tung nagparigla níya,</i> It was street toughs that attacked him. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> unusual behavior. <number>2</number> malicious destruction of others' things. <number>3</number> thrill attacks on unknown people. <form>-mintu, -myintu</form> <pos>n</pos> regulations, rules of conduct.

<p><form>rigudun</form> <pos>n</pos> formal ballroom <tr>dance</tr> done in squares. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C2; c6]</itype> dance this dance. <form>&mdash; diunur</form> <xr>= <sc>RIGUDUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>rigul</form> <xr>= <sc>RIGUR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>rigular</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>average</tr>, conforming in form to the <tr>normal</tr>. <i>Rigular ang íyang gidak-un,</i> He is of <tr>average</tr> build. <i>Rigular ang íyang rigla,</i> She has a <tr>normal</tr> menstrual cycle and <tr>normal</tr> amounts of discharge. <i>Rigular na ang íyang pulsu,</i> His pulse is now <tr>regular</tr>. <i>Lahì kini sa rigular nga kútiks,</i> This one is different from the ordinary Kotex. <number>1a</number> <tr>regular</tr>, not special student. <i>Rigular purt yir siya run,</i> He is a regular fourth year student this year. <number>2</number> <tr>consistent</tr> or <tr>habitual</tr> in action. <i>Rigular kining tulumanun sa radiyu,</i> This is a regular program over the radio. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become a permanent worker, employee.

<p><form>rigulasiyun</form> <xr>= <sc>RIGLAMINTU</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>RIGLA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>rigur</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146]</itype> feel <tr>uneasy</tr> when s.t. pent up can't be released. <i>Nagrigur nà siya kay wà tugúting muadtu sa bayli,</i> She is <tr>ill at ease</tr> because she was not given permission to go to the dance. <i>Magrigur giyud kug dì kapanimalus,</i> I won't rest until I get revenge.

<p><form>rigyular</form> <xr>= <sc>RIGULAR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ríhas</form> <pos>n</pos> window <tr>grills</tr>. <i>Migúnit ang prísu sa ríhas sa prisuhan,</i> The prisoner clung to the prison <tr>bars</tr>. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> having <tr>grills</tr> put in front of it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> install <tr>grills</tr> on windows or doors.

<p><form>*rihistráda</form> <form>marka &mdash;</form> <tr>registered</tr> trade mark.

<p><form>rihistr&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>register</tr>, officially <tr>record</tr>. <i>Irihistr&acaron;r ang yútà sa ákung ngálan,</i> <tr>Register</tr> the land in my name. <form>rihistrádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>registered</tr>; officially <tr>recorded</tr>. <i>Kuríyu rihistrádu,</i> <tr>Registered mail</tr>.

<p><form>rihistru</form> <xr>= <sc>RIHISTR&Acaron;R</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>rihiyunal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>regional</tr>. <i>Banggà rihiyunal sa amatiyur,</i> Regional contest for amateur performers. <i>Kumpirinsiya rihiyunal,</i> Regional conference.

<p><form>riiliksiyunista</form> <pos>n</pos> s.o. up for reelection.

<p><form>rík</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rake</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> rake s.t. <i>Ríka ang mga sagbut,</i> Rake up the trash. <i>Ríki ang sílung,</i> Rake the yard in front of the house.

<p><form>rikábir</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> for a boxer to get back on his feet or regain his composure. <i>Wà gánì siya makarikábir, giusban dáyug sukmag,</i> Hardly had he recovered when he was hit again. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>recover</tr> s.t. lost or stolen. <i>Dì na marikábir nang puhúnan,</i> The capital can no longer be <tr>recovered</tr>.

<p><form>rikádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>spices</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> spice food. <i>Dì ku murikádu ug luy-a sa tinúlang isdà,</i> I don't put ginger into fish stew.

<p><form>rikap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>recap</tr> tires. <pos>n</pos> <tr>recapped</tr> tires.

<p><form>rikargu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>surcharge</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> cause s.o. to pay a surcharge. <i>Murikargu nímug diyis pursintug mulápas ka sa tagal,</i> You'll have to pay a ten percent surcharge if you go past the due date.

<p><form>ríkim</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>requiem</tr> <tr>mass</tr>.

<p><form>rikísa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>search</tr> for s.t. hidden. <i>Abtik nga mirikísa sa dinakpan ang pulis,</i> The cop quickly <tr>frisked</tr> the suspect. <i>Girikísa ang ákung malíta sa kustums,</i> My suitcase was thoroughly <tr>searched</tr> in the Customs.

<p><form>rikisisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>requisition</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> requisition s.t. <i>Nakarikisisiyun ka na ba sa mga kinahanglanun sa upisína?</i> Have you requisitioned the things we need for the office? <i>Girikisisiyun sa mga sundáwu ang ámung dyíp,</i> The soldiers requisitioned our jeep.

<p><form>rikisíta, rikisítas, rikisítus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>requisites</tr>, <tr>requirements</tr>. <i>Kwarta ray rikisíta sa kaminyúun,</i> Money is the only <tr>prerequisite</tr> for marriage. <i>Unsay rikisíta sa pag-istudiyug narsing?</i> What are the <tr>prerequisites</tr> for studying nursing?

<p><form>rikiyim</form> <xr>= <sc>RÍKIM</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>riklamadur</form> <pos>a</pos> one who complains all the time. <i>Riklamadur kaáyung kasiráha. Dì kaángay sa káun,</i> The boarder complains all the time. She doesn't like the food. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become a <tr>complainer</tr>.

<p><form>riklamasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>reclamation</tr> area.

<p><form>riklámu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>complaint</tr>, utterance of dissatisfaction. <i>Wà pamatía ang riklámu sa mga trabahanti,</i> No one heeded the laborers' complaints. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b3c5]</itype> <tr>complain</tr>. <i>Unsay giriklamúhan (giriklámu) sa mga istudiyanti?</i> What are the students complaining about? <i>Adtu nà iriklámu sa kapulisan,</i> File your <tr>complaint</tr> with the police. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>request</tr> food or money, usually on a short-term loan. <i>Muriklámu kug bayinti nímu,</i> I would like to ask you for a loan of twenty pesos.

<p><form>rikrak</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ricrac</tr>, a k.o. trimming for clothing. <number>2</number> k.o. ornamental <tr>bush</tr> with leaves that look like they have a ricrac, a variety of <ix>kalípay, 1</ix> (<bio>Polyscias fruticosa</bio>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> trim, adorn with ricrac.

<p><form>rikta</form> <pos>a</pos> using a language that is rudely brief and curt (female). <i>Rikta kaáyung manubagtubag nga bayhána mu rag hawud,</i> She answers <pb n=826>in a curt and rude manner as if she were the boss. <form>riktahun</form> <pos>a</pos> being blunt and curt in one's replies.

<p><form>riktanggul, riktanggulu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>rectangle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become rectangular.

<p><form>riktu<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>RIKTA</sc> (male).</xr>

<p><form>riktu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>penis</tr> (slang&mdash;so called from Claro M. Recto, a statesman whose bald pate reminds one of the glans).

<p><form>riktur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rector</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56; a2]</itype> be, become a rector.

<p><form>rikúbir</form> <xr>= <sc>RIKÁBIR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>rikúdu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> for a land vehicle to turn a corner, negotiate a curve. <i>Ayaw ug pakúsug ug magrikúdu ka,</i> Don't drive fast when you negotiate a turn. <form>rikuduhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>curve</tr> in a street.

<p><form>rikúla</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>refuse</tr> to do s.t., usually for some reason. <i>Dì giyud nà murikúla kun sugúun,</i> He doesn't refuse if you tell him to do s.t. <i>Ug áway ímung gustu, dì ti ka rikuláhan,</i> If it's a fight you want, I am not afraid. <number>2</number> <tr>back out</tr> of s.t. <i>Sáad nga dílì marikuláhan,</i> An agreement you cannot back out of. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b3]</itype> raise an <tr>objection</tr> to s.t. <i>Mirikúla siya sa ákung hukum ug páwul,</i> He raised an objection to my calling a foul.[+]

<p><form>rikulúta<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> military <tr>recruit</tr>. <pos>v</pos> [A.; a12] recruit for military service. <pos>a</pos> <tr>novice</tr>, <tr>greenhorn</tr>. <i>Rikulúta pa siya sa panganak,</i> She is still new to childbirth. <i>Rikulúta pa ku sa kinaíya sa mga Múrus,</i> I am not accustomed to the ways of the Moros.

<p><form>rikulúta<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> be <tr>distrusting</tr> and saying so openly. <i>Rikulúta kaáyu siya sa ímung mga pasálig,</i> He disbelieves your promises and says so. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become distrusting and vocal about it. <i>Makarikulúta (makaparikulúta) nang ímung binahinan,</i> Who wouldn't say s.t. the way you divide it up?

<p><form>rikumind&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>recommend</tr> s.o. or s.t. <i>Dì ku murikumind&acaron;r ug tapulan,</i> I don't recommend lazy people. <i>Kining librúha ang girikumind&acaron;r sa maistru,</i> The teacher recommended this book. <form>rikumindádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>recommendee</tr>. <i>Nadáwat siya kay rikumindádu man sa mayur,</i> He was accepted because he is one of the mayor's recommendees. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be one's recommendee. <form>rikumindasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>recommendation</tr> for a job.

<p><form>rikunsidirasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>reconsideration</tr>.

<p><form>rikunusir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>examine</tr> s.o. physically. <i>Rikunusihun ka ug wà ka bay tíbi,</i> You will be <tr>examined</tr> for T.B. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> have oneself medically examined. <i>Iparikunusir ang ímung asáwa ug mabdus ba,</i> Have your wife examined to see if she is pregnant.

<p><form>ríkurd</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>record</tr>, official <tr>account</tr> of s.t. <i>Tan-áwa sa ríkurd pilay íyang grádu,</i> Look into the <tr>records</tr> to see what his grades were. <number>2</number> the known or recorded facts about anything: one's conduct, performance, one's career. <i>Si Dígu may ríkurd sa íyang pagka-*kriminal,</i> Diego has a criminal <tr>record</tr>. <number>3</number> <tr>phonograph record</tr>. <number>4</number> record, the best performance. <i>Ang íyang ríkurd wà pa hilupigi,</i> No one has surpassed his <tr>record</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> put in the record. <i>Iríkurd ang mga gastus,</i> Record the expenses. <form>klas &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>class record</tr> in school. <form>-ing</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>recording</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> have a recording session. <i>Paghílum mu kay nagrikurding na mi,</i> Keep quiet. We are recording.

<p><form>rikurída, rikurídas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b5c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>advertise</tr> a movie or some public event with a roving truck. <number>2</number> <tr>make the rounds</tr> to check, inspect. <i>Murikurída ang pulis patrul sa tanang dapit káda gabíi,</i> The police make their rounds in our neighborhood every evening. <number>3</number> make the rounds of s.t. for pleasure. <i>Girikurídas námù ang tanang nayit klab dinhi,</i> We made the rounds of all the night clubs here. <pos>n</pos> action of making the rounds to advertise s.t. or check up.

<p><form>*rikursus naturális</form> <form>Dipartamintu sa Agrikultúra ug Rikursus Naturális</form> <pos>n</pos> Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources.

<p><form>rikwirdu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>souvenir</tr>, <tr>keepsake</tr>. <i>Rikwirdu sa ílang kasal,</i> Souvenirs of their wedding.

<p><form>rikwisasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>RIKISISIYUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>rikwisisiyun, rikwisisyun</form> <xr>= <sc>RIKISISIYUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>rikwisítus</form> <xr>= <sc>RIKISÍTUS</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>RIKISÍTA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>rilak, rilaks</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>relax</tr>, take it easy. <i>Rilaks lang. Ayg kabaláka,</i> Just take it easy. Don't worry. <i>Murilaks ku human sa iksámin,</i> I'll take a vacation after the exams.

<p><form>rilansi</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>shoddy</tr>, <tr>poor</tr> in workmanship. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; b6c1]</itype> do work <tr>poorly</tr> or <tr>shoddily</tr>. <i>Maáyu nang mananahía kay dì giyud murilansi sa íyang trabáhu,</i> That seamstress is good because she never relaxes on the quality of her work.

<p><form>rilasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>kinship</tr> by blood or marriage. <i>Wà silay rilasiyun bísag paríhug apilyídu,</i> They are not related even though they have the same surname. <number>2</number> love <tr>affair</tr>. <i>Dúna tingáli rilasiyun ang manidyir ug ang sikritarya,</i> The manager seems to be having an affair with the secretary. <number>3</number> <tr>relations</tr> among nations. <i>Ang rilasiyun sa Pilipínas ug Malisya tandugun kaáyu,</i> The Philippines' relations with Malaysia are very shaky.

<p><form>rilíbu</form> <pos>n</pos> s.o. who relieves s.o. else on duty. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> <tr>relieve</tr> s.o. on the job, work on a rotation basis. <i>Nagrilíbu mig bantay sa masakitun,</i> We took turns watching the sick <pb n=827>man. <i>Girilibúhan na ba ang gwardiya?</i> Has the guard been <tr>relieved</tr>?

<p><form>rilidyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>religion</tr>, a subject in school consisting mainly of <tr>catechism</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> hold a religion class.

<p><form>rilihiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>religion</tr>.

<p><form>rilihiyúsa</form> <xr>= <sc>RILIHIYÚSU</sc> (female).</xr>

<p><form>rilihiyúsu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>religious</tr>, <tr>devout</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become religious.

<p><form>rilikaryu</form> <pos>n</pos> place where religious relics are kept.

<p><form>rilikyas</form> <pos>n</pos> religious <tr>relic</tr>.

<p><form>rilip</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>second-hand</tr> clothing gathered by charitable organizations and sold cheap. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> have, wear relief clothing. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> place where <tr>second-hand clothes</tr> are sold.

<p><form>rilis<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> <tr>set free</tr>. <i>Narilis ang binilanggù,</i> The prisoner was <tr>released</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> issue a <tr>permit</tr>, publish test results. <i>Narilis na ang ímung lún,</i> Your loan has been released. <i>Hápit nang irilis ang risulta sa bar,</i> The results of the bar exam are about to be released. <form>pris &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>press release</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> issue a press release.

<p><form>rilis<sub>2</sub>, rílis</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>railway</tr> <tr>tracks</tr>. <number>2</number> district in Cebu where the railroad station used to be, and where there is a red light district. <form>babáyi sa &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prostitute</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <number>1</number> patronize a prostitute. <i>Nangrilis siya kay gibigáan,</i> He went to the red light district because he got the urge to have sex. <number>2</number> go through the area where the railway used to be. <i>Mangrilis tag ági igpaúlì,</i> Let's go by the railway tracks when we go home.

<p><form>rilisiyun</form> <xr>= <sc>RILASIYUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>rilu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>watch</tr> or <tr>clock</tr>. <form>&mdash; dibulsa</form> <tr>pocket watch</tr>. <form>&mdash; dipasmu</form> a watch that is always late. <form>&mdash; dipulsu</form> <tr>wrist watch</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear a watch. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get a watch. <form>riluhíru</form> <pos>n</pos> watch repairman; <tr>watchmaker</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be, become a watch repairman or maker.[+]

<p><form>rilus</form> <pos>n</pos> watch pocket.

<p><form>rilyíbu</form> <xr>= <sc>RILÍBU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>rilyínu</form> <pos>n</pos> dish of fowl or shellfish, prepared by removing the inner bones or shells and the meat, replacing them with meat mixed with other ingredients. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> have, make this dish.

<p><form>rím</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ream</tr> of paper with 500 sheets. <number>2</number> a <tr>carton</tr> of <tr>cigarettes</tr>.

<p><form>ríma</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rhyme</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> make rhymed <tr>verse</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make words rhyme. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2C3; b(1)]</itype> rhyme with. <i>Wà muríma ang púlung kahil sa púlung kahun,</i> The word &lsquo;orange&rsquo; does not rhyme with the word &lsquo;box&rsquo;.

<p><form>rímas</form> <xr>= <sc>KULU<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>rimatádu</form> <pos>n</pos> for s.t. pawned to be foreclosed so that it is no longer the possession of the owner. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> get <tr>foreclosed</tr>. <i>Ug marimatádu na nà, únu lus dus ug mabalik pa nímu,</i> If you don't redeem it before the due date, it's all a matter of luck whether you can ever get it back.

<p><form>rimáti<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for many bells to <tr>peal</tr> in a jumble. <i>Tána kay nagrimáti na ang kampána,</i> Come on! The bells are <tr>ringing</tr> for the mass.

<p><form>rimáti<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for a pawnshop to take over possession of articles that weren't redeemed. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> for a matter to become <tr>worse</tr>. <i>Ang ulan mauy nakarimáti (nakaparimáti) sa ákung ubu,</i> The rain made my cough worse.

<p><form>rimatsi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rivet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> attach with, make into, put a rivet. <i>Rimatsihun nátù ni arun lig-un,</i> Let's attach this with a rivet so it will be strong. <i>Irimatsi ni sa babag,</i> Rivet this to the crossbar. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>beat</tr>, like riveting. <i>Rimatsíhun ka sa mga buguy ug dì ka manghátag ug sigarilyu,</i> The toughs will beat you up if you don't give them cigarettes. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>finish</tr> up, get done with. <i>Awáya siya kay akuy murimatsi ug kasábà, Quarrel with her,</i> and I will finish her up with a tongue-lashing. <number>3a</number> finish a girl by having <tr>intercourse</tr> with her. <i>Rimatsíha (rimatsía) ang imung uyab,</i> Do s.t. to your sweetheart that will complete your relationship. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>steal</tr> surreptitiously (slang). <i>Nagrimatsi siyag manuk sa ílang silíngan kagabíi,</i> He stole his neighbor's chicken last night.

<p><form>rimidiyu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>acquire</tr> s.t. for one's needs. <i>Magrimidiyu kug kwartang ibáyad sa iskuylahan,</i> I must secure money to pay for the school. <number>2</number> <tr>tinker</tr> around with s.t. to improve it. <i>Rimidiyúha nu nà ug muandar pa ba,</i> Tinker around with it. Maybe it will still run. <number>3</number> <itype>[AC2; a2b2]</itype> have <tr>sexual intercourse</tr> (humorous). <i>Dì ku makarimidiyu sa ákung asáwa kay gidugù,</i> I can't do anything with my wife because she is menstruating. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> <tr>lend</tr>. <i>Parimidiyúha ku dihag písus kay ákung ipamúlang,</i> Lend me one peso to use for the cockfights. <pos>n</pos> <tr>remedy</tr>, s.t. that can <tr>repair</tr> or <tr>restore</tr> s.t. to good state. <i>Wà na kay rimidiyu kay kansir man,</i> You have no hope because it's cancer. <i>Wà nay rimidiyu nang makinilyáha,</i> That typewriter is broken beyond repair. <form>rimidiyuhay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> have <tr>sexual intercourse</tr>. <pos>n</pos> action of having <tr>intercourse</tr>.

<p><form>rimin</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> stay after school.

<p><form>rímu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>scull</tr>, move a boat forward by twisting an oar from side to side over the stern of a boat. <i>Rimúhi ring búti kay <pb n=828>punù nag kupras,</i> <tr>Scull</tr> this small boat because it's already full of copra. <pos>n</pos> <tr>scull</tr>.

<p><form>rimulatsa</form> <pos>n</pos> light brown <tr>sugar</tr>, closest in class to the refined white sugar.

<p><form>rimurki<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>tow</tr> or <tr>drag</tr> s.t. in the water. <i>Dakung trúsu ákung girimurki,</i> I'm towing a big log in the water.

<p><form>rimurki<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make <tr>use</tr> of, <tr>eat</tr> s.t. with or without proper permission (colloquial). <i>Nagrimurki ang mga irù sa basúra,</i> The dogs are busy with the garbage. <i>Nakarimurki na nà sa kusína kay nanghingìkì na,</i> He has eaten in the kitchen because he is picking his teeth. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> open up s.t. to get at the contents illegally. <i>Taga kustum mauy mirimurki sa pákids,</i> A Custom official helped himself to the contents of the package.

<p><form>rimut kuntrul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>broadcast</tr> away from the radio station. <i>Magrimut kuntrul mi sa mísa sa Santu Rusaryu,</i> We will broadcast the mass from Santo Rosario church by <tr>remote control</tr>.

<p><form>rína</form> <xr>= <sc>RAYNA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>rinda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>reins</tr>. <form>sigunda &mdash;</form> <tr>checkrein</tr>. <i>Pahugti ang sigunda rinda arun dílì madugmù ang kabáyù,</i> Tighten the checkrein so the horse won't stumble. <form>paghátag ug &mdash;</form> let s.t. go free, <tr>release</tr> the restraints. <i>Wà siya magduhadúha sa paghátag ug rinda sa íyang mga kapritsu,</i> She did not hesitate to give full course to her caprices. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <tr>attach</tr>, make into a rein. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> pull on the reins. <i>Rindáhi arun muhínay ang kabáyù,</i> Pull on the reins to slow the horse down.

<p><form>rind&icaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>give way</tr>, <tr>collapse</tr>. <i>Hápit na ku murind&icaron;r sa kalisud sa trabáhu,</i> I'm practically ready to collapse because the work is so hard. <i>Kining bangkúa dì murind&icaron;r bisag daghang maglingkud,</i> This bench won't give way no matter how many people sit on it. <number>2</number> for s.t. to <tr>expire</tr>. <i>Murind&icaron;r na ang sidula sunud búwan,</i> The residence certificate expires next month. <form>rindídu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having given way. <number>2</number> come to an end, <tr>expired</tr>. <i>Búlan sa Disyimbri aku natáwu, rindídu na ang túig,</i> I was born in December when the year was ending.

<p><form>rindyir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ranger</tr>, unit in the Philippine Constabulary or member thereof, highly trained in hand-to-hand combat. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>PÚRIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ring</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> boxing or wrestling <tr>ring</tr>. <number>2</number> ring in logs. <number>3</number> basketball ring.

<p><form>ríng</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for the telephone or doorbell to <tr>ring</tr>. <i>Muríng gánì ang tilipunu tubaga dáyun,</i> When the telephone rings, answer it immediately.

<p><form>ringgíru</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>fish</tr>.

<p><form>ringlis</form> <pos>a</pos> shot in basketball which does not touch the ring in going into it. <i>Basta maáyung musyát, ringlis pirmi,</i> A player who is a good shot always makes clean shots.

<p><form>rinigar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> be, become <tr>desperate</tr> enough to do s.t. at the peril of one's own life. <i>Kinsay dílì murinigar (marinigádu) nga hápit na malumus ang bátà,</i> Who would not be out of his mind with <tr>desperation</tr> if his child was at the point of drowning. <form>rinigáda</form> <xr>= <sc>RINIGÁDU</sc> (female).</xr> <form>rinigádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>desperate</tr> to the point of not caring whether one lives or dies. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> be, become desperate.

<p><form>rintas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>internal revenue</tr>. <i>Bayranan sa rintas,</i> Payments to be made to the Bureau of Internal Revenue. <form>&mdash; intirnas</form> <xr>= <sc>RINTAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>rinyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>kidney</tr>. <number>2</number> kidney ailment. <i>Dì makakaun ug parat ang dúnay rinyun,</i> A person with a kidney ailment can't eat salty foods. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> get a kidney ailment.

<p><form>RIP</form> abbreviation on graves for <ix>Requiescat in Pace</ix>.

<p><form>rip.</form> <pos>n</pos> abbreviation for <ix>riprisintanti</ix> representative.

<p><form>ríp</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>rape</tr>. <i>Mga batan-un ang miríp sa usa ka tigúlang,</i> It was a bunch of young men that raped the old woman.

<p><form>rípa</form> <pos>n</pos> drawing of <tr>lots</tr> or game of chance, usually with lots. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>draw lots</tr>; conduct a <tr>raffle</tr>. <i>Átung ripáhun kun kinsay makabangka,</i> Let's draw lots to see who treats. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>raffle</tr> off. <i>Unsay giparipáhan?</i> What are they raffling off?

<p><form>ripan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make a <tr>refund</tr>. <i>Katungà na lang sa kantidad ang iripan,</i> Only half of the amount will be refunded. <pos>n</pos> <tr>refund</tr>.

<p><form>riparasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>reparations</tr>.

<p><form>ripásu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rehearsal</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>rehearse</tr> s.t. or s.o. <i>Kinsa may muripásu ninyu sa dráma?</i> Who will rehearse you for the drama? <i>Nakaripásu ka na ba sa ímung diklimisyun?</i> Have you rehearsed your declamation piece?

<p><form>ripíki</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pealing</tr> of a large number of bells. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for bells to <tr>peal</tr>.

<p><form>ripílint</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> water <tr>repellent</tr> cloth. <number>2</number> mosquito <tr>repellent</tr> rubbed on the skin.

<p><form>ripinádu</form> <pos>n</pos> refined <tr>sugar</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; a2]</itype> make <form>refined</form> sugar. <i>Maripinádu ang sintripugal kun usbun kini paglútù,</i> The semi-refined sugar will become <tr>refined</tr> after it is processed again. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put refined sugar in s.t.

<p><form>ripir</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>repair</tr> s.t. mechanical. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> stitch up the genitalia after childbirth (humorous). <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <number>1</number> have s.t. <tr>repaired</tr>. <i>Iparipir nátù ang tíbi,</i> Let's have the TV fixed. <number>2</number> have the genitalia stitched <pb n=829>after childbirth.

<p><form>ripiri</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>referee</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>referee</tr> s.t. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make s.o. the referee.

<p><form>ripitir</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> say or do s.t. again. <i>Ayaw ug ripitiha (iripitir) ang ímung sayup,</i> Don't <tr>repeat</tr> your mistake. <i>Gihangyù si Múna nga iripitir ang íyang kanta,</i> Mona was asked to sing her song again. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> do s.t. to s.o. in rapid succession. <i>Giripitir ku níyag sumbag,</i> He struck me again and again. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> in a certain k.o. billiard game, make successive caroms, usually ten times or more. <i>Maáyu gánì ang mísa muripitir man kug sín,</i> If it is a good billiard table, I can make a hundred successive caroms. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> ask for an encore by throwing money. <i>Giripitir níya ang singku písus sa mananayaw,</i> He threw in five pesos so the dancer would give an encore. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> a student who has to repeat a course.

<p><form>ripitisiyun</form> <tr>encore</tr>, an exclamation asking for <tr>repetition</tr> of a performance. <pos>n</pos> <tr>encore</tr> given by a performer. <i>Walà muhátag ug ripitisiyun,</i> He wouldn't give an encore.

<p><form>ripl&acaron;n</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>folk belief</tr> about s.t. that will happen. <i>Mauy ripl&acaron;n sa karáan nga kun magdamgu ug tái makadaug sa súgal,</i> It's a folk belief that when one dreams of feces he will win in gambling. <i>Mauy ripl&acaron;n sa mga karáang táwu nga muabut ang panahun nga ang puthaw manglúpad,</i> Old folks believe that time will come when iron flies. <number>2</number> <tr>proverb</tr>, <tr>saying</tr>. <i>Adúnay ripl&acaron;n nga nag-ingun nga ang tábì dílì maputus,</i> There's a proverb which says &lsquo;You can't wrap gossip up (i.e. keep it secret).&rsquo;

<p><form>ripli</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rifle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> <tr>shoot</tr> s.t. with a rifle. <i>Riplihun ku nang irúa kay mamáak,</i> I'll shoot that dog with a rifle because it bites. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain a rifle. <form>&mdash; nga dibumba</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>air-rifle</tr>.

<p><form>riplí</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>replay</tr> recorded music.

<p><form>ripliksiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>reflection</tr> in a mirror or the like.

<p><form>ripliktur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>reflectors</tr> for motor vehicles.

<p><form>ripr&acaron;n</form> <xr>= <sc>RIPL&Acaron;N</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ripridyirítur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>refrigerator</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c6]</itype> use, obtain a refrigerator.

<p><form>riprisint&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>represent</tr>. <i>Si Glurya Díyas mauy miriprisint&acaron;r sa Yúbi sa banggà,</i> Gloria Diaz represented U.V. in the contest. <i>Siya mauy nagriprisintar sa ikaduhang distrítu,</i> He is the <tr>representative</tr> of the second district. <i>Unsang kapunungána ímung giriprisintahan?</i> What organization do you represent? <form>riprisintanti</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>congressman</tr>. <number>2</number> s.o. who represents. <i>Dúnay riprisintanti ang átung punduk sa maung kumbinsiyun,</i> Our organization sent a representative to the convention. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; c1]</itype> be, become a <tr>congressman</tr> or representative. <form>riprisintasiyun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>representatives</tr> collectively sent s.w. <i>Ang riprisintasiyun sa kabisay-an mauy nanaug sa Prisáa,</i> The representatives of the Visayas won the PRISAA athletic meet.

<p><form>riprisintasiyun<sub>2</sub></form> <number>1</number> <tr>standard</tr> to maintain, a <tr>front</tr> to keep up. <i>Gamay ra ug swildu ang magtutudlù apan kinahanglan may riprisintasiyun ang íyang pamuyù,</i> A teacher has a meager salary, but he still has to keep up a front. <number>2</number> <tr>bearing</tr>, personality that impresses. <i>Ang íyang kunsurti way riprisintasiyun kay mabag tambuk,</i> Her consort is unimpressive in his bearing because he is short and fat.

<p><form>riprisku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>refreshments</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> take refreshments.

<p><form>riprismin, riprismint</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>refreshments</tr> esp. cold drinks. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; parlur</formx> <tr>refreshment parlor</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12N; c]</itype> take refreshments.

<p><form>ripublika</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>republic</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; c1]</itype> be, become a republic.

<p><form>ripulyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cabbage</tr>.

<p><form>ripurt</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>report</tr>, piece of <tr>news</tr>. <i>Mátud sa mga ripurt, tulu ang patay,</i> According to the reports, three were killed. <number>1a</number> piece of malicious information. <i>Ayaw panumbalinga kanang mga ripurt,</i> Don't pay any heed to that <tr>gossip</tr>. <number>2</number> official <tr>report</tr> or presentation of facts. <i>Way kamatuúran ang ripurt sa prisidinti,</i> The presidential report lacks credibility. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>report</tr> to a place of work. <i>Dílì ku muripurt sa upisína ugmà,</i> I will not report to the office tomorrow. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> report s.t. wrong. <i>Iripurt ta ka sa manidy&icaron;r,</i> I shall report you to the manager. <i>Ímung giripurt ang tilipunung nadáut?</i> Did you report the telephone out of order? <number>2a</number> give a report, piece of news. <i>Giripurt siyang patay,</i> He was reported dead. <form>-ir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> news <tr>reporter</tr>, one who reports bad things to the authorities. <i>Dúna giyuy ripurtir ning átung upisína,</i> There's a spy in the office. <number>2</number> <tr>gossip</tr>. <i>Paglikay ánang bayhána kay ripurtir nà,</i> Keep away from that woman because she is a gossip. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be, become a news reporter.

<p><form>rirayit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>rewrite</tr>. <i>Irirayit nà kay di mabása,</i> Rewrite that because it's illegible.

<p><form>*risáda</form> <form>mísa &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> low mass.

<p><form>Risal</form> <ix>name</ix> Jose Rizal, a national hero of the Philippines. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> be <tr>earnest</tr>, <tr>diligent</tr> like Rizal. <i>Mutrabáhu giyud nà siya bísag Duminggu. Magrisal tingáli,</i> He goes to work, even on Sundays. He must want to be a <pb n=830>hero. <form>-in-</form> <pos>a</pos> hair style like Rizal's.

<p><form>risáyin</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b3]</itype> <tr>quit</tr> one's job. <i>Mirisáyin ang sikritarya,</i> The secretary resigned.

<p><form>risáyit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>recite</tr> a poem in class.

<p><form>risaytal</form> <pos>n</pos> musical <tr>recital</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c6]</itype> hold a recital.

<p><form>risgu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>risk</tr>, the chance or danger of injury, <tr>loss</tr>. <i>Risgu ang pagpanguntrabandu,</i> Smuggling is a <tr>risky</tr> business. <i>Ang paglabang ánang subáa dakung risgu sa kinabúhì,</i> You cross that river at the risk of your life. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> take a risk. <i>Dautan ang panahun apan murisgu lang ku pagbiyáhi,</i> The weather is bad, but I'll take a risk and travel.

<p><form>risibi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>look after</tr>, <tr>take care of</tr>. <i>Ug dì ka kamau murisibi sa mga urkids, mangamátay lang nà,</i> If you don't know how to take care of the orchids, they'll die. <number>1a</number> <tr>entertain</tr>, <tr>receive</tr> a guest or visitor. <i>Maáyug mga bigsyat ta kay risibihun dáyun,</i> They would have tried to outdo each other in entertaining us had we been big shots. <number>2</number> pay attention to what one is about. <i>Risibiha ang ímung gibúhat arun dílì magkasayupsayup,</i> Pay attention to what you are about so it won't be full of mistakes. <form>-dur(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> living room. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. given full care and attention.

<p><form>risíbu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>receipt</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> make or issue a receipt.

<p><form>risidídu</form> <xr>= <sc>DISIDÍDU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>risidins</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>RISIDINSIYA</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <tr>residence</tr> in school to graduate or get honors.

<p><form>risidin sirtipikit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>residence certificate</tr>.

<p><form>risidinsiya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>residence</tr>, <tr>dwelling</tr> place of a nice sort. <number>2</number> residence to fulfill voting requirements. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> have a long enough residence.

<p><form>risikáda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>copra</tr> that has dried beyond the usual standard moisture content. <i>Ang kupras risikáda mas mahal ug prisyu,</i> Very dry copra fetches a higher price. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a1]</itype> be, become quite <tr>dry</tr>.

<p><form>risíku</form> <pos>n</pos> decrease in weight from evaporation. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> for copra to lose its moisture content. <i>Mugaan ang kupras ug murisíku,</i> Copra becomes <tr>lighter</tr> if it loses moisture. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> deduct possible loss in weight due to evaporation from the material weighed. <i>Risikúhi ang timbang ug báli singku kílus,</i> Deduct five kilos from the original weight for evaporation.

<p><form>risint&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>resent</tr>. <i>Dílì ta murisint&acaron;r ug tagáan ug mga maáyung tambag,</i> We should not resent it when we are given good advice.

<p><form>risipi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>recipe</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>recipe book</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b]</itype> use a recipe book.

<p><form>rísir</form> <pos>n</pos> racing <tr>bicycle</tr>.

<p><form>risirba</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. spare for later use. <i>Kining kwartáha risirba pára sa timpu sa kalisud,</i> This money is a <tr>reserve</tr> for difficult times. <i>Wà nay hángin ang risirba,</i> The <tr>spare tire</tr> has no air. <number>2</number> s.t. set <tr>aside</tr> for a special person. <i>Adúna ka nay risirba nga lamísa sa nayitklab,</i> You already have a table <tr>reserved</tr> in the night club. <number>3</number> <tr>reservist</tr> in the armed forces. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>reserve</tr>, set s.t. <tr>aside</tr> for later use. <i>Átung irisirba ang ítik pára sa pista,</i> I'm reserving the ducks for the fiesta. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be a reservist. <form>-du</form> <pos>a</pos> s.t. set aside for a special purpose. <i>Gidilì ang pagtagà sa mga risirbádung kalasangan,</i> Felling trees in a forest reservation is prohibited. <pos>n</pos> <tr>forest reservation</tr>. <form>-siyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>forest reservation</tr>.

<p><form>risis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>recess</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56; b(1)]</itype> be recess time, begin recess. <i>Mupaulì siyag marisis,</i> He goes home at recess time.

<p><form>risistinsiya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>resistance</tr>. <i>Risistinsiya sa inpiksiyun,</i> Resistance to infection. <number>2</number> <tr>endurance</tr>. <i>Way risistinsiya sa bug-at nga trabáhu,</i> He cannot endure hard work. <i>Dúgay siyang kapuyun ug magbaskit bul kay maáyug risistinsiya,</i> He doesn't easily run out of breath in basketball because he has lots of steam. <form>-du(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> having lots of endurance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to have good endurance.

<p><form>risíta</form> <pos>n</pos> doctor's <tr>prescription</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> issue a prescription.

<p><form>risma</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ream</tr> of paper of 500 sheets.

<p><form>rispitar</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>respect</tr>, showing s.o. the <tr>deference</tr> and courtesy due him in his station. <i>Wà kay rispitar sa ímung ginikánan,</i> You don't show your parents the respect that is due them. <number>2</number> sign of courtesy. <i>Rispitar lang tung ákung pagtambung sa íyang kasal,</i> I went to his wedding out of respect for him. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> respect, recognize a person's station and rights. <i>Nagrispitar ku sa ímung katungud,</i> I respect your rights. <i>Rispitai ang butang sa uban,</i> Respect other peoples' properties. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> do s.t. out of respect for s.o. <i>Rispitahan lang nátù ning básung gitágay,</i> We'll just accept this glass as <tr>recognition</tr> of the person who offered it. <form>rispitádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>respected</tr>. <i>Mutúu giyud ang mga táwu níya kay rispitádu kaáyu siya,</i> People believe him because he is very much respected. <number>2</number> <tr>respectful</tr>. <i>Rispitádu kaáyu nang tawhána sa mga babáyi,</i> That man is very respectful to women.

<p><form>rispítu</form> <xr>= <sc>RISPITAR</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p><form>rispundi</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> take the <tr>responsibility</tr> for s.t. <i>Ikay murispundi ug madáut nà,</i> You're responsible if that breaks. <i>Kinsay nagrispundi pagpakatúlug sa mga bátà?</i> Who's <tr>responsible</tr> for putting the children to sleep? <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> shoulder expenses, <tr>provide</tr>. <i>Akuy murispundi <pb n=831>sa ímung pagtuun,</i> I'll take care of your studies. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> take care of s.o.'s expenses for the moment. <i>May talagaan kung dus sa taksi. Rispundihi sà ku,</i> I owe the taxi driver two pesos. Take care of it for me, will you?

<p><form>rispunsabli</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>reliable</tr>, having a sense of <tr>responsibility</tr>. <i>Makasálig ka ánang tawhána kay rispunsabli nà,</i> You can rely on that person because he is <tr>trustworthy</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>responsible</tr> for s.t. <i>Dì ku rispunsabli sa ímung mga útang,</i> I'm not responsible for your debts. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> develop a sense of responsibility.

<p><form>rispunsabilidad, rispunsibilidad</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>responsibility</tr>.

<p><form>rispunsu</form> <pos>n</pos> ceremony of blessing a tomb, usually at the funeral, on death anniversaries, or on All Souls' Day. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> bless the tomb.

<p><form>rista</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>check up on</tr> how s.t. is. <i>Akuy muristar kun natrangkahan bag pultahan,</i> I'll <tr>check</tr> the door to see if it is bolted. <i>Pagaristahan ang kík ug mitúbù ba,</i> Keep checking the cake to see if it rose.

<p><form>ristanti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>balance</tr>, the amount still owed after a partial settlement. <i>Ilátay ang ákung bag-ung útang sa ristanti,</i> Just add my new debts to the balance I owe. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> leave a balance after partial payment.

<p><form>rist&acaron;r</form> <xr>= <sc>RISTA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ristawran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>restaurant</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> engage in a restaurant business; make into a restaurant. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> go to a restaurant.

<p><form>risulta</form> as a <tr>result</tr>. <i>Sígi lang siyag ínum. Risulta, giulsir,</i> He keeps drinking. As a result, he developed an ulcer. <pos>n</pos> <tr>result</tr>. <i>Makaguul ang risulta sa iksámin,</i> The results of the exam are depressing. <i>Mau kanay risulta sa gahiag úlu,</i> That's what happens to s.o. who is stubborn. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> result in s.t. <form>-du</form> <pos>n</pos> result of a bad practice or behavior. <i>Ang ímung ulsir risultádu na nà sa sígi nímung pagpagutum,</i> The ulcer you've got comes from letting yourself go hungry all the time.

<p><form>risulusiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> formal <tr>resolution</tr> to do s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> pass a resolution.

<p><form>risuriksiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>Resurrection</tr> of Christ.

<p><form>ritásu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>remnants</tr> of cloth. <number>2</number> remnants of wood, metal. <number>3</number> <tr>children</tr> (humorous). <i>Kadaghan sa ímung mga ritásu!</i> What a lot of kids you have! <number>3a</number> <tr>small</tr> ones. <i>Inigsúgud sa bayli padaplin mung mga ritásu ha?</i> When the dance starts the <tr>small fry</tr> step to the sides, will you? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be, become a remnant.

<p><form>ritatsir</form> <pos>n</pos> one who retouches pictures.

<p><form>ritáyir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>retire</tr> from one's job or position. <form>-d</form> <tr>retired</tr>. <form>-min</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>retirement</tr>. <number>2</number> retirement pay. <i>Inigkadawat ni Tátay sa íyang ritayirmin, makapadáyun ku sa ákung pag-*iskuyla,</i> When Dad receives his retirement pay, I can continue my studies.

<p><form>rítim</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> an <tr>instrument</tr> for giving the <tr>rhythm</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>music</tr> played by the instrument which gives the rhythm. <number>3</number> rhythm method of birth control. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> play the rhythm in a combo performance. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> use the <form>rhythm</form> method for birth control.

<p><form>ríting</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rating</tr> in a board examination. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> get, obtain a rating of.

<p><form>ritíra</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b36]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>retreat</tr>, <tr>withdraw</tr>. <i>Miritíra sila pag-abanti sa kaáway,</i> They retreated as the enemy advanced. <number>2</number> <tr>leave</tr> a place. <i>Ngánung miritíra ka man sa Sugbu?</i> Why did you leave Cebu? <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b36]</itype> <tr>back out</tr> of an agreement. <i>Dílì ku muritíra sa átung sábut,</i> I will not back out of our agreement. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> kick s.o. out of a home or job. <i>Paritiráhun ka nákù sa ákung pudir,</i> I'll kick you out of my home.

<p><form>ritmu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rhythm</tr>. <i>Adúnay ritmu ang pitik sa átung pulsu,</i> Our pulse beats <tr>rhythmically</tr>.

<p><form>ritratar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> take <tr>pictures</tr>. <i>Akuy muritratar nímu,</i> I'll take your picture. <i>Dílì makaritratar sa sulud sa simbahan ang ritratista,</i> Photographers can't take pictures inside the church. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(l)]</itype> have one's picture taken. <i>Nagparitratar mi sa dágat,</i> We had our picture taken by the sea. <form>ritratista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>photographer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; c1]</itype> be a photographer.

<p><form>ritrátu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>photograph</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> take a <tr>picture</tr>. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; ab]</itype> have one's picture taken.

<p><form>ritrít</form> <pos>n</pos> religious <tr>retreat</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> hold a retreat. <i>Magritrít mi antis sa Simána Santa,</i> We will hold a retreat before Holy Week.

<p><form>ritríta</form> <pos>n</pos> ceremony held in the evening of the first day of a novena which precedes the day of the patron saint of a place, where people shouting <ix>'Bíba'</ix> together with a band parade to herald the coming fiesta. Also, the parade held at the dawn of the feast day, where the image of the Saint is paraded with a band to the church for blessing and back to the chapel.

<p><form>ritru di-</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PAKTU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ritrúku</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. combination shot in billiards where the player makes a carom when the cue ball is between the two object balls. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> make this sort of shot.

<p><form>ritubáda</form> <xr>= <sc>RITUBÁDU</sc> (female).</xr>

<p><form>ritubádu</form> <pos>a</pos> given to talking back. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get into the habit of talking back.

<p><form>ritubar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make clothing from an old piece of clothing. <i>Ritubahun ku ning sinínà <pb n=832>sa ákung anak kay gamay na man ni nákù,</i> I'll <tr>remake</tr> this into a dress for my daughter because it is too small for me.

<p><form>ritukadur</form> <pos>n</pos> one who touches up photographs.

<p><form>ritúki</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>touch up</tr> a photograph. <i>Batan-un siyang tan-áwun sa litrátu kay maáyung pagkaritúki,</i> He looks young in the picture because it was well <tr>touched up</tr>. <form>dílì ma-</form> for s.t. to be so <tr>ugly</tr> nothing can be done to make it look nice. <i>Dílì maritúki ang íyang nawung sa kasukù,</i> When he gets angry he looks terrible.

<p><form>riturn báwut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>return bout</tr> in boxing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C]</itype> have a return bout.

<p><form>riurganisar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>reorganize</tr>. <i>Riurganisahun sa Prisidinti ang íyang gabiníti,</i> The President will reorganize his cabinet. <form>riurganisasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>reorganization</tr>.

<p><form>riyal<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>liberal</tr> spender. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; c1]</itype> be liberal in spending. <i>Wà kay kaugmáun kun magriyal ka sa ímung kwarta,</i> You have no future if you spend your money <tr>liberally</tr>.

<p><form>riyal<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> silver <tr>coin</tr> worth one eighth of a peso, circulated in Spanish times. <form>-is(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>RIYAL</sc> (plural&mdash;used only after the numbers of Spanish origin).</xr>

<p><form>riyal<sub>3</sub></form> in the variation of billiards game called <ix>hardin</ix>, the downing on the first strike of the four billiard pins placed in the center. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; a12]</itype> become, make a <ix>riyal</ix>.

<p><form>riyal istít</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>real estate</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> go into the real estate business.

<p><form>riyúma</form> <xr>= <sc>RAYÚMA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>riyumatismu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rheumatism</tr>.

<p><form>riyunyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>reunion</tr> of a class or family. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> hold a reunion. <i>Magriyunyun ang pamilya káda Pasku,</i> The family holds a reunion every Christmas. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> attend a reunion.

<!-- Entry RPS deviates in using abbreviation -->

<p><form>RPS /arpíis/</form> abbreviation for Republic of the Philippines Ship put on Philippine naval craft. <i>Ang arpíis Lapulápu mauy yáti sa Prisidinti,</i> The RPS Lapulapu is the yacht of the President.

<p><form>rubar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> draw a mahjong piece. <pos>n</pos> action of drawing. <form>rubáda</form> <xr>= <sc>RUBAR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>rubi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ruby</tr>, a precious stone.

<p><form>rublis</form> <xr>= <sc>GAWAYGÁWAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>rúbu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; ab2]</itype> <number>1</number> rough s.o. up. <i>Unyà mu na ba buyaga kun magrúbu na nang duha?</i> Will you reprimand them only after they have started roughing each other up? <i>Rubúhun nátù ang dúlà ug lúpig ta,</i> Let's play the game <tr>rough</tr> if we get out-classed. <number>2</number> engage in heavy petting. <i>Hikit-an si Liyun nga nakigrúbu sa íyang trátu,</i> Leon was seen engaging rough romance with his sweetheart. <pos>n</pos> <tr>fight</tr> or rough and tumble romance. <i>Kun gustu kag rúbu, andam ku,</i> If you want to play rough, I'm ready. <form>pára &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> rough and tumble. Kanang sinináa pára rúbu, This dress is for rough use. <form>ruburúbu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>rough and tumble</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>informal</tr>, rough and <tr>easy-going</tr> without paying attention to niceties of etiquette. <i>Wà nay platuplátu. Ruburúbu bítaw ni,</i> Let's not bother with plates. This is a rough and tumble get-together anyway. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> do s.t. in a rough way.

<p><form>rúbut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>robot</tr>.

<p><form>rud-aylan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Rhode Island chicken</tr>.

<p><form>rúgi</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>groggy</tr>, <tr>dizzy</tr>. <i>Rúgi siya kay naigù sa usa ka búl,</i> He's groggy because he got drunk on his jarful of toddy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; ab3(1)]</itype> get groggy from a blow or liquor. <i>Liphuk nga makarúgi (makaparúgi),</i> A left hook that will send you <tr>reeling</tr>.

<p><form>rúl<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>rules</tr> of sports. <number>2</number> <tr>rules</tr> of a school, religious order, and the like.

<p><form>rúl<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> roll the hair up on <tr>curlers</tr>.

<p><form>rúling<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the <tr>rules</tr> or <tr>procedures</tr> by which s.t. is carried out. <i>Mga rúling sa baksing,</i> Rules of boxing. <i>Unsa may mga rúling sa inyung kapunúngan arun makasúd ta?</i> What are the rules for joining your organization? <number>2</number> the <tr>decision</tr> pronounced by a referee, <tr>ruling</tr> handed down by a judge. <i>Unsa may rúling sa ampayir?</i> What was the umpire's decision? <i>May rúling sa kurti nga dílì dawátun kúmu piyansa ang yútang prindádu,</i> The court ruled that you cannot post bail with mortgaged property.

<p><form>*rúling<sub>2</sub></form> <form>&mdash; báyan</form> <pos>n</pos> snack made of old bread, sugared, fried, and shaped into an oval. <form>&mdash; dú</form> <xr>= <sc>BÙBUAY</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>BÙBÙ</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; ist&ucaron;r</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>store</tr> or <tr>canteen</tr> set on wheels.

<p><form>rúlir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ruler</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> make into, use as a ruler. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ab2]</itype> hit with a ruler. <i>Rulirun ta ka run ug dì ka muhílum,</i> I will whack you with a ruler if you don't keep quiet.

<p><form>rulíta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>roulette</tr> wheel, a rotating disc divided into numbered or colored portions for gambling or drawing lots.

<p><form>rulkul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> call the <tr>roll</tr>. <i>Magrulkul ang maistru inigsúgud sa klási,</i> The teacher calls the roll at the start of the session. <i>Rulkúlun ang mga diputádu kun dúna bay kúrum,</i> The roll is called for the congressmen to see if there is a quorum. <pos>n</pos> <tr>roll call</tr>.

<p><form>rulpad</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pad</tr> of ruled paper.

<p><form>rulyu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>coil</tr> or <tr>roll</tr> s.t. up. <pos>n</pos> anything that is stored by rolling it up: roll of film, paper, coil of rope.

<p><form>rulyu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lecture</tr> in the cursillo (a series of religious lectures and prayers for laymen). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> give the lecture in a cursillo.

<pb n=833>

<p><form>rulyista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lecturer</tr> in a cursillo.

<p><form>rúmi</form> <xr>= <sc>RAMI<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>rúma</form> <xr>= <sc>ARÚMA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>Rumanista</form> <pos>n</pos> member of the <tr>Roman Catholic</tr> church. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b6c1]</itype> be, become a Roman <tr>Catholic</tr>.

<p><form>rúmans</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>petting</tr> or <tr>necking</tr>. <i>Báhin sa sining may rúmans,</i> The part of the movie that shows scenes of romance. <form>pára &mdash;</form> <pos>a</pos> not to be used for anything but romance, i.e. not for hard work (humorous). <i>Ayaw táwun ku pagunáha kay pára rúmans ra ba ning kamúta,</i> Don't make me weed. These hands of mine are made only for romance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> engage in petting.

<p><form>rumansa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>romance</tr>, love <tr>affair</tr>. <i>Ang rumansa sa duha ka bitúun,</i> The love affair of the two stars. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>RÚMANS</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>RÚMANS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>rumantika</form> <xr>= <sc>RUMANTIKU</sc> (female).</xr>

<p><form>rumantiku</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>romantic</tr>, evoking feelings of <tr>amorousness</tr> or <tr>sentimentality</tr>. <i>Rumantikung lugar,</i> A romantic place. <number>2</number> romantic, <tr>amorous</tr>. <i>Rumantikung mga mata,</i> Romantic eyes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become romantic.

<p><form>Rumánu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>Roman</tr>. <number>2</number> Roman <tr>Catholic</tr>. <form>katuliku &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Roman Catholic</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> become a Roman Catholic.

<p><form>rumba</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rhumba</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> do the rhumba.

<p><form>rumblun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>pandanus</tr> grown widely as an ornamental and for its leaves which are particularly pliant and suitable for weaving. The color is lighter than the other species and the leaves are armed along the edges and the midribs.

<p><form>rumbu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>head</tr> towards the direction of; take s.t. s.w. <i>Sakayang nagrumbu dinhi,</i> A boat heading this way. <i>Ang ímung kabúang nagrumbu nímu sa kadáut,</i> Your foolishness is leading you to misery. <i>Rumbuha nang kahúya,</i> Head towards that tree. <number>2</number> be the <tr>target</tr> or <tr>object</tr> of. <i>Aku tung íyang girumbu sa insultu,</i> I was the target of his insult. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>batter</tr>, <tr>ram</tr> s.t. down. <i>Rumbúhun ta ning pultahan kay nawálà ang yábi,</i> Let's batter the door down because we lost the key. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>direction</tr> or <tr>heading</tr> taken. <i>Tan-áwa ug unsay rumbu sa barku,</i> See what direction the ship took. <i>Ása rumbu ning dalána?</i> Where does this road lead to? <i>Gitumba níya ang káhuy rumbu sa sapà,</i> He felled the tree directly into the river. <number>2</number> <tr>destination</tr>, <tr>goal</tr>. <number>3</number> <tr>target</tr>, <tr>object</tr> aimed at.

<p><form>rumíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rosemary</tr>, sold as a dried herb for spice.

<p><form>rumlun</form> <xr>= <sc>RUMBLUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>rumpi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>destroy</tr> s.t. by breaking it to pieces. <i>Ang mga tulisan mauy mirumpi sa pultahan,</i> The robbers broke the door down. <i>Si Ilurdi mauy nagrumpi sa gúsuk ni Kusáka,</i> Elorde <tr>shattered</tr> Kosaka's ribs. <number>2</number> destroy a girl's reputation. <i>Narumpi na ang kadunggánan ánang bayhána,</i> The reputation of that girl is ruined. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>RUMPI KANDÁDU</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; kandádu</form> <pos>n</pos> general name for <tr>barracudas</tr> (the lock breaker): <bio>Sphyraena jello, et al</bio>.

<p><form>run</form> short for <xr><sc>KARUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>runda</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> police <tr>raid</tr>. <i>Mga Písi ang mirunda sa sugálan,</i> The P.C. raided the gambling den. <number>2</number> go to s.o.'s house unexpectedly to collect a debt, ask for charity. <i>Girunda mi sa mananaygun,</i> The carollers came to see us to <tr>solicit</tr> money (lit. raided us).

<p><form>rundalya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>orchestra</tr> consisting mainly of native stringed instruments. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> form a <ix>rundalya</ix>.

<p><form>rúng</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>wrong</tr> answer in an exam. <i>Rúng tanan ang ákung ansir,</i> All my answers were wrong. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> mark s.t. wrong. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be, become wrong.

<p><form>rungkilyu</form> <pos>n</pos> name of a notorious bandit during Spanish times. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)]</itype> <tr>flare up</tr> at s.o. unreasonably at the slightest provocation. <i>Murungkilyu (marungkilyu) siya kun mahubug,</i> He gets mad easily when he is drunk.

<p><form>runíyu</form> <pos>n</pos> mimeographing machine (so called from the brand name <tr>Roneo</tr>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>mimeograph</tr> s.t.

<p><form>rup gardin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>roof garden</tr>.

<p><form>rúral</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rural</tr> <tr>doctor</tr>, <tr>bank</tr>. <i>Dílì maáyung ipanghuwam sa rúral kay dakug pursintu,</i> It's no good to borrow from rural banks because they charge a high percentage. <form>&mdash; duktur</form> <tr>rural doctor</tr>. <form>(&rarr;) bangku &mdash;</form> <tr>rural bank</tr>.

<p><form>rús</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rose</tr>. <form>byitnam &mdash;</form> <number>1</number> ornamental <tr>herb</tr> bearing rose-like flowers: <bio>Portulaca grandiflora</bio>. <number>2</number> k.o. venereal disease.

<p><form>rúsa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rose-colored</tr>, <tr>pink</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be, become rose-colored.

<p><form>rusal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gardenia</tr>, grown as an ornamental.

<p><form>rusaryu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rosary</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> pray the rosary. <form>rusaryuan, rusaryuhan, rusaryúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rosary beads</tr>.[+]

<p><form>rúsas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>rose</tr>. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>RÚSA</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; dihapun, &mdash; dipapil</form> kinds of <tr>chrysanthemums</tr>. <form>&mdash; dipúkì</form> <xr>= <sc>PÚKÌ</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr> <form>di-</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>rose-colored</tr>. <i>Dirúsas ang ákung páyung,</i> My umbrella is rose-colored. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> anything that is wrong with (humorous euphemism). <i>Ang nakadirúsas nímu kay dì ka kamau,</i> The thing that's wrong with you is that you don't know how.

<p><form>rusítas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rosette</tr> design of jewelry.

<pb n=834>

<p><form>ruska</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>screw</tr> or small <tr>nut</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6(1)]</itype> attach with, drive in a screw or bolt.[+]

<p><form>ruskilyus</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ring-shaped fancy <tr>cookies</tr> made of flour and egg yolks. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> have, make this k.o. cookie.

<p><form>Rúsu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Russian</tr>.

<p><form>rúta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>route</tr>, <tr>itinerary</tr>. <i>Ang rúta sa ámung paglangyaw muági sa Rúma,</i> Our tour will go through Rome. <i>Dílì ku muhatud sa Pwinti. Dílì nà ákung rúta,</i> I don't take passengers to the Fuente because that is not my route.

<p><form>rutisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> working in shifts or on a two-week <tr>rotational</tr> basis. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> work in shifts or on a <tr>rotation</tr> basis. <i>Hínay ang trabáhu maung nagrutisiyun ang mga trabahanti,</i> Business is slow so the laborers are working on a rotation basis.

<p><form>rutunda</form> <pos>n</pos> small round <tr>park</tr> or grass <tr>island</tr> at an intersection.

<p><form>rúyal</form> a winning mahjong hand consisting of only one design. <form>&mdash; buki</form> <pos>n</pos> a <ix>buki</ix> consisting of all black or all red numbers. <form>&mdash; iskalíra</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ISKALÍRA</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; midul kard</form> a <ix>rúyal</ix> hand composed of <ix>midul kards</ix>. <form>&mdash; pyanghaw</form> a <ix>rúyal</ix> hand consisting of a <ix>pyanghaw</ix>.[+]

<p><form>ruyda</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>wheel</tr> with wooden spokes. <number>2</number> wheel or <tr>flywheel</tr> with spokes in a printing press. <number>3</number> <tr>arena</tr> or <tr>ring</tr> in a cockpit, boxing stadium, circus. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; c1]</itype> <tr>turn</tr> around. <i>Nagruyda ang ákung úlu sa pagkainum,</i> My head is <tr>awhirl</tr> after I drank s.t. <i>Nagruyda ang palábad sa ayruplánu,</i> The airplane propeller is <tr>whirling</tr>. <i>Ruydáhun (iruyda) sa kábaw ang galingan sa intusan,</i> The carabao will pull the sugar cane grinder around.




<div1>
<head>S</head>


<p><form>sa<sub>1</sub></form> particle indicating grammatical relations. <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>s</bx>. <number>1</number> preceding a phrase referring to a place. <i>Niadtu sa Manílà,</i> Went to Manila. <i>Sa ibabaw,</i> Up on top. <i>Lakaw ngadtu sa unáhan,</i> Walk up ahead. <i>Ihátag sa bátà,</i> Give it to the child. <i>Nahúlug sa pangpang,</i> Fell off the cliff. <i>Amíhan sa kanáway,</i> Northwind from a westerly direction. <number>1a</number> following a word meaning &lsquo;be in a place&rsquo;. <i>Nia dinhi sa Sibu,</i> It is here in Cebu. <i>Didtu siya sa Manílà iskuyla,</i> He went to school in Manila. <i>Walà sa lugar,</i> Not at the right time or place. <number>2</number> preceding a phrase referring to time. <i>Muanhi sa alas dúsi,</i> Will come at twelve. <i>Malígù ta sa sunud Duminggu,</i> Let's go swimming next Sunday. <i>Sa káda ámut mutugbang pud siyag hátag,</i> Each time they contribute, he gives an equal amount. <number>2a</number> preceding a sentence referring to past time. <i>Sa pag-abut na níya didtu,</i> When he arrived there. <i>Sa nagalakat ang panahun,</i> As time went by. <number>3</number> indicating gen. relations. <number>3a</number> possession or analogous concepts. <i>Ang balay sa ákung amígu,</i> My friend's house. <i>Ang mga pagtulun-an sa Bibliya,</i> The lessons given in the Bible. <i>Ang sa ákung mga igsúun,</i> The ones belonging to my brothers and sisters. <i>Usa sa ákung mga sákup,</i> One of my people. <i>Ang kamahal sa palalítun,</i> The high cost of things. <i>Búlan sa Máyu,</i> The month of May. <number>3b</number> agent of a passive verb. <i>Gihambat sa liyun,</i> Was devoured by the lion. <i>Kaúnun sa mga bátà,</i> The children will eat it. <number>3b1</number> preceding the agent of a nominalized verb. <i>Ang pagkamatay sa bátà,</i> When the child died (lit. the dying of the child). <i>Káda kanáug sa pasahíru,</i> Each time a passenger got off. (Lit. Each getting off of the passengers.) <number>3c</number> following an exclamation to mark the thing exclaimed over.<corr sic=" mation to mark the thing exclaimed over."></corr> <i>Kamahal gud sa ímung gibáyad!</i> What a high price you paid! <i>Dakúa sad sa balay!</i> What a huge house it was! <number>4</number> indicating dat. relations. <number>4a</number> specific goal of an action. <i>Nakabunù sa íyang kaáway,</i> Killed his enemy. <i>Akuy gitagáan sa libru,</i> The book was given to me. <number>4b</number> <ix>in comparisons:</ix> <tr>than</tr>. <i>Dátù pa sa ákung amahan,</i> Richer than my father. <number>4c</number> <i>&mdash; ákù, ímu, íya, ámù, átù, inyu, íla</i> <xr>= <sc>KANÁMÙ, KANÍMU, KANÍYA, KANÁMÙ, KANÁTÙ, KANINYU, KANÍLA</sc>.</xr> <number>5</number> indicating causal, instrumental, or <corr sic=concommitant>concomitant</corr> relations. <i>Mihílak sa kapungut,</i> Cried out of anger. <i>Sa tantung paningkámut, milampus,</i> He succeeded after trying so hard. <i>Íyang gisuntuk sa walang kamut,</i> He hit him with his left hand. <i>Sa minaayug sa dinautan,</i> By hook or by crook. <i>Sapátus nga naghilíra sa kadaghan,</i> Rows and rows of shoes, there were so many of <pb n=835>them. <i>Mitandù sa walay lángan,</i> He agreed without delay. <number>5a</number> following a word which expresses these relationships. <i>Báhin sa ákung hangyù,</i> As for my request. <i>Tungud sa kalúuy,</i> On account of his mercy. <i>Uban sa íyang amahan,</i> Together with her father. <i>Para ni sa Nága?</i> Is this bound for Naga? <i>Human sa klási,</i> After class. <number>6</number> optionally preceding an infinitive with <ix>pag-</ix>. <i>Arun sa pagpauswag sa lungsud,</i> In order to develop the town. <i>Misúgud na sad siya sa pag-inum,</i> He began to take to the bottle again.

<p><form>sa<sub>2</sub></form> <number>1</number> short for <xr><sc>UNSA</sc></xr> used at end of phrases. <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>UNSA</sc>, <i>5.</i></xr> <number>2</number> short for <xr><sc>UNSA GÁNÌ</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>GÁNÌ</sc>, <i>5a.</i></xr>

<p><form>s&amacracu;</form> <xr>= <sc>SÁLA<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<!-- Should be italics -->

<p><form>sà</form> short for <bx>ísà, úsà</bx>.

<p><form>sâ</form> <xr>= <sc>SALÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sáa</form> <number>1</number> <tr>where</tr> (past or present tense)? <i>Sáa man tu paingun ag bátà?</i> Where could the child have gone? <i>Sáa man ang inyung balay?</i> Where is your house? <number>2</number> <tr>which</tr> of the several. <i>Sáa áning duha imung palitun?</i> Which of these two are you going to buy?

<p><form>sáad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> <tr>promise</tr>. <i>Nagsáad siya nga mubálik,</i> He promised to come back. <i>Dílì ku makasáad nímu ug trabáhu,</i> I cannot promise you a job. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>promise</tr>. <i>Tumánun ba nímu ang sáad?</i> Will you keep your promise? <i>Yútà sa mga sáad,</i> The Land of Promise (Mindanao). <number>2</number> s.t. <tr>promised</tr>. <i>Diyis pursyintu ang ákung sáad sa Ginúu,</i> I promised to give ten percent to the Lord. <form>Bag-ung, Dáang &mdash;</form> New, Old Testament. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> make a <tr>promise</tr> or <tr>vow</tr> to oneself. <i>Nanáad si Supru nga dílì na siya mubálik,</i> Sofro vowed that he would never go back. <pos>n</pos> <tr>vow</tr>, solemn <tr>promise</tr> to do s.t. if s.t. is fulfilled. <i>Panáad ku nga dì ku muusab, basta lang maluwas siya,</i> I made a vow never to do it again, if only she would get better. <form>sinaáran</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. <tr>spoken for</tr>. <i>Dì na ni mabaligyà kay sinaáran,</i> I can't sell it because it has been spoken for. <number>2</number> a <tr>betrothed</tr> girl that has never been married. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> one with whom s.o. made a promise of love or marriage. <form>masaárun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>promising</tr>. <i>Masaárung kaugmáun,</i> A promising future. <form>pakig-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>covenant</tr>, mutual giving of promises.

<p><form>saag</form> (from <ix>saláag</ix>) a <tr>stray</tr>, not in the usual course or passage. <i>Usa ka saag nga huyúhuy mipakítuy sa mga dáhun,</i> A stray breeze stirred the leaves.

<p><form>sáag</form> <xr>= <sc>SALÁAG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>saang</form> <pos>n</pos> spider <tr>conch</tr>.

<p><form>sab</form> <xr>= <sc>USAB</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sáb</form> <xr>= <sc>SÁLAB</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sábà</form> <pos>a</pos> noisy. <i>Sábà kaáyu ang tyanggihan,</i> The marketplace is very noisy. <pos>n</pos> <tr>noise</tr>. <i>Ang sábà abut diri nákù,</i> The noise reaches me here. <form>&mdash; dihà</form> <number>1</number> shut up! (said in anger). <i>Sábà (sabà) dihà, nagrawraw ka lang,</i> Shut up! You're talking nonsense! <number>2</number> Oh, <tr>come on</tr>, you're kidding. <i>Sábà (sabà) dihà uy, gipaláhan na pud ku nímu,</i> Oh come on. You're just flattering me. <xr><i>See also</i> <form>bà dihà</form>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make noise. <i>Ngánung nía man mu magsábà sa huspital?</i> Why are you making noise here in the hospital? <i>Gisabáan ka ba námung nagdúlà?</i> Do you find it too <tr>noisy</tr> if we play here? <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; c]</itype> <tr>tell</tr> s.t. to s.o. <i>Ayaw isábà ang átung rilasiyun ha,</i> Don't breathe a word about our affair, O.K.? <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> given to making noise or talking. <number>2</number> given to divulging secrets. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become <tr>noisy</tr> or tending to divulge secrets. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>din</tr>, <tr>noise</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>scolding</tr>. <i>Ang kasábang ákung nadáwat dílì makáun ug irù,</i> I got a scolding not fit for a dog. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b(1)]</itype> <tr>scold</tr>. <i>Ayawg ihagpak ang sira kay kasab-an kang Máma,</i> Don't slam the door because Mom will scold you. <form>hinga-, hinga-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of scolding. <form>kalasab-an</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> always <tr>scolded</tr>. <number>2</number> worthy of a scolding.

<p><form>sab-a</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> variety of cooking <tr>banana</tr> with rectangular fruit similar to but smaller than the <ix>kardába</ix>, with 7&ndash;12 or more hands in the bunch. The fiber can be made into cloth: <bio>Musa sapientum var. compressa</bio>. <number>2</number> cloth made from the <ix>sab-a</ix>.

<p><form>sabad</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>restless</tr>, <tr>unsteady</tr>, always moving. <i>Sabad kaáyu ang tabánug,</i> The kite was very unsteady. <pos>n</pos> <tr>propeller</tr>, <tr>blade</tr> of a fan, <tr>windmill</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B]</itype> be, become annoyingly restless, unsteady. <i>Musabad ang mga bábuy ug gutúmun,</i> Pigs get restless when they are hungry. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <tr>attach</tr>, make into a propeller or <tr>fan</tr>, windmill blade. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>whiz</tr> closely by, moving fast. <i>Wà gánì makasabad sa íyang gipusil ang bála,</i> The bullet did not even go near the target. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> go <tr>near</tr> s.t. for a purpose. <i>Gisabaran níya kanúnay ang asáwa nga nagsugal,</i> He kept hanging around his wife who was gambling. <i>Isabad (sabara) ang bátà kun túa ba sa iskuylahan,</i> Go by the school for a moment and see if the child is there.

<p><form>sabadista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Seventh-day Adventist</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B15]</itype> be, become a Seventh-day <tr>Adventist</tr>.

<p><form>Sabadu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> Saturday. <form>&mdash; iglurya, Santu</form> the Saturday of the Holy Week. <number>2</number> one point short of winning. <i>Sabadu na ang ílang iskúr. Usa na lay kuwang pára mudaug,</i> They are one point short of winning. They only need one more point to sew up the game. <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>BIRNIS</sc> for verb forms.</xr> <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> use <pb n=836>s.t. <tr>sparingly</tr> or in little amounts. <i>Musinabadu lang ku ug pangagwa basta lang mahumut ta,</i> I will use the perfume sparingly just enough to smell sweet. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <tr>preserve</tr> fish with a small amount of salt. <i>Magsinabadu ta kay daghang bulinaw ug dì nátù mahurut,</i> Let's make fish preserves because we've got lots of anchovies and we can't consume them all. <pos>n</pos> <tr>fish</tr> preserved with a little salt.

<p><form>sab-ag<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>hang</tr> s.t. light over the shoulders or a projection. <i>Isab-ag ang tualya sa abága,</i> <tr>Drape</tr> the towel over your shoulders. <i>Isab-ag ang bukag sa lansang,</i> <tr>Hang</tr> the basket on the nail.

<p><form>sab-ag<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SABWAG</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p><form>sábak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put s.t. in one's lap to carry it. <i>Dì ku musábak nímu kay dakù ka,</i> I will not allow you to sit on my lap because you're too big. <i>Ákung sabákun (isábak) ring bátà arun makalingkud tang tanan,</i> I will put the child on my lap so that all of us can sit down. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> <tr>hit</tr> s.t. <tr>squarely</tr>. <i>Usa ka suntuk nasábak sa íyang apapángig,</i> A blow with the fist struck him squarely in the jaw. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <tr>sponsor</tr> a bill, <tr>espouse</tr> a cause. <i>Ang bag-ung urdinansa gisábak sa tanang mga kawáni,</i> The new ordinance is <tr>supported</tr> by all the employees. <number>4</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> having a certain property (literary). <i>Hángin nga nagsábak sa madulútung kabugnaw,</i> A wind that brought penetrating coolness. <form>&mdash; ug bitúun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> for a crescent moon to have a star just above it&mdash;a sign of good luck for courtship. <i>Ug musábak gánì kunu ang búlan ug bitúun, dalì sugtun ang láking mangulitáwu,</i> They say that a man will easily win the hand of a woman he courts when the moon is carrying a star in its lap. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; c]</itype> be <tr>pregnant</tr>. <i>Kalúha tingáli ning ákung gisabak,</i> I must be pregnant with twins. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lap</tr> or s.t. analogous to it. <i>Nag-ulun sa ákung sabakan,</i> Resting her head on my lap. <i>Sa sabakan sa dakung búkid,</i> At the <tr>base</tr> of a big mountain. <number>2</number> the mother's <tr>womb</tr> (literary). <i>Gíkan sa sabakan ni Maríya,</i> From Mary's womb. <number>2a</number> one's <tr>parents</tr>. <i>Anak sa pubring sabakan,</i> A child from poor parents. <number>2b</number> <formx>-an sa yútà</formx> the <tr>bosom</tr> of the earth (literary). <number>3</number> female <tr>genitalia</tr> (euphemism). <number>4</number> small <tr>basket</tr> with an open mouth, usually rounded, made of rattan or bamboo, used as a container for the seeds when sowing or for harvested rice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> hit in the genital region.[+]

<p><form>sábak<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> area of a field assigned to a particular person to work on.

<p><form>sábal</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> offering <tr>resistance</tr> to motion. <i>Sábal kaáyu ning maggúyud ta ug gákit,</i> It's slow-*going if you tow a raft. <number>2</number> entailing <tr>encumbrance</tr>, a <tr>burden</tr>. <i>Sábal kaáyu ang bátà sa lakaw,</i> The child is a <tr>nuisance</tr> to take with you when you go out. <i>Kining mga lúun sa balay sábal kaáyu,</i> It's a burden to have other people live with you. <number>3</number> <tr>obstructing</tr> the vision. <i>Sábal kaáyu sa átung panan-aw ang mga káhuy,</i> The surrounding trees <tr>obstruct</tr> our view. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; b6]</itype> be, become a <tr>drag</tr> to forward motion, <tr>burden</tr>, or <tr>obstruction</tr>.

<p><form>sabana</form> <xr>= <sc>GWAYABANU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sabang, sábang</form> <pos>n</pos> area on or near the <tr>mouth</tr> of a river.

<p><form>Sábas</form> a name of a person, not much respected, who is a smart aleck who makes cheap puns and wisecracks. <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> make foolish jokes and wisecracks. <i>Ayaw kug sinabási,</i> Don't try to <tr>ridicule</tr> me. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> treat s.o. the way one would treat Sabas (without proper deference). <i>Sinabásun man ku níya ábig dílì musúkul,</i> He treats me like Sabas as if I wouldn't stand up to him.

<p><form>sabat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> speak after s.o. has spoken. <i>Unyà misabat pud ang usang táwu bísag walà sultíhi,</i> And then the other man spoke in turn, though he hadn't been spoken to. <number>1a</number> <tr>answer</tr>. <i>Ngánung dì man ka musabat ug tawgun ka?</i> Why don't you answer when you're called? <number>1b</number> <tr>repeat</tr> words after, as in prayer. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> attend a <tr>novena</tr>. <i>Dílì ángayng itambung ug kumbira ug walà makasabat ug pangadyì,</i> You shouldn't attend the banquet if you did not attend the prayer. <form>&mdash; amin</form> <pos>a</pos> always <tr>agreeable</tr> to another's viewpoint. <i>Ang táwung sabat amin pirmi lang úyun,</i> A yes-man always gives his approval. <form>panabtan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> lead the novena. <form>manalabtan, mananabtan</form> <pos>n</pos> one who leads the prayer in the novena.[+]

<p><form>sabaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>soup</tr>, <tr>gravy</tr>, <tr>juice</tr> given off by s.t. cooked. <i>Sabaw sa manuk,</i> Chicken soup. <number>2</number> <tr>water</tr> in <tr>coconut</tr>. <number>3</number> <tr>water</tr> that has gotten into a boat. <number>4</number> <tr>queer</tr> character trait, <corr sic=quirts><tr>quirks</tr></corr>. <i>Láin nímug sabaw à,</i> You sure are a <tr>strange</tr> sort. <i>Magkauyun mu kay paríhu mu ug sabaw,</i> You two will hit it off nicely because you have the same <tr>quirks</tr>. <form>waw &mdash;</form> exclamation of admiration for a sexy woman. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; b]</itype> <tr>cook</tr> s.t. with extra water or juice. <i>Sabwi ug diyútay ang útan,</i> Add a little water to the vegetable stew. <number>2</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> for a ship or boat to take in water. Nasabwan ang sakayan kay dagkung balud, The boat took in water because the waves are high. <form>láin ug &mdash;</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> take a different tack in a conversation. <i>Muláin ka man ug sabaw ug mag-isturyahánay ta sa ímung kaági,</i> You change the subject when we talk about your past.

<p><form>sabay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> hand <tr>net</tr> used for scooping small fish out of water. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make, make into such a net.

<p><form>sabay<sub>2</sub></form> <tr>often</tr>, <tr>usually</tr>. <i>Sabay ingun niárung urása siya malígù,</i> She usually takes a bath at this time.

<p><form>sábay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2C; bc3]</itype> <tr>walk with</tr>, <tr>beside</tr>. <i>Misábay siya paglakaw sa íyang giulitawhan,</i> He walked beside the girl he was courting. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>go by</tr>, around s.w. <i>Unsa man tung mananápang misábay sa ákung úlu?</i> What k.o. insect is this that is darting around my head? <i>Gisabáyan nákù ang ákung kuntra arun maglágut,</i> I purposely <tr>went by</tr> my enemy's house to provoke his anger.

<p><form>sábay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>jellyfish</tr> with stinging cells in the tentacles.

<p><form>sab-ay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> let s.t. <tr>dangle</tr> over the edge of s.t. or over one's shoulder. <i>Kinsay nagsab-ay sa tualya diri sa kurdísu?</i> Who <tr>hung</tr> the towel over the window sill? <i>Ayawg sab-áyi ning ákung abága sa ímung buktun,</i> Don't <tr>hang</tr> your arms over my shoulder.

<p><form>sabdyik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>subject</tr> in school.

<p><form>sabid</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>encumbrance</tr>, s.t. making action laborious. <i>Way sabid nga mulakaw ang way anak,</i> S.o. with no children can go out unencumbered. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; c5]</itype> become <tr>encumbered</tr>, cause <tr>encumbrance</tr>. <i>Makasabid ning ákung pagsabak sa ákung trabáhu,</i> My pregnancy is a terrible encumbrance to my work.

<p><form>*sabikil</form> (from <ix>bikil</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> accidentally <tr>nudge</tr> s.t. with the elbow. <i>Ayawg yapayapa kay sabiklan nímu ang butilya,</i> Don't wave your hands around because you might <tr>knock</tr> the bottle with your elbow.

<p><form>sabilay, sab-ilay</form> <xr>= <sc>SAMBILAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sabin</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> do s.t. in addition to one's main task. <i>Musabin kug pangutaw samtang maglung-ag,</i> I'll do some ironing <tr>while</tr> I'm cooking the rice. <i>Isabin ta kag palit ug sigarilyug manmirkádu ku,</i> I'll buy your cigarettes when I go shopping.

<p><form>sab-it</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> put s.t. small around s.t. that holds it or <tr>pierce</tr> it with a hook. <i>Nasab-itan ang ákung karsúnis sa alambring tunukun,</i> I <tr>snagged</tr> my pants on the barbed wire. <i>Isab-it lang nang ímung baskit sa halígi sa kural,</i> Just <tr>hang</tr> your basket on the fence post. <number>2</number> <tr>decorate</tr> with a medal hung from a ribbon put around the neck. <i>Gisab-ítan siyag midalya,</i> He was decorated with a medal. <number>2a</number> attribute <tr>credit</tr> to s.o., give him the honor due him. <number>3</number> put a curved thing around s.t. to pluck or bring it down. <i>Sab-ítan lang <pb n=837>nímu ang búnga ug kaw-it, Dì na mistil sak-*un,</i> Just pull the fruit down with a hook on a pole. You don't have to climb up for it. <form>-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. onto which s.t is hooked.[+]

<p><form>sablag</form> <xr>= <sc>SABWAG</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p><form>sablaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> for the strings to be <tr>out of tune</tr>. <i>Unsáun nímu pagkuskus ánang sistáha nga nasablaw man nà?</i> How can you play that guitar when the strings are not tuned? <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be somewhat <tr>off</tr>, <tr>crazy</tr>. <i>Uy nasablaw ka nga nagswítir ug mudtung dakù,</i> Hey, have you gone crazy, wearing a sweater at high noon!

<p><form>sablay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> put s.t. on top of s.t. else going beyond its edge. <i>Kinsay nagsablay íring kawáyan sa kural?</i> Who placed the bamboo pole across the fence? <i>Dì tà nímu sabláyan nang alambri sa iliktrisidad,</i> You should not <tr>hang</tr> anything from the electric wire. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> for a boxer to totter (lean on the ropes). <i>Nasablay sa ring ang buksidur dihang nagrúgi siya,</i> The boxer leaned on the ropes when he became groggy. <form>&mdash; sa luwag</form> state of development of the coconut where the meat is firm enough to hold together (lit. will hang over the edge of the ladle) but not stiff. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> longitudinal beams under the roof running along the posts on which the rafters (<ix>salagunting</ix>) rest.

<p><form>sabli</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>saber</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make, make into a saber. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> <tr>stab</tr> with a saber.

<p><form>sablig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN2; a12]</itype> throw or <tr>splash</tr> water on. <i>Gisablígan níyag túbig ang nagbagang puthaw,</i> He splashed water on the glowing steel. <pos>n</pos> action of <tr>splashing</tr> or throwing water. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> splash water on oneself in bathing, <form>-ay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C23]</itype> for politicians to engage in <tr>mudslinging</tr>.

<p><form>sabluk</form> <pos>n</pos> intense desire to eat s.t. one hasn't eaten in a long time. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> have an intense desire to eat s.t. <i>Gisabluk kug mangga sa didtu ku sa Istíts,</i> I conceived an intense craving for mangoes when I was in the States. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> eat s.t. in great quantity to satisfy one's intense desire to eat it. <i>Makahinabluk tag káun ug mangga karung swildu,</i> We can eat mangoes to our heart's content on payday.

<p><form>sabnit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>snatch</tr> s.t., esp. in stealing. <i>Nasakpan ang nagsabnit sa íyang pitáka,</i> The man who snatched her bag was apprehended.

<p><form>sabsab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a2]</itype> <tr>graze</tr>. <i>Túa sa lagúna nanabsab,</i> It's in the pasture grazing. <i>Háin áning kandínga nagsabsab sa misítas?</i> Which of these goats ate the ornamental plants?

<!-- TODO check stress-shift subentry, also in following entry -->

<p><form>sabud<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>catch</tr> s.t. against an obstruction. <i>Bantay kay musabud ang ímung <pb n=838>tiil sa tiil sa lamísa,</i> Watch out or you will <tr>hit</tr> your foot against the table. <i>Nasabdan ang misitíra sa íyang sáya,</i> Her skirt accidentally <tr>caught</tr> against the flower pot. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>trip</tr>, cause s.o. to <tr>stumble</tr>. <i>Kinsay nagsabud sa ákung tiil?</i> Who <tr>tripped</tr> me (lit. my foot)? <number>2a</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> make a <tr>slip</tr>, <tr>trip</tr> up. <i>Bisag unsáun nátug amping sa átung trabáhu, musabud giyud ta usáhay,</i> No matter how careful we are, we can't help making a <tr>mistake</tr> once in a while. <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> be <tr>delayed</tr>. <i>Didtu na pud ka masabud sa bilyaran!</i> You're <tr>late</tr> again because you played billiards. <form>walay &mdash;</form> without offering obstruction. <i>Way sabud nga pagkasyát,</i> A basketball shot that went in without touching the ring. <i>Pilipínu, apan way sabud ang íyang dílang musultig Ininglis,</i> He's a Filipino, but he can speak English with the greatest of fluency. <form>(&larr;)<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>cumbersome</tr>, giving <tr>hindrance</tr> to movement. <i>Ubang bátà, dì layhan ug taas nga karsúnis kay sábud kunu,</i> Some children don't like long pants because they're cumbersome.

<p><form>sábud<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>sow</tr>, sprinkle seeds on a bed. <i>Ang dáwang ákung isábud,</i> The millet I am going to sow. <number>2</number> feed chickens by sprinkling grains on the ground. <pos>n</pos> action of throwing grains. <i>Ákù rung sábud sa manuk,</i> It's my turn to feed the chickens. <form>(&rarr;)<sub>2</sub></form> <number>1</number> <tr>grain</tr> to strew to fowls. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>SABURAN</sc>.</xr> <form>saburan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>seedbed</tr> where seeds are sprinkled for germination.[+]

<p><form>sabug, sábug</form> <tr>usually</tr>, most <tr>commonly</tr> [so-and-so] rather than s.t. else. <i>Sabug siyang muanhi sa upisína maalas utsu,</i> He usually comes to the office at eight o'clock. <i>Sabug sa ákung midiyas putì,</i> <tr>Most</tr> of my socks are white. <form>ma-</form> <xr>= <sc>SABUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sábul</form> <xr>= <sc>BULSA</sc> (slang).</xr>

<p><form>sabúlag</form> (from <ix>bulag</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>strew</tr>, <tr>scatter</tr> out. <i>Nahisabúlag ang mga libru nga ákung gikaptan dihang gipakuratan ku,</i> The books I was carrying fell in all different directions when s.o. frightened me.

<p><form>sabúlak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>strew</tr>, <tr>sprinkle</tr> s.t. small. <i>Kinsay nagsabúlak ug pasì sa mais sa ákung gardin?</i> Who strewed corn grains in my garden? <i>Sabuláki ug kinudkud kísu ang sud-an,</i> Sprinkle grated cheese on the food.

<p><form>sabun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>soap</tr>. <number>2</number> intense <tr>scolding</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>soap</tr> s.t. <i>Sabnig maáyu ang kamisin kay nagkagrása,</i> Soap the undershirt well because it is smeared with grease. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> be severely <tr>scolded</tr>. <i>Nasabun (nasabunan) ku. Ikaw man gud,</i> I got a good <tr>scolding</tr> because of you. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. onto which soap has been rubbed.

<p><form>sábung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cockfight</tr>, usually without gaffs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; a]</itype> <number>1</number> fight cocks. <i>Sabúngan ku nang ímung ugis sa ákung pula,</i> I will try out my red cock on your white one. <number>2</number> <tr>pair off</tr> people, usually in a love match. <form>pa-a</form> let [subject] have a <tr>light</tr> from a burning cigarette. <i>Pasabúnga ku bi,</i> Let me have a light. <form>-íru, maN-r-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> one who fights cocks.

<p><form>sab-ung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>hang</tr> s.t. by passing it around s.t. else. <i>Kasab-úngan nang ímung simud ug baskit,</i> You're <tr>pouting</tr>. (Lit. A basket could be hung from your mouth.) <i>Isab-ung lang nang sista sa halígi,</i> Just hang the guitar over the post. <number>2</number> <tr>decorate</tr> with a pendant medal hung from a ribbon. <form>-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hook</tr> or <tr>nail</tr> from which things are hung.

<p><form>saburnu</form> <xr>= <sc>SUBURNU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sabut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>understand</tr>. <i>Walà ka makasabut kay dílì man ka musabut,</i> You didn't understand because you don't want to understand. <i>Ayaw ug sabta ug láin ug dì ku muadtu sa inyu,</i> Don't take it wrong if I do not go to your place. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> <tr>sense</tr>, be vaguely <tr>aware</tr> of s.t. <i>Midágan ang irù kay nakasabut nga iháwun siya,</i> The dog ran away because he sensed that he would be slaughtered. <i>Hingsabtan ming Máma nga manan-aw mig sini,</i> Mama became aware that we were planning to go to the movies. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>obey</tr>, do what one was told to do. <i>Bísag sáun nímug ingun dì giyud nà siya musabut,</i> No matter how much you tell him, he won't obey. <pos>n</pos> one's way of understanding. <i>Sa ákung sabut, dì na tu mubálik,</i> As I understand it, he won't come back. <ix>interjection</ix> <number>1</number> I don't know (giving a curt tone). <i>&lsquo;Kahibáwu kag háin si Tatay?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Sabut,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Do you know where Father is?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Nope.&rsquo; <i>Sabút uruy níya ug mukúyug ba siya,</i> I don't know about him, if he is going. <number>2</number> understand? (short for <ix>nakasabut ka?</ix>) <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C; ab4]</itype> make, come to an <tr>agreement</tr> with s.o. <i>Magsábut tag unsáun nátù pagbáyad sa útang,</i> Let's <tr>agree</tr> on how to pay the debt. <i>Nagkasábut na ba mu si Pidru báhin sa pagbáhin sa yútà?</i> Have you come to an <tr>agreement</tr> with Pedro about how the land is to be divided? <i>Ikay makigsábut ni Binut kay kamuy amígu,</i> You make the agreement with Benot because you two are friends. <i>Unsay inyung gikasabútan?</i> What agreement did you make? <i>Lisud kang igkasábut kay dì ka mutúman,</i> It's impossible to have an agreement with you because you don't stick to your promises. <number>2</number> <itype>[C; abc3]</itype> talk s.t over to reach s.t. mutually agreeable. <i>Magsábut lang unyà ta ug pilay bayranan,</i> We'll come to an agreement later on <pb n=839>the price. <i>Mahímù pang sabútun ang inyung gikasungían,</i> You can still talk your quarrel over. <i>Sabúti siya ug musugut ba,</i> Have a talk with him to see if he is amenable. <i>Dì siya ikasábut kay dì mamínaw ug rasun,</i> You can't <tr>come to terms</tr> with him because he doesn't listen to reason. <number>3</number> <itype>[C; a12]</itype> <tr>conspire</tr>, be in <tr>cahoots</tr>, make special arrangements with s.o. <i>Nagsábut ning duha kay paríhu ug pamasángil,</i> The two are in cahoots because they have the same alibi. <i>Sabútun nákù ang gwardiya arun mu paagíun,</i> I will make arrangements with the guard so that you will be allowed to pass. <number>4</number> <itype>[C13]</itype> <tr>hit it off</tr>. <i>Nagkasábut dáyun ning duha kay paríhu sila ug sabaw,</i> The two hit it off nicely because they are both of the same ilk. <pos>n</pos> <tr>agreement</tr> reached. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> <tr>show</tr>, give indications of doing s.t. <i>Dì ka mupasabut nga nangísug ka,</i> Don't show that you are angry. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> <tr>explain</tr> to make s.o. understand s.t. <i>Pasabta ku ngánung kining sumáhay miguwà,</i> Explain to me why this sum appeared. <i>Unsa may ímung ipasabut ánà?</i> What do you mean by that? <form>-in-(&larr;), sinabtanay, sinabtánay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C3; c3]</itype> understand each other's viewpoint. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> person with whom one has an agreement. <form>ka-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>agreement</tr>, <tr>pact</tr>. <i>Ang kasabútan báhin sa nigusyu nakahátag ug dakung pabur sa Pilipínas,</i> The trade agreement gave the Philippines a big advantage. <form>-l-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mind</tr>, <tr>intellect</tr>. <i>Háit ug salabútan si Míri kay húmuk siya makasabut,</i> Mary has a keen mind because she easily understands. <form>paN-</form> <xr>= <sc>SABUT</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <form>salabtunun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>meaningful</tr>, giving hidden meaning. <i>Mau tuy ímung nadungug apan sabtunun (salabtunun) tu kaáyu,</i> That's what you heard but it was full of hidden meaning. <form>masinabtánun, masinabútun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>considerate</tr>, <tr>understanding</tr>.

<p><form>sabutáhi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>sabotage</tr>. <i>Sabutahíun nátù ang baskit arun mudaug ang pusta ni Pidru,</i> Let's sabotage the game so that Pedro will win his bet. <pos>n</pos> <tr>sabotage</tr>.

<p><form>sabúwak</form> <xr>= <sc>SABÚLAK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sábuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>pass by</tr> close to a place. <i>Misábuy lang mi sa Sikihur padúlung sa Dumagíti,</i> We just went by Siquijor on the way to Dumaguete. <form>sabuysábuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> pass back and forth. <i>Nagsabuysábuy lang ang ulitáwu sa íla kay naúlawng mamisíta,</i> The young man just walked back and forth in front of the house because he was too shy to go in.

<p><form>sab-uy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> throw hot liquid at s.o. <i>Sab-úyig ínit túbig nang nanghangad,</i> Throw hot water at the peeping tom under the house.

<p><form>sabwag</form> (from <ix>bulag</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN2; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>throw</tr> liquid or s.t. in grains. <i>Kinsay nagsabwag nímu ug túbig?</i> Who threw water on you? <i>Sabwági ug balas ang dáub kay misiláub,</i> Throw sand on the fire because it flared up. <i>Isabwag ang sinsilyu sa mga bátà,</i> Throw the coins out to the children. <number>1a</number> <tr>supply</tr> in abundance. <i>Dílì makadaug ang pulitikung way kwartang isabwag,</i> The politician who doesn't have money to spread out can't win. <number>1b</number> <tr>emit</tr>, send forth s.t. in extensive or intensive degree (literary). <i>Búlan nga nagsabwag sa íyang kasílaw,</i> The moon that was sending forth its rays. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; c6]</itype> <tr>spread news</tr>, make s.t. known to many. <i>Isabwag ang balità nga nakadaug kita sa burúka,</i> Spread the news that we have won the court case. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>spread</tr>. <i>Misabwag sa íyang láwas ang hanggà,</i> The smallpox spread all over her body. <form>-ay</form> <pos>n</pos> a version of <tr>jackstones</tr> where the player throws a number of stones on the ground and flips them against each other. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> play <ix>sabwagay</ix>.

<p><form>sabyag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>throw</tr> water, sand. <i>Akuy misabyag ug túbig sa káyu,</i> I threw water on the fire. <i>Kinsa man tung nagsabyag ug balas sa ákung nawung?</i> Who was it that threw sand in my face? <number>2</number> <itype>[A13B; c6]</itype> <tr>spread</tr>, cause to spread. <i>Isabyag ang balità,</i> Spread the news. <i>Misabyag ang hanggà sa íyang kalawásan,</i> The chicken pox spread over his body.

<p><form>sabyu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>wise</tr> and deeply <tr>experienced</tr>, often with prophetic abilities. <i>Ang sabyung tigúlang nakatagnà sa gúbat,</i> The wise old man foretold the Second World War. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become wise.

<p><form>sabyuk</form> <xr>= <sc>SABLUK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sad</form> <xr>= <sc>USAB</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sád</form> <xr>= <sc>SÁLAD<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sad-ang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> in cockfighting, when a larger cock fights a smaller one, a manner of attaching the gaff on the larger one to offset his advantage: the gaff is placed higher than usual and the ring holding the gaff is not tied around the cock's hind toe. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> attach the gaff in this way.

<p><form>sad-ang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>hook</tr>, <tr>snag</tr> s.t. s.w. <i>Kinsay misad-ang sa sudlay sa ákung úlu?</i> Who <tr>stuck</tr> the comb on my head? <i>Gamay nga sanga ang íyang gisad-ángan sa kawit,</i> He <tr>hooked</tr> the palm toddy container over a small branch.

<p><form>sad-ay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>rest</tr> s.t. over s.t. else. <i>Nagsad-ay siya sa íyang síku sa kurdísu,</i> He rested his elbows on the window sill. <i>Hisad-ayan <pb n=840>sa ákung kamut ang íyang páa,</i> I accidentally rested my hand on her thigh.

<p><form>sadiyà</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lively</tr> and <tr>gay</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a2b6]</itype> be, become, make lively, <tr>merry</tr>. <i>Magsadiyà ta kay midaug ang átung kandidátu,</i> Let's be merry because our candidate won. <i>Sa nagkahubug sila nagkasadiyà pud,</i> The drunker they got the gayer they became. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>liveliness</tr>, state of being merry. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> gay, lively.

<p><form>sadlayin</form> <xr>= <sc>SAYID LAYIN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sadsad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>dance</tr>, with the feet (rather than with the hands or some other part of the body). <i>Hala! Panadsad mung tanan,</i> All right! Everybody dance! <pos>n</pos> <tr>dancing</tr>. <i>Dúgayng wà makatilawg sadsad,</i> Hadn't danced for a long time.

<p><form>sadsarun</form> <xr>= <sc>SITSARUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sadtu</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>NIADTU</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>KADTU</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>KANIADTU</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p><form>saduk</form> <xr>= <sc>SARUK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sad-ung<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SAB-UNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>*sad-ung<sub>2</sub></form> <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> close <tr>stitches</tr> for sewing buttonholes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab]</itype> sew a buttonhole stitch. <i>Akuy nagsinad-ung sa sidsid,</i> I sewed the hem with buttonhole stitches. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>trimmed</tr> with lace.

<p><form>sadyap</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. twill <tr>weave</tr> of cloth done in the same way as <ix>amákan</ix> (cf. <ix>amákan</ix>). <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <tr>weave</tr> s.t. in this way.

<p><form>s&amacracu;g</form> <xr>= <sc>SÁLAG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ságà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>portion</tr> or <tr>group</tr> from a larger quantity, esp. of things for sale. <i>Tagpíla ang ságà sa kík?</i> How much is the cake per portion? <number>2</number> portion of things strung. <i>Usa ka ságang isdà,</i> A <tr>string</tr> of fish. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>apportion</tr> things. <i>Akuy muságà sa dakung isdà,</i> I'll <tr>divide</tr> the big fish into several portions. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>string</tr> things into groups, usually for sale.

<p><form>sagábal</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>hindering</tr>, <tr>restricting</tr> movement, esp. in the achievement of s.t. <i>Sagábal kaáyu sa átung panghunàhunà nga adúnay daghang atimanun,</i> It's difficult to think straight when there are too many details to attend to. <pos>n</pos> <tr>hindrance</tr>, s.t. that prevents achievement. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> constitute a <tr>hindrance</tr>. <i>Ang íyang pagkaiks kumbik nagsagábal sa íyang pangimplíyu,</i> His record was an <tr>obstacle</tr> to his getting a job. <i>Sagabálan ka bag dala áning malíta?</i> Will it be a <tr>burden</tr> for you to bring this suitcase? <number>2</number> <itype>[B46; b6]</itype> be <tr>unwieldy</tr>. <i>Musagábal gawíun ang prakul ug tas-un ang pul-an,</i> The hatchet will be unwieldy if the handle is made too long.

<p><form>sagábay</form> (from <ix>gábay</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>friend</tr>, <tr>comrade</tr> with whom one has common interests and sympathies. <i>Adúnay mga prupisur nga sagábay sa kumunista,</i> There are professors who are communist <tr>sympathizers</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B256C; a12]</itype> be <tr>friends</tr> with, <tr>stick together</tr> as friends. <i>Musagábay kahà ka nákù ug tinuntuhan ku?</i> Would you <tr>stick by</tr> me if s.o. tries to do s.t. to me?

<p><form>ságad<sub>1</sub></form> <number>1</number> <formx>&mdash; sa</formx> <tr>most</tr>, <tr>all</tr>. <i>Ságad sa muanhi taganurti,</i> Most of those that come here are from the North. <i>Ságad sa mga táwu dinhi,</i> Most of the people here. <i>Ang ságad gibug-atun,</i> The usual weight. <number>2</number> <ix>with verbs:</ix> <tr>usually</tr>. <i>Sàgad mulikì ang básu ug huwarag ínit túbig,</i> Glasses usually crack if hot water is poured into them. <number>3</number> <tr>common</tr>, <tr>usual</tr> thing. <i>Ang ságad nímung buhátun mau ang pagtug-an nímu sa inyung dakùdàkù,</i> The usual thing for you to do is for you to report (it) to your immediate superior. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be, become usual, <tr>commonplace</tr>. <i>Nagságad na ang pangáwat diri sa ámù,</i> Stealing is <tr>rampant</tr> in our place. <form>kasagáran</form> <xr>= <sc>SÁGAD</sc>, <i>1, 2, 3.</i></xr> <number>4</number> <tr>ordinary</tr>. <i>Ispisiyal ni, dílì ingun sa ubang kasagáran nga bulpin,</i> This is special, not like other ordinary ball point pen.

<p><form>*ságad<sub>2</sub> sagdi</form> short for <xr><sc>PASAGDI</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PA-(&rarr;)</sc>, <i>2a.</i></xr> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. without adequate preparation or forethought. <i>Mipaságad ka lag tubag bisag wà masáyud,</i> You just went and gave any old answer, even though you didn't know. <i>Ngánung magpaságad (magpasagad) ka man ug yabu ug túbig sa bintánà?</i> Why do you throw water <tr>carelessly</tr> out of the window? <i>Pasagári lang ug pusil. Makaigù tingáli kag usa,</i> Just shoot at <tr>random</tr>. You might hit one. <form>pa-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>neglect</tr>, fail to give s.t. its proper attention. <i>Tibíhun ka ug magpasagad ka sa láwas,</i> You'll <corr sic=contact>contract</corr> T.B. if you neglect your health. <i>Nahagbung siya kay nagpasagad lang sa pagtuun,</i> He flunked because he neglected his studies. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b(1)]</itype> <tr>ignore</tr>, not heed, <tr>disregard</tr>. <i>Makapasagad ka sa íyang mga abúsu?</i> Could you ignore his abuses? <number>2a</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> <tr>let be</tr>, don't do anything to s.t. <i>Pasagdiku. Lakaw lag ímu,</i> Let me be. Go by yourself. <i>Sagdi (pasagdi, pasagdahi) lang,</i> <tr>Never mind</tr>, <tr>forget it</tr>. <i>2b</i> <itype>[b8]</itype> be <tr>disregarded</tr>. <i>Ang kalagmítan nga ang mamumúnù nía pa sa syudad dílì kapasagdan,</i> The likelihood that the killer is still in the city cannot be disregarded. <form>pinasagdan</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>neglected</tr>. mapinasagdánun, mapinasagárun a neglectful. <number>3</number> <itype>[A]</itype> live, stay unconcerned or resignedly (come what may). <i>Magpasagad lang ku dinhi kay wà na kuy mga paryinti,</i> I'll stay here to rot for I have no more family.

<p><form>sagadsad</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>shuffling</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a2b6]</itype> walk <pb n=841>with shuffling steps. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shuffling</tr> noise. <i>Ang sinagadsad sa íyang sinílas,</i> The shuffling of his slippers.

<p><form>sagahid<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> drag one's legs in moving from one place to another, usually because of an injury or defect. <i>Magsagahid nang íyang mga tiil kay gipulyu man siya,</i> She drags her feet when she walks because she is a polio victim. <i>Ayaw sagahira (isagahid) ang ímung sapátus arun dì magubà ug dalì,</i> Don't drag your feet when you walk or your shoes will wear out right away.

<p><form>sagahid<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SAGHID</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sagákang</form> <xr>= <sc>SAGÁKAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sagákay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>carry</tr> or <tr>support</tr> s.o. with both arms under him. <i>Amahan nga misagákay sa patayng láwas sa bátà,</i> A father carrying his child's dead body in his arms.

<p><form>sagalak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S46; c1]</itype> for liquid to flow with a noisy bubbling or slurping sound. <i>Nagsagalak ang túbig sa tubud,</i> The water in the spring is flowing with a bubbling sound. <i>Ayaw sagaláka (isagálak) paghígup ang sabaw,</i> Don't sip your soup noisily.

<p><form>sagalsal</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>rough</tr> with small bumps. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c6]</itype> be, become rough. <i>Nawung nga nagsagalsal sa bugas,</i> A face dotted with pimples. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> a rough, bumpy sort. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become rough. <i>Nasagalsalun ang karsáda pag-ulan,</i> The road became rough when it rained.

<p><form>sagang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>fend off</tr>, <tr>ward off</tr> or <tr>block</tr> a thrust or blow. <i>Wà siya makasagang (makapanagang) sa ákung hampak,</i> He wasn't able to ward off my blows. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>support</tr>, keep weight up. <i>Kining parúlus mauy musagang sa mga busaug,</i> This crossbeam is what supports the joists. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>protection</tr>. <i>Tambal nga muhátag sab ug talagsaung sagang sa mga sakit sa pánit,</i> Medicine that gives unusual protection against skin diseases. <number>2</number> the action of fending off a blow. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>answer</tr>, <tr>respond</tr> to a query. <i>Wà ku makapanagang sa kinalisdang tuksù sa banggà,</i> I was not able to answer the hardest question in the contest. <pos>n</pos> s.t. magical (charm, medicinal concoction, prayer) worn on the body as a defense against evil spirits or influences. <form>sagangságang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>ward off</tr> hunger, difficulty temporarily. <i>Makasagangságang giyud ning lagutmun sa kagútum,</i> We can depend on root crops for food during the lean months.[+]

<p><form>sag-ang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>thin</tr> and <tr>emaciated</tr>. <i>Sag-ang siya kaáyu human masakit,</i> He was very thin after his sickness. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> become thin and emaciated.

<p><form>sagangat</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>barb</tr> of a hook, spear, arrow, harpoon. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> hit with a spear having several tines. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> spear with several tines for fishing. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB6; a1]</itype> <tr>hook</tr> s.t. on a barb, be <tr>hooked</tr>. <i>Misagángat (nasagángat) ang angkla sa dakung batu,</i> The anchor got hooked on a big stone. <i>Sagangáta ang isdà,</i> <tr>Spear</tr> the fish. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2SP; a12]</itype> make, make into a spear with several tines.

<p><form>sagangsang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be <tr>rough</tr> with sharp projecting edges. <i>Nagsagangsang ang íyang nawung sa buti,</i> His face is rough with smallpox. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>rough</tr>, not smooth. <i>Sagangsangun ang ngilit sa dáhun sa magay,</i> The edge of a maguey leaf is sharp and thorny.

<p><form>sagansal</form> <xr>= <sc>SAGALSAL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ságap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123S; a3b2]</itype> <number>1</number> catch a whiff by accident. <i>Nakasagap kug báhù sa patayng ilagà,</i> I got a whiff of the dead rat. 1a catch <form>some</form> gossip. <i>Dalì siyang makasagap ug tábì,</i> She is good at sniffing out gossip. <number>2</number> come upon suddenly, become aware of the existence of s.t. <i>Nasagapan sa mga sundálu ang tinabúnang masinggan,</i> The soldiers came upon the hidden machine gun nest. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <form>search</form> for s.t., covering an area. <i>Giságap níla ang kabukíran sa pagpangítà sa púga,</i> They covered the mountains looking for the fugitive.

<p><form>sagapsap<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> fibrous and dry to chew. <i>Sagapsap kan-un ang lútung way sabaw,</i> Rice with no soup is very dry to try to eat. <i>Giluwà na nákù ang tubu kay sagapsap na, Wà nay dugà,</i> I spit the sugarcane out because it was all pulp and didn't have any more juice. <number>2</number> rough to the touch. <i>Sagapsap na siyag nawung kay napunù sa bugas,</i> His face is rough because of the pimples. <pos>n</pos> sound made by a pig eating. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become pulpy or dry to chew. <i>Masagapsap ang humay ug dì baghásan,</i> Rice is hard to eat if it isn't well-polished. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for a surface to be rough to the touch. <number>3</number> <itype>[B1; a12]</itype> make the noise of a pig eating.

<p><form>sagapsap<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish.

<p><form>sagarat, sagárat</form> <xr>= <sc>LAGARAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sagàsà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make the hollow cracking sound of s.t. splitting. <i>Misagàsà ang sag-ub nga natumba sa batu,</i> The bamboo container went crack when it fell on the stones.

<p><form>sagàsà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small tree of second growth forest, commonly used as firewood. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> wood resembling <ix>sagàsà</ix> which has grains that do not run straight and parallel, such that splitting it lengthwise is difficult.

<p><form>sagatà</form> <xr>= <sc>SUGATÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sagay</form> <pos>a</pos> matured coconuts at the stage when one can hear the water but the husk is still green. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B5]</itype> reach the mature, but not brown, stage. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> gather mature coconuts.

<pb n=842>

<p><form>ságay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2456]</itype> for s.t. highly fragile to <tr>break</tr> into pieces. <i>Miságay ang bangà nga natumba,</i> The earthen jar broke to pieces when it toppled over.

<p><form>sagáyad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; c1]</itype> <tr>drag</tr>, <tr>trail</tr> behind. <i>Nagsagayad ang íkug sa búda,</i> The train of her gown was trailing behind her.

<p><form>sagaysay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB3(1); c1]</itype> make stones <tr>skip</tr> over the surface of the water, for a stone to do so. <i>Dílì makasagaysay ang batu nga língin,</i> A round stone can't skip over the surface of the water. <pos>n</pos> action of skipping a stone over the surface of the water.

<p><form>sagbat</form> <xr>= <sc>SAKBAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sagbay</form> <xr>= <sc>SABLAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sagbuk</form> <xr>= <sc>SABLUK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sagbut</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>weeds</tr> or <tr>grasses</tr>: any herbaceous <tr>plants</tr> growing wild. <form>&mdash; sa dágat</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>seaweeds</tr>. <number>1a</number> leafy <tr>vegetables</tr> (humorous). <i>Sígi lang tang mangáun niínig sagbut,</i> We always have to eat weeds. <number>2</number> <tr>trash</tr>, <tr>rubbish</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> put rubbish s.w. <i>Kinsa may nagsagbut diri sa tugkaran?</i> Who strewed rubbish all over the yard? <form>ka-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> place where there are weeds. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> full of weeds, trash. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> get to be full of weeds or trash.

<p><form>saghid</form> <pos>v</pos> [A; b4(1); c6P] <tr>brush</tr>, come into light contact. <i>Napásù ku kay nasaghiran sa kamut ku ang ínit nga plansa,</i> I burned myself when I <tr>touched</tr> the hot iron. <i>Ayawg isaghid (ipasaghid) ang alambri sa atup,</i> Don't let the wire come into contact with the roof.

<p><form>ságib<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> go about a place covering it thoroughly. <i>Ang mga mananagat miságib sa dágat pagpangítà sa nalumus,</i> The fishermen <tr>combed</tr> the sea searching for the drowned man. <i>Sagíbun nátug panaygun ang tanang tindáhan,</i> Let's carol at every store.

<p><form>ságib<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> transport firewood by letting it float from the place it was gathered to its destination. <pos>n</pos> this method of transporting firewood. <form>mag-r-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> one who gathers firewood and transports it this way.

<p><form>sagíbu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>scythe</tr> down weeds and small bushes. <i>Ákung sagibúhun ang mga tanum nga wà kinahanglana,</i> I'll cut down the useless plants. <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to cut down weeds. <form>sagibunhun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>thicket</tr> of weeds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a4]</itype> get <tr>overgrown</tr> with weeds. <i>Nagkasagibunhun ang tugkaran nga way bungaybúngay,</i> The yard hasn't been weeded in ages and is getting overgrown. <i>Gisagibunhun na ang plása,</i> The plaza is all overgrown.

<p><form>sagidsid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b4(1)]</itype> move too close to the edge of a pathway or passageway. <i>Nagpasagidsid pagpadágan ang awtu mau nga nasagidsiran usab ang táwu nga dihà sa daplin nagtindug,</i> The car was too close to the edge of the road, so the man standing by the roadside was sideswiped. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> get close to the edge of a pathway. <i>Nagpasagidsid kus kabalayan nga galakaw kay gaulan man,</i> I walked close by the houses because it was raining.

<p><form>sag-ilay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c6]</itype> carry on or sling s.t. over the shoulder. <i>Ang mananagat nagsag-ilay sa bugsay paúlì sa íla,</i> The fisherman was carrying his paddle over his shoulder as he walked home. <i>Isag-ilay ang bág arun sayun dad-un,</i> Sling the bag over your shoulder so that it will be easy to carry.

<p><form>sagílit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S]</itype> move forward swiftly over the water. <i>Musagílit ang sakayan basta kusug ang hángin,</i> The boat will move swiftly if the wind is strong.

<p><form>ságing</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>banana</tr> tree, fruit. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> put bananas in s.t. <i>Sagingan ba nátù ang linat-an?</i> Shall we put bananas in the stew? <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sweet</tr> made from mashed, ripe tungdan bananas mixed with rice flour, wrapped in young coconut leaves and boiled. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, have <ix>sinaging</ix>. <form>sagingsaging</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ornamental tuberous plant, the general name for members of the genus <bio>Canna</bio>.

<p><form>sagiput</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> <tr>get away</tr>, moving through s.t. with great agility. <i>Dalì rang nakasagiput ang mangunguut sa daghang mga táwu,</i> The pickpocket easily eluded capture by running through the crowd.

<p><form>sagip-ut</form> <xr>= <sc>HAGIP-UT</sc>, <i>a1, v1.</i></xr> <xr>see <sc>GIP-UT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sagírit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> <tr>speed away</tr> from s.t., <tr>whizz</tr> by} s.t. <i>Nagsagírit (nagsagirit) siyang nagsakay sa mutur, walà manumbáling ug hiabugan mi,</i> He sped by on his motorcycle not caring that he was getting dust all over us.

<p><form>sagísag</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> name taken by a person as a <tr>pen name</tr>, <tr>stage name</tr>, or given as a representation of his character. <i>Hitlir ang sagísag ni Sikilgrúbir,</i> The world knew Schicklegruber as Hitler. <number>2</number> object used as a <tr>symbol</tr>. <i>Pati ang sagísag sa kalínaw,</i> The dove is a symbol of peace.

<p><form>sagisi</form> <xr>= <sc>BIL-IS</sc>.</xr> <form>sagisihun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>fish</tr>, a type of <ix>lagaw</ix>.

<p><form>sagitsit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> speed on the surface of water or <tr>skip</tr> over the surface. <i>Lisud ig-un ang tambasákan ug musagitsit sa túbig,</i> It is hard to hit the mudskipper when it <tr>races</tr> over the surface of the water. <i>Spidbut nga nagsagitsit sa túbig,</i> Speedboat <tr>rushing</tr> over the water. <form>&mdash; gu</form> words uttered to start a race. <i>Únu, dus, sagitsit, gu,</i> Get ready, get set, go!

<pb n=843>

<p><form>sagiwsiw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for blood to flow profusely. <i>Misagiwsiw ang dugù sa gisubáan,</i> Blood flowed profusely from the woman that had a hemorrhage.

<p><form>sagka</form> <xr>= <sc>SAKA</sc>, in all meanings and with all affixes except <ix>-da</ix>.</xr>

<p><form>sagmukù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456; b3]</itype> be in <tr>low spirits</tr>. <i>Nagsamukù siya, may gikagul-an tingáli,</i> She is in low spirits. S.t. must be bothering her.

<p><form>sagmúkuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; c1]</itype> be <tr>crestfallen</tr>, have a <tr>downhearted</tr> look. <i>Nagsagmúkuy ang íyang nawung kay wà hatági sa gipangáyù,</i> She had a crestfallen look because she wasn't given what she had asked for. <form>hi-/ha-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> have a <tr>crestfallen</tr>, <tr>downhearted</tr> look. <i>Nahasigmúkuy si Tátay sa pagkahibalu nga nahagbung ku sa bár,</i> Father became silent in <tr>disappointment</tr> when he learned I failed the bar exam.

<p><form>sagmun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> cloth or clothes used to wrap a baby. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a]</itype> wrap a baby up in s.t. <i>Sagmúni ang bátà kay tugnaw,</i> Wrap up the baby because it's cold.

<p><form>sagmun<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SALÚMUN</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>SÁLUM</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sagmuyù</form> (from <ix>puyù</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B156]</itype> be, become <tr>pensive</tr> and <tr>quiet</tr>. <i>Nagsagmuyù siya sa paghinunàhúnà sa nawálang kwarta,</i> She was pensive and silent thinking about the money that had disappeared. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> be, become <tr>silent</tr> and <tr>dejected</tr> as if in disappointment, defeat, embarrassment. <i>Nasagmuyù ang ulitáwung gibalibáran,</i> The young man was dejected when she turned him down. <form>hi-/ha-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be <tr>struck dumb</tr> with surprise. <i>Nahisagmuyù ang amahan pagkabatì sa nutisya,</i> The father became <tr>speechless</tr> upon hearing the news. <form>kahi-</form> <pos>n</pos> silent, speechless surprise.

<p><form>sagnunut</form> <xr>see <sc>NUNUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sagpà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> <tr>slap</tr>, strike the face with the open palm. <form>mu rag gi- ug wala</form> deeply <tr>insulted</tr> (as if slapped in the face with the left hand). <i>Mitalikud si Pidru mu rag gisagpag wala kay gigahutan ni Ansay,</i> Pedro turned away very much embarrassed because Ansay shouted at him. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>slap</tr> in the face. <number>2</number> <tr>insult</tr>. <i>Sagpà sa ákung pagkatáwu ang íyang gipamúlung,</i> What he said was an insult to my honor. <form>&mdash; bahà</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. freshwater <tr>shrimp</tr> about 1&frac12;&Prime; long which has one claw broader than its body. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a1]</itype> for s.t. to <tr>boomerang</tr> on one such that he becomes the very thing that he scorns. <i>Kusug kaáyung manaway nang bayhána kaniadtu sa mga laláking turútuy, apan gipanagpà kay inánu giyud hinúun ang nabána,</i> That woman used to laugh at short men, but it boomeranged on her because she got a midget for a husband.

<p><form>sagpang</form> <xr>= <sc>SIKUHAN</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>SÍKU<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sagpù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> <number>1</number> catch birds in the nest by putting the cupped hands over the top. <number>2</number> touch parts of s.o.'s body with the whole hand, esp. private and other delicate parts. <i>Ayawg apil ug dúlà sa mga láki kay hingsagpuan ímung tútuy,</i> Don't join in the boys' games because s.o. might touch your breasts. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> go hunting for birds to catch them in their nests.

<p><form>*sagráda</form> <form>&mdash; iskritúra</form> <pos>n</pos> the Holy Scriptures. <form>&mdash; Pamilya</form> <pos>n</pos> The Holy Family.

<p><form>sagrádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sacred</tr>. <i>Sagrádu kaáyu ning dapíta kay dinhi mahúgas ang kasundalúhan,</i> This place is very sacred because here the soldiers were annihilated. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125; b6]</itype> be, become, consider s.t. sacred. <i>Nasagrádu álang sa mga bitiránu ang singgit nga Batáan,</i> The cry &lsquo;Bataan&rsquo; has become sacred to the veterans. <form>&mdash; Kurasun di Hisus</form> <pos>n</pos> The Sacred Heart of Jesus.

<p><form>sagu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>starch</tr> obtained from palm trunks, esp. the sago palm (<ix>lumbiya</ix>) and the buri palm (<ix>buli</ix>).

<p><form>sagu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> dead man's saliva.

<p><form>sag-&umacracu;</form> <xr>= <sc>SAG-ÚLU</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ÚLU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sag&umacrgra;</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> produce a sudden but prolonged groaning sound. <i>Misag&umacrgra; siya dihang naigù sa kutukutu,</i> He let out a <tr>groan</tr> when he received a blow in the solar plexus. <i>Pagdusù níya sa tukun dihà sa túbig misag&umacrgra; kini,</i> The water produced a rushing sound when he thrust a pole into it.

<p><form>sag-ub</form> <pos>n</pos> a bamboo 6&ndash;7&prime; long with the nodes removed except at the bottom, used to fetch liquids. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> haul liquid in this container. <i>Sag-úbun ta lang ning tubà,</i> Let's haul this palm toddy in a bamboo tube container. <i>Sag-úban tikag túbig,</i> I'll fetch you some water. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> make into such a container. <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> one who carries water.

<p><form>sagubang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> face responsibilities, difficulties and <tr>endure</tr> them. <i>Akuy musagubang sa ímung galastúhan,</i> I will take care of your expenses. <i>Nagsagubang tag daghang suliran,</i> We are <tr>faced</tr> with many difficulties. <i>Sagubangun ku ang kamíngaw,</i> I will endure the loneliness.

<p><form>sagud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> take over the responsibilities for the expenses or care of s.t. <i>Akuy nagsagud sa mga galastúhan sa balay,</i> I'm <tr>shouldering</tr> the household expenses. <i>Sagura ang ílu,</i> Take care of the orphans. <number>2</number> <tr>take the blame</tr>. <i>Ang nakasalà mauy musagud sa tanang pagbásul,</i> The culprit must take all the blame.

<p><form>ságud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> for a rope or string to be <pb n=844>worn out by friction. <i>Naságud na ang ákung pasul,</i> My fishline is all worn out.

<p><form>sagudsud</form> <pos>n</pos> noisy sound of shuffling feet. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> walk with a shuffling sound. <i>Ayawg isagudsud ang sapátus kay dalì mahílis,</i> Don't drag your shoes when you walk or they'll wear out fast.

<p><form>saguksuk</form> <pos>n</pos> :triggerfish which grow the size of a man's hand and which have a long projecting dorsal spine.

<p><form>sagúkum</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> take s.o. in the arms and :embrace him tightly. <i>Ákung gisagúkum ang bátang naghilak,</i> I took the child that was crying and embraced him. <number>2</number> assume :responsibility for. <i>Ang uyuan mauy misagúkum sa mga ílu,</i> The uncle took on the responsibility of taking care of the orphans. <number>3</number> <tr>incorporate</tr> into. <i>Mga katungud nga gisagúkum sa Batakang Baláud,</i> Rights <tr>incorporated</tr> into the Constitution. <number>4</number> <tr>harbor</tr> feelings within oneself (literary). <i>Kasilù nga gisagúkum sa kinahiladman,</i> The disappointments he harbored deep within him.

<p><form>sagukuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>leave</tr> a group or gathering surreptitiously. <i>Musagukuy ta arun dì ta hitawgan ug pakanta,</i> Let's <tr>sneak</tr> out of here so we won't be called on to sing.

<p><form>ságul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; ab2]</itype> <tr>mix</tr> s.t. with s.t. else, be <tr>mixed</tr>. <i>Kinsay nagságul ug asin áring asúkar?</i> Who mixed the salt and the sugar together? <i>Sagúlun ta ning sibin-ap ug ram,</i> Let's mix seven-up and rum together. <i>Bit-*suylas ang iságul sa linat-ang bábuy,</i> Put beans in the pork stew. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC]</itype> go, mix with a group. <i>Nagságul ang hayiskul ug tagakálids sa bayli,</i> The high school and college students were <tr>together</tr> in the dance. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> thing added or mixed in. <i>May ságul nga ram ang kúk,</i> The coke has rum <tr>added</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>mixed</tr>, <tr>interspersed</tr> with. <i>Gibatbátan ku níya sa nahitabù ságul bakhù,</i> She told me what happened interspersed with sobs. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>SÁGUL</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr> <number>2</number> fresh coconut palm <tr>toddy</tr> which has old toddy mixed into it. <i>Ang tubà nga sagul daling makahubug,</i> Fresh coconut palm toddy mixed with old toddy makes you drunk quick. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> things mixed or used in mixing. <form>saksak -in-</form> a <tr>mixture</tr> of all different things. <i>Ang ílang sud-an saksak sinágul nga karni: may bábuy, báka, kanding ug irù pa,</i> The dish was a mixture of various kinds of meat: there was pork, beef, and dog's meat as well. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B145]</itype> be a varied mixture of all kinds. <i>Nagsaksak sinágul ang íyang sinultihan&mdash;Tinagawug, Binisayà, Ininglis,</i> Her speech is a <tr>hodgepodge</tr> of English, Tagalog, and Visayan. <form>sagulságul</form> <tr>varied</tr> in profusion. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> be <tr>varied</tr> and <tr>profuse</tr>. <i>Sagulságul ang mga baligyà sa Tabuan,</i> There's all different things for sale in the market. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> a different one each time. <i>Kaságul lang nang ímung pamalíbad,</i> You have no end of excuses. (You make a new one each time.) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> come up with a different one each time.

<p><form>sag-úlu</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ÚLU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sagumáyun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. freshwater <tr>fish</tr> with a flat head, the size of a man's finger.

<p><form>sagum-ut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>unsmiling</tr>. <i>Sagum-ut ug nawung ang mga pildíru,</i> Losers in gambling have unsmiling faces. <number>2</number> for the hair to be <tr>disheveled</tr>, <tr>uncombed</tr>. <i>Panudlay kay sagum-ut kaáyu ang ímung buhuk,</i> Comb your hair because it's all disheveled. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> get an unsmiling expression. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> get disheveled. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> facial expression depicting a feeling of unhappiness.

<p><form>sagungsung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> speak through the nose. <i>Magsagungsung ang átung sinultihan basta sip-unun ta,</i> You speak through the nose if you have a cold.

<p><form>sagúngut</form> (from <ix>úngut</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B246]</itype> <tr>pierce</tr> into s.t. and stick fast. <i>Misagúngut ang tagà sa hásang,</i> The hook got stuck in the gills.

<p><form>sagunsun</form> (from <ix>sunsun</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> do s.t. in rapid succession or several times in a row. <i>Misagunsun siyag ubu,</i> He coughed <tr>repeatedly</tr>. <i>Ug makasagunsun kag igù sa buls-ay,</i> If you can hit the bulls-eye <tr>repeatedly</tr>. <pos><corr sic="n">a</corr></pos> done repeatedly. <i>Sagunsun ang íyang panganak,</i> She had babies in rapid succession.

<p><form>sagunting</form> <xr>= <sc>SALAGUNTING</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>saguntù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>hit</tr> s.t. and <tr>jounce</tr>. <i>Misaguntù ang dyíp sa batsi,</i> The jeep <tr>bounced</tr> when it hit the hole in the road. <number>2</number> <tr>grunt</tr>, esp. when hit in the pit of stomach. <i>Misaguntù ang pubring naigus kutukutu,</i> The poor fellow <tr>groaned</tr> when he was hit in the pit of the stomach.

<p><form>sagup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>adopt</tr> or take s.o. under one's care. <i>Ug sagupun ta ka, dad-un mu ang ákung apilyídu,</i> If I adopt you, you will take my surname. <number>1a</number> <tr>harbor</tr>, give temporary <tr>shelter</tr>. <i>Saláud ang pagsagup ug púga,</i> It is a crime to shelter an escaped convict. <i>Ang ákung kandidatúra gisagup sa partídu,</i> My candidacy was under the aegis of the party. <number>2</number> <tr>accept</tr> an idea, belief. <i>Ang pagsagup sa binag-ung paági sa pag-uma,</i> Adoption of the modern methods of farming. <i>Ang kumunismu sayung sagupun sa mga pubring nagkalisudlisud,</i> It is not hard for the poor people who have a hard life to <tr>embrace</tr> communism. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> an adopted person.

<p><form>sagúran</form> <pos>n</pos> cloth woven of fiber taken from the unopened leaf of the buri palm, similar <pb n=845>to raffia, used for curtains, blankets, and the like. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> weave this material.

<p><form>ságut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)4]</itype> for a trawling net to drag on the bottom when it should just skim. <i>Nagságut ang palakáya kay daghang bagal ug batu nga nadala,</i> The trawl net is dragging on the sand because we took in lots of rocks and shells.

<p><form>sagutsut</form> (from <ix>sutsut</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> slurping sound. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>SAGADSAD</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; c16P]</itype> slurp, eat or drink with a sucking sound. <i>Insik nga nagsagutsut sa íyang nilúgaw,</i> A Chinaman slurping his rice soup. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> place where grasses or bushes are tall and dense and hard to get through (so called from the rustling sounds one makes in going through this sort of land).

<p><form>sagutsutun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> stunted of growth. <i>Sagutsutun kaáyu ang mga tanum nga mahawngan,</i> Plants growing in the shade are stunted in growth.

<p><form>sagutsutun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> rough-surfaced, not smooth. <i>Sagutsutun kaáyu kag pánit,</i> You have very rough skin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for a surface to be rough.

<p><form>saguy</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>GAGUY</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>BUGUY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>saguysuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>continuous</tr>, <corr sic=presistent>persistent</corr> cough that sounds resonant, vibrating against the back. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> have a persistent, continuous, dry cough. <i>Akuy lisdan ug magsaguysuy na ang bátà,</i> I am the one who feels uneasy when the child coughs continuously.

<p><form>sagúyud</form> (from <ix>gúyud</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; c1]</itype> be trailing along behind with one end being pulled at an elevation and the other end being dragged. <i>Musagúyud ang kawáyan nga gikarga sa karumáta,</i> The bamboo loaded on the cart will drag on the ground. <i>Ug mulúun ka sa bisiklíta, dílì saguyúrun (isagúyud) ang ímung tiil,</i> If you ride on the back of the bicycle, don't drag your feet.

<p><form>sagyad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6P]</itype> hang down and touch a lower level. <i>Dílì makasagyad sa salug ang íyang tiil iniglingkud níya,</i> His feet don't touch the floor when he sits.

<p><form>sáhà</form> <i>0</i>n shoot, a plant that comes up from the root. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2N2]</itype> grow shoots. <i>Ug musáhà (manáhà) na nang ságing, mudaghan,</i> If the banana grows shoots, it will multiply. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> gather shoots. <form>manggi-un</form> <pos>a</pos> giving or growing abundant shoots.

<p><form>sahì</form> <pos>a</pos> different from the others. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6]</itype> come out different from the rest. <i>Misahì ang íyang túnu sa ubang nanganta,</i> He sang in a different key from everyone else. <i>Sa parti siya ray misahì kay ang tanan nag-amirkána,</i> He was different from everybody else in the party because everybody wore a coat except him.

<p><form>sáhì</form> <number>1</number> <tr>similar</tr> to, <tr>same</tr> as. <i>Nagtindug siya sa prúwa sáhì sa usa ka aráyis sa sakayan,</i> He stood at the bow like the skipper of a boat. <number>1a</number> <formx>&mdash; pa</formx> could it be any different! <i>Sáhì pa? Mau ra nà ang duha!</i> Could it be any different? The two are the same. <number>2</number> <tr>as though</tr>. <i>Naghigwaus sila sáhì nga may nakítà sa gawas,</i> They were uneasy as though they saw s.t. outside. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C3]</itype> be the <tr>same</tr>. <i>Nagsáhì ang inyung taras,</i> You have both the same sort of character. <form>-um-, -ay</form> it is exactly the <tr>same</tr>. <i>Ayawg pasakiti ang bátà kay sahíay (sumáhì) ra bang paníta!</i> Don't inflict pain on the child because (his) skin is no different from anybody else's. <i>Ngánung aku may pangutan-ung sumáhì (sahíay) sa usa ka ignuranti?</i> Why are you asking me, as if I were a fool?

<p><form>sáhid</form> <xr>= <sc>SALAHID</sc>.</xr>

<!-- NOTE: non-standard xr -->

<p><form>sahù</form> (from <ix>unsay áhù</ix>. <xr><ix>see</ix> <bx>unsa</bx>, <i>1d.</i></xr>) <i>Sahù bag dì ka mangasáwa nákù. Maáyug nahúngut ang kalibútan,</i> Who gives a damn if you don't marry me? You're not the only fish in the ocean.

<p><form>sáhù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>mix</tr> things well into each other. <i>Sahúa ang harína ug ang asúkar,</i> Mix the flour and the sugar together. <i>Íyang gisahúan ug gamay nga putì ang lugum nga manikyur,</i> She mixed a little light-colored nail polish into the dark polish. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> be, move about in <tr>profusion</tr> and confusion. <i>Nagsáhù ang mga kutsig dyíp sa Kulun,</i> The cars and jeeps were in vast profusion on Colon Ave. <i><corr sic=Iyang>Íyang</corr> panghunàhúnà gisahúan sa mga pagdúda,</i> All manner of suspicions presented themselves to his mind. <pos>a</pos> full of all different things moving in <tr>confusion</tr>. <i>Sáhù kaáyu ang Magalyánis ug mapasku,</i> It's a bustling confusion downtown at Christmas time.

<p><form>sáhug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> be <tr>mixed</tr> together. <i>Misáhug ang kawatan sa punduk sa táwu,</i> The thief mixed with the crowd. <i>Nagkasáhug ang asúkar ug asin,</i> The sugar and the salt got mixed together. <i>Dì ka makasáhug sa labadúra ug wà ang igbabatil,</i> You can't <tr>mix</tr> the dough without the mixer. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mixture</tr>.

<p><form>sahuy</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. striped <tr>fish</tr> of reefs, growing to 6&Prime;.

<p><form>sái, sáin</form> <number>1</number> <tr>which</tr> of the two or several. <i>Sáin man nílang mga tawhána ang nagsumbag nímu?</i> Which of those persons struck you? <number>2</number> which place is it, was it. <i>Sáin ka ba trabáhu run<corr sic=",">?</corr></i> <tr>Where</tr> do you work? <i>Sáin kahà nákù tu ikabutang<corr sic=",">?</corr></i> <tr>Where</tr> (which of the various possible places) could I have put it?

<p><form>saka</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>climb</tr>, bring s.t. up. <i>Nagsaka <pb n=846>sa hagdan,</i> Going up the stairs. <i>Kinsay nagsaka sa ákung malíta?</i> Who brought my suitcase upstairs? <i>Sak-un ku nang hinug nga kaimítu,</i> I will climb to get that ripe star apple. <i>Isaka ning antína sa ibabaw sa atup,</i> Put this antenna up on the roof. <number>1a</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> work off a debt by gathering coconuts. <i>Sak-an ku ang ákung útang nímu,</i> I'll work off my debt to you by gathering coconuts. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> <tr>break into</tr> the house. <i>Gisaka na mig kaduha,</i> Our house has already been broken into twice. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>lodge</tr>, <tr>stay</tr> in. <i>Mu nay ákung gisak-an sa istudiyanti pa ku,</i> That's where I stayed when I was a student. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> yield of coconut trees. <i>Pilay saka ning ímung kalubian?</i> How much does your plantation yield? <number>1a</number> action of climbing or gathering coconuts. <number>2</number> action of coming to <tr>stay</tr> at s.o.'s place. <i>Káda saka níya sa ámù magdala giyud siyag sinugátan,</i> Every time he comes to stay with us he brings a present. <number>2a</number> one who is staying at s.o.'s place temporarily. <form>&mdash; kanáug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> go in and out of a house. <i>Mga bátang nagsaka kanáug ug dúlà,</i> Children running in and out of the house playing. <number>2</number> go up and down. <form>&mdash; lugsung</form> <pos>n</pos> going up and down. <i>Dálang saka lugsung,</i> A road that goes up and down. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> go, bring <tr>uphill</tr>. <i>Tuktuk nga bungtud nga dì masákag trák,</i> A <tr>steep</tr> road that a truck cannot negotiate. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2S]</itype> <tr>rise</tr> to a high degree. <i>Gasíging sáka ang prisyu,</i> The prices keep rising. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> formally ask permission to marry. <i>Ugmà musáka na sila si Pidru sa ka Maríya,</i> Tomorrow Pedro and his family will ask for Maria's hand. <number>4</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> gain stones in a game of <ix>sungkà</ix> (putting them in the home base). <number>5</number> <itype>[A12; c6]</itype> <tr>carry</tr> numbers in adding or multiplying. <i>Singkuwinta idus. Ibutang ang dus ug isáka ang singku,</i> Fifty-two. Write down two and <tr>carry</tr> your five. <number>6</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> for a school of fish to go near the shore. <i>Ang mga bansíkul musáka sa búlan sa Máyu,</i> The mackerel come near the shore in the month of May. <number>7</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> for a boat to put into shelter. <i>Musáka ang mga barku ning luúka basta magdáut ang tyimpu,</i> The boats put into this cove when the weather is not good. <number>8</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for cards to come to one. <number>8a</number> <itype>[A12; b4]</itype> <tr>draw</tr> cards. <i>Kun sakáan kug maáyung baráha,</i> If I get good cards. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> set of cards coming up. <number>2</number> rental for a gambling device. <number>3</number> <formx>bag-ung &mdash;</formx> s.o. who has just recently become popular. <i>Bag-ung sáka pa siya sa buksing mau nga sikat kaáyu,</i> He is a new boxing star so he is very popular. <number>4, 5</number> <xr>= <sc>SAKA</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <form>&mdash; kanáug</form> <xr>= <sc>SAKA KANÁUG</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; us-us</form> <xr>= <sc>SAKA KANÁUG</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr> <form>pa-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>file</tr> a charge, application, petition. <i>Kásung ákung gipasáka bátuk níya,</i> The case I filed against him. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c56]</itype> file, pass a law. <i>Wà pa ikapasáka ang balaudnun,</i> The bill hasn't been passed (or filed). <number>3</number> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> <tr>rent</tr> out a gambling device. <form>paN-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> climb up to <tr>pick</tr>. <i>Túa, nanáka ug lubi,</i> He's picking coconuts. <form>sakaan</form> <pos>n</pos> in a <ix>sungkà</ix> game, the hole nearest the home base (<ix>balayan</ix>)&mdash;so called because that is where the stones go into the home base from (<ix>sáka, 4</ix>). <form>-da(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> group of people recruited to work in another place. <i>Adúnay sakáda sa mga trabahadur sa asyinda,</i> They are recruiting labor for the plantation. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>recruit</tr> workers. <form>sinak-an</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> amount paid to a person picking coconuts. <number>2</number> gift of the groom to the bride following the marriage ceremony. <number>3</number> amount paid by a parent of children enrolled in a public school to pay for minor projects. <number>4</number> food and drinks stored up in a house one has moved into, enough to last for three days, usually including a slaughtered animal. The purpose of doing this is magical: it assures that the owner will not run out of anything while he lives there. <form>mag-r-(&larr;), maN-r-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> coconut picker. <form>sakaun</form> <pos>a</pos> s.t. one has to climb if he is to reach it. <i>Layù ang íla ug sakaun pa,</i> Their place is far away and you have to climb to get there.

<p><form>sakáang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S3P]</itype> <tr>totter</tr> under a heavy weight with the legs spread far apart for balance and foothold. <i>Pára usa ka tárung túbig, nagsakaang ka na!</i> All you are carrying is a can of water and you are tottering! <number>1a</number> <itype>[B28; b6c1]</itype> walk with the legs wide apart due to some ailment. <i>Musakáang ang táwung danlákan,</i> A person who has a hernia walks with his legs wide apart. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2S3P]</itype> undergo great hardship. <i>Nagsakaang ku adtung pangutanáha,</i> I sweated out that question.

<p><form>sakab</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fishing <tr>trap</tr> of shallow waters put directly over the fish to be trapped. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> fish with a <ix>sakab</ix>.

<p><form>sak-absurbir</form> <pos>n</pos> shock absorber.

<p><form>sak-ang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>sit</tr> down, <tr>set</tr> s.t. on s.t. that fits the bottom. <i>Nagsak-ang sa inudúru,</i> <tr>Sitting</tr> on the toilet. <i>Gisak-ang níya ang kúlun sa dagang,</i> He <tr>put</tr> the rounded pot on top of the holder. <number>2</number> <tr>sit</tr>, <tr>set</tr> s.t. down carelessly without noticing whether it is in the proper place. <i>Ayawg sak-ángi nang kartun kay mahulbà,</i> Don't just <tr>plunk</tr> yourself down on that box because it will collapse.

<p><form>sakapi, sakapì</form> <tr>instead</tr> of (doing s.t.). <i>Sakapì <pb n=847>nga magtrabáhu natúlug siya sa landung,</i> Instead of working, he slept in the shade.

<p><form>sakar</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>fitting</tr> exactly. <i>Sakar kaáyu níya ang sinínà sa íyang kalúha,</i> Her twin-sister's dress <tr>fit</tr> her perfectly. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; c6]</itype> <tr>fit</tr> exactly. <i>Musakar kahà ning yawíha sa ímung aparadur,</i> I wonder if this key will fit the lock in your chest.

<p><form>sakat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b4(1)]</itype> take hold by <tr>piercing</tr>. <i>Dílì kaáyu musakat ang tagà sa gáhing paun,</i> The hook doesn't easily <tr>pierce</tr> hard bait. <i>Nasaktan ang kabli sa angkla,</i> The anchor caught the cable. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> for a gear to <tr>mesh</tr>. <i>Ang kambiyu dílì musakat sa primíra,</i> The transmission doesn't mesh in first gear. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; a1]</itype> be <tr>on time</tr> to do s.t. <i>Musakat ku sa primírung byáhi sa trák,</i> I want to catch the first bus trip. <number>4</number> <itype>[B246]</itype> believe s.t. obviously not true. <i>Ug musakat ka ánang isturyáha, tuntu ka,</i> If you believe that story, you're a fool. <pos>a</pos> falling exactly on a certain time. <i>Sakat giyud ang íyang kasal sa íya pung adlaw,</i> Her wedding day falls just <tr>exactly</tr> on her birthday.

<p><form>sakáti</form> <pos>n</pos> a slender perennial <tr>grass</tr> of waste places: <bio>Paspalum conjugatum</bio>.

<p><form>sakay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>put</tr> s.t., <tr>ride</tr>, <tr>get on</tr> a vehicle. <i>Dì ku musakay ánang ímung awtu,</i> I will not ride in your car. <i>Wà ku makasakay dáyun,</i> I couldn't find transportation right away. <i>Taksing ákung gisakyan,</i> The taxi I took. <i>Isakay ring bátà sa taksi,</i> Get this child on the taxi. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> for a vehicle to accommodate a certain amount. <i>Ang sakayan níya musakay ug lima,</i> His boat takes five. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>join in</tr> with other people. <i>Dì ku musakay sa inyung hantak,</i> I will not <tr>join</tr> your coin-tossing game. <i>Dílì nímu ángay sakyan ang panagsultisulti námù,</i> You should not butt into our conversation. <i>Hungíhung nga isakay run sa Libiral si Pilayis,</i> Rumor that Pelaez would cross over to the Liberal party. <number>3a</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> <tr>include</tr> s.t. together with a list that has been made up. <i>Ikasakay pa ba ni sa badyit rung tuíga?</i> Can this be <tr>included</tr> in this year's budget? <i>Ikasakay pa ang ímung ngálan sa lista kay dì pa ulahi,</i> We can still <tr>add</tr> your name to the list because it's not too late. <number>4</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>believe</tr> or react favorably to s.t. not true. <i>Dì ku musakay ánang ímung ulug-úlug,</i> I will not believe your flattery. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>passenger</tr>, <tr>cargo</tr>. <i>Pila may sakay sa dyip?</i> How many passengers did the jeep have? <i>Blu sil ang sakay sa bangkà,</i> The boat was carrying smuggled cigarettes. <number>2</number> load <tr>capacity</tr>. <i>Pilay sakay sa ímung sakayan?</i> How many passengers does your boat hold? <number>3</number> <tr>aboard</tr>. <i>Sakay na ang tanang pasahíru,</i> The passengers are all aboard. <i>Milarga ang trák sakay ang íyang asáwa,</i> The bus left with his wife aboard. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c6]</itype> ride <tr>together</tr>. <i>Táwung ákung gikasákay,</i> The man I rode together with. <pos>a</pos> for there to be lots of people wanting rides. <i>Kay ulan man, sákay kaáyu run,</i> Since it is raining, there are lots of people who are looking for transportation. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> wooden <tr>boat</tr> of any size, with or without a sail. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a1c]</itype> go, take by boat. <form>paN-an</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> engage in hauling or passenger business with boats. <i>Sa nanakayan pa ku abut kug Masbáti usáhay,</i> I sometimes went as far as Masbate with my ferrying business. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> go <tr>boating</tr>. <i>Manakayan ta ug mangalígù ta sa Talísay,</i> We will go boating when we go swimming at Talisay. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>man</tr> a boat. <i>Duha ka táwu ang nanakayan niíni,</i> Two people were manning this boat. <form>-anun(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>crew</tr> on a <ix>sakayan</ix>. <number>2</number> <tr>fisherman</tr>. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> fellow passenger. <i>Mangunguut ang ákung kasákay,</i> The other man in the vehicle was a pickpocket. <form>salakyanan, salakyan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>passenger vehicle</tr>. <form>-um-r-(&larr;), mag-r-(&larr;), maN-r-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>passenger</tr>.

<p><form>sakbang</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>across</tr>, on the <tr>opposite</tr> side. <i>Ang naglingkud sakbang nákù,</i> The one sitting across from me. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C]</itype> be <tr>across</tr> from each other. <i>Nagsakbang mig balay,</i> Our houses are across from each other. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC; a]</itype> be contenders, opponents. <i>Akuy musakbang kaníya sa pulitika,</i> I'll run against him in politics. <i>Makigsakbang ku bísag dakù,</i> I'll take him on, big as he is. <number>3</number> <itype>[A1; c6]</itype> push s.t. concave into s.o.'s face. <i>Isakbang ku ning usa ka hulmahang litsi plan sa ímung simud,</i> I will push this dish of custard on your snout. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rival</tr>.

<p><form>sakbat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1c]</itype> say s.t. after s.o. else has spoken, butting in or not. <i>Way batásan tung nagsakbat sa panagsultiánay,</i> The one who <tr>cut in</tr> on the conversation has no manners. <pos>n</pos> thing said in <tr>response</tr> or butting in. <i>&lsquo;Muadtu pud ku,&rsquo; sakbat níya,</i> &lsquo;I'll go, too,&rsquo; said he.

<p><form>sakbit</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>adjacent</tr>, very <tr>near</tr>. <i>Ang ákung lamísa sakbit sa kang Abil,</i> My table is <tr>beside</tr> Abel's. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C; ac]</itype> be <tr>near</tr>, <tr>next to</tr> each other. <i>Nagkasakbit sila paglingkud sa sini,</i> They happened to sit beside each other in the movies. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC; b]</itype> <tr>touch</tr> lightly, brush against. <i>Ang ílang gipanagsultíhan misakbit sa Kumunismu,</i> Their conversation <tr>touched</tr> on the subject of Communism. <i>Nasakbitan ang bátà sa naghagurus nga awtu,</i> A speeding car brushed the child. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>snatch</tr> s.t. from s.o. <i>Gisakbit ang ílang kalubihan <pb n=848>kay wà makabáyad sa útang,</i> They lost their coconut lands because they couldn't pay their debts. <i>Nakasakbit kug pila ka púlung sa ílang panagsulti,</i> I caught a few <tr>snatches</tr> of their conversation.

<p><form>sakbut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>scoop</tr>, get by cupping in the hand. <i>Musakbut kug usa ka kumkum bugas,</i> I will scoop out a handful of rice. <number>2</number> <tr>snatch</tr>, <tr>grab</tr> s.t. from. <i>Gisakbut níya ang kwarta nga gibitbit sa táwu,</i> He snatched the money the man was holding. <number>3</number> get fruits with a <ix>sakbut</ix>. <pos>n</pos> fruit <tr>picker</tr> made of a blade to which a basket or bag is attached, tied to a pole.

<p><form>sakdap</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>swoop</tr> down at, on. <i>Gisakdápan ku sa dakung banug,</i> A big hawk swooped down at me. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; cP]</itype> touch swiftly and lightly with one's hand. <i>Kamut nga kugihang musakdap sa mga sangput sa dalága,</i> A hand that readily touches young girl's buttocks. <form>-ay(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> game with kites where the kites are made to battle each other. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c6]</itype> have a kite fight.

<p><form>sakdaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1, 2</number> <xr>= <sc>SAKGAW</sc>.</xr> <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> divert s.o.'s hands or arm. <i>Misakdaw ang ákung anak sa ákung kamut arun ku muundang,</i> My daughter held my arm to stop me. <i>Nanuyù nà siya nga nakasakdaw lang ku níyag gamay,</i> She got angry at me when I happened to nudge her arm lightly.

<p><form>sakdup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>swoop</tr> down on. <i>Ug musakdup ang ayruplánu, butangi dáyun,</i> If the airplane swoops down, let him have it. <i>Gisakdupan ku sa langgam pag-úlì nákù sa kuyabug,</i> The bird swooped down on me when I put the nestling back in the nest.

<p><form>sakgaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; ab2]</itype> <tr>butt in</tr> on a conversation. <i>Ug magsulti ku, dì ka musakgaw,</i> If I talk, don't <tr>interrupt</tr>. <i>Ayawg isakgaw nang ímung mga hingì ug dúnay bisíta,</i> Don't interrupt with your whimpered requests when I have visitors. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>snatch</tr>, <tr>grab</tr> at s.t. <i>Wà ku kità kinsay nagsakgaw sa ímung báhin,</i> I did not see who snatched your share.

<p><form>sakgum</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> hold s.t. in both hands. <i>Íyang gisakgum ang inágas arun imnun,</i> He caught the flowing water in his hands to drink it. <number>2, 3, 4, 5</number> <xr>= <sc>SAGÚKUM</sc>.</xr> <pos>n</pos> the amount held in both hands. <i>Usa ka sakgum nga utanun,</i> The amount of vegetables one can hold in both one's hand.

<p><form>sákir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>soccer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3C; b6]</itype> play soccer.

<p><form>sakit</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>painful</tr>. <i>Sakit nga samad,</i> A painful wound. <number>2</number> <tr>hurting</tr>, causing wounded feelings. <i>Sakit kaáyung musulti si Pidru,</i> Pedro speaks in a hurting way. <number>3</number> violent <tr>death</tr> or way of <tr>dying</tr>. <i>Naimpas siya sa usa ka sakit nga kamatáyun,</i> He expired in a violent death. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> physical <tr>pain</tr>. <i>Sakit nga dílì maagwanta,</i> A pain that can't be endured. <i>Sakit sa tiyan,</i> Stomachache. <form>&mdash; sa kalyu, pus-un, tíyan, tungà, túngul</form> s.t. that bothers one intensely (used sarcastically). <i>Sakit ba nà sa ákung kalyu ug dì ka pahulam?</i> What do I care if you don't lend me any (lit. you think it hurts my corns)? <number>1a</number> <tr>ache</tr>, emotional <tr>pain</tr>. <i>Ang sakit sa ákung kasingkásing,</i> The ache in my heart. <number>1b</number> <formx>&mdash; sa buut</formx> <tr>hurt</tr> to one's pride or feelings. <i>Sakit sa ákung buut nang pagsaway mu nákù,</i> It hurts my pride the way you criticized me. <number>2</number> <tr>ailment</tr>, <tr>sickness</tr>. <i>Ang sakit mikaylap sa kabaryúhan,</i> The <tr>disease</tr> spread through the countryside. <i>Sakit sa kasingkásing,</i> Heart disease. <form>binulang &mdash;</form> <tr>menstruation</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa babáyi</form> <number>a</number> <tr>venereal disease</tr>. <number>b</number> <tr>menstruation</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa láwas</form> <tr>injury</tr>. <i>Nagpakúsug siya sa íyang mutur kay nangítag sakit sa láwas,</i> He rides fast on his motorcycle because he must want to get <tr>injured</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab4]</itype> become, make <tr>painful</tr>. <i>Nagsakit ba ang ímung tangu?</i> Does your tooth hurt? <i>Gisakitan kug maáyu,</i> It hurts like hell. &mdash; <form>ang dughan, kasingkásing</form> <itype>[B46; b4]</itype> <number>a</number> be <tr>heartsick</tr>. <number>b</number> be very <tr>harrassed</tr>. <i>Nagsakit ning ákung dughan pagpahílum ning mga bátà,</i> I am going crazy trying to keep these children quiet. <number>c</number> be deeply <tr>worried</tr> over s.t. <i>Nagsakit ang íyang dughan kay mikúyug ang íyang trátu ug láin,</i> She is deeply worried because her boy friend went out with s.o. else. <number>1c</number> <formx>&mdash; ang kalyu, pus-un, tíyan, tungà, túngul</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; b6]</itype> <tr>bother</tr> s.o. intensely (sarcastic usage). <number>2</number> <itype>[AB1256]</itype> be, become <tr>ill</tr>. <number>3</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> for plants to bear less because of damage. <i>Gisakitan ang agbáti nga gipanglabnut lang pagpangúhà kay dúgay nga nangudlut,</i> The leaves were not taken off carefully from the agbáti vine and it took it long to develop new buds. <form>sakitsakit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> be <tr>sick</tr> now and then. <i>Mamalhin kami ug láing puy-anan kay kanúnay lang kung magsakitsakit (masakitsakit) dinhi,</i> We have to move to another place, as I always get sick here. <pos>n</pos> miscellaneous diseases. <i>Sakitsakit sa pánit,</i> Various skin ailments. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <tr>torture</tr>, inflict unnecessary pain. <i>Gisákit úsà patya,</i> <tr>Tortured</tr> before being put to death. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; ac5]</itype> inflict emotional pain. <i>Gikasákit ku kanang ímung gibúhat,</i> I was deeply <tr>offended</tr> by what you did. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> ask insistently, as if torturing. <i>Ayaw ku sakíta sa ímung bálun,</i> Stop <tr>nagging</tr> me for your spending money. <number>1c</number> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> for children to put up a crying fit. <i>Musákit na pud ning bátà kay kúlang ug tulug,</i> <pb n=849>The baby will put up a crying fit again because he didn't sleep long enough. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> inflict several small cuts on the trunk of trees to make them bear more fruit. <form>pa-(&larr;), paka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> make <tr>sacrifices</tr>. <i>Magpakasákit ku arun mulampus ang ímung pagtuun,</i> I will <tr>sacrifice</tr> to see you through your studies. <form>-in-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>martyr</tr>. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pain</tr>, physical or emotional. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>crucifix</tr>. <form>mistiryu sa &mdash;</form> the Sorrowful Mystery of the Rosary. <number>2</number> severe <tr>suffering</tr>. <form>-l-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> susceptible to diseases. <i>Salakítan kaáyu búsà dì maáyu ang biyáhi pára nákù,</i> I easily get sick so I shouldn't travel. <number>2</number> infested with organisms that cause diseases. <i>Salakítan kaáyu ning dapíta kay sunaup,</i> This place is infested with disease-giving organisms because it is low and dark. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>patient</tr>, an <tr>ill</tr> person. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be, become gravely <tr>ill</tr>. <i>Magmasakitun ka ug magsígi kag kaguul,</i> You will become gravely ill if you always worry. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pains</tr>, <tr>aches</tr>, characteristics of a sickness. <i>Kining banyúsa álang sa panakit sa labad sa úlu,</i> This compound is for pains that accompany a <tr>headache</tr>.

<p><form>sákit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>socket</tr> for an electric light. <form>&mdash; tayip nga tigib</form> k.o. <tr>chisel</tr> in which the handle is set into a socket instead of having a tang.

<p><form>sakíyu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> get money or valuables belonging to s.o. else by stealing or swindling. <i>Gigúkud sa pulis ang nagsakíyu sa ákung bág,</i> The policeman ran after the man who snatched my bag. <i>Gisakíyu ni Huwan ang kuliksiyun sa buhatan,</i> John <tr>embezzled</tr> the office money.

<p><form>saklaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>snatch</tr> at s.t., <tr>grab</tr> s.t. away from s.o. <i>Sukmágun ta ka ug saklawun mu ning ákung ayiskrim,</i> I'll hit you if you try to snatch my ice cream from me. <form>aN-r-</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ANANAKLAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>saklit</form> (from <ix>kalit</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; ab2]</itype> <tr>snatch</tr> with suddenness. <i>Misaklit ang bátag duláan pag-ági níya sa tindáhan,</i> The child quickly snatched a toy as he passed the store. <i>Kamatayun, ngánung gisaklit mu ang bugtung kung kalípay sa kalibútan,</i> Death, why did you snatch my only source of happiness in this world? <number>1a</number> <tr>commandeer</tr> on the sea. <i>Ang ílang sakayan nasaklitan sa Hapun,</i> The Japanese commandeered his boat. <number>1b</number> grab s.o.'s land. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> take a short time off from what one is doing to do s.t. else, do s.t. quickly. <i>Musaklit kug higdà ug magtrabáhu ku,</i> I will take a few minutes off from work to lie down. <pos>a</pos> sudden.

<p><form>saklub<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sheath</tr>, <tr>holster</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>wife</tr> (humorous). <i>Bisag ásas Timyung uban giyud ang íyang saklub,</i> Wherever Timyong goes his wife tags along. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; c6]</itype> put, put in a <tr>sheath</tr>, <tr>holster</tr>. <i>Isakub na nang ímung ispáda,</i> <tr>Sheathe</tr> your sword. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> make into a <tr>scabbard</tr>. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>SAKLUB</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p><form>saklub<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lid</tr>, s.t. put over s.t. else as a <tr>cover</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>cover</tr> s.t. over with a lid or a loose <tr>covering</tr>. <i>Saklubi ug maáyu ang sud-an kay arun dílì sungkábun sa iring,</i> Cover the dishes well so that the cat can't get at them. <i>Díay tualya isaklub sa ímung úlu,</i> Here's a towel to cover your head with.

<p><form>saklut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sack cloth</tr>.

<p><form>sakmal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> <tr>snatch</tr> at s.t. to hold it, <tr>grab</tr> at as if to hold. <i>Manakmal siyag tutuy,</i> He'll grab for your breasts. <i>Nakaikyas ang bábuy kay tiil ray ákung hingsakmalan,</i> The pig got away because I only got hold of its feet. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put s.t. in the mouth, usually big enough to fit in it. <i>Sakmala (isakmal) kunu ang ímung kinúmù sa ímung bàbà,</i> Try putting your fist into your mouth.

<p><form>sakmit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>snatch</tr> s.t. away from s.o. <i>Gisakmit ákung rilu,</i> S.o. snatched my watch. <number>2</number> <tr>confiscate</tr>. <i>Sakmítun sa maistra ang kúmiks,</i> The teacher will confiscate the comics. <number>3</number> take s.o. into custody from his home. <i>Gisakmit sa Hapun ang gidudáhang girilya,</i> The Japanese <tr>arrested</tr> the man they suspected of being a guerrilla. <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> snatcher.

<p><form>sakna, saknà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> ask s.o. whether he wants to do s.t. or is willing for s.t. to happen. <i>Nagsaknà si Nítuy nímu ug muuban ka ba,</i> Nitoy is asking you whether you would like to go along. <i>Saknaa si Máma mu ug pakuyúgun ka ba,</i> Ask your mother if she's willing to let you go. <number>2</number> <tr>challenge</tr> s.o. to a fistfight. <i>Saknaag musúkul ba,</i> Challenge him and see if he fights. <form>&mdash; ug pamaláyi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> for a young man to notify his parents of his intensions of getting married. <i>Misakna nag pamaláyi ang anak kung ulitáwu,</i> Our son notified us of his intention of getting married.

<p><form>saknib</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> lay two things out flat so that the one is partly over the other. <i>Nagkasaknib ang ámung mga banig kay gamay ra man ang kwartu,</i> We spread our mats with the edges overlapping one another because we were in a small room. <i>Sakníba ang duha ka hapin arun dílì mutagpas ang íhì sa bátà,</i> Let the child lie on two pieces of cloth so the urine won't seep through.

<p><form>saknit</form> <xr>= <sc>SAKMIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sakpaw</form> <pos>a</pos> for a broad container to be too <tr>shallow</tr>. <i>Diyútay rang masúd áning baskit kay sakpaw,</i> You can't get very much in <pb n=850>this basket because it is too shallow. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a12]</itype> be, become, make s.t. <tr>shallow</tr>. <i>Nasakpaw ang panaksan kay gimasáhag simintu,</i> The basin became shallow because they mixed cement in it.

<p><form>sakramintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Sacrament</tr>, one of the seven sacred rites of the Roman Catholic Church. <form>anak sa &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>legitimate</tr> child.[+]

<p><form>sakrilihiyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sacrilege</tr>.

<p><form>sakripisyu</form> <pos>a</pos> requiring an extraordinary expenditure of time, effort, or money. <i>Sakripisyu kaáyu nákù ning ákung pag-iskuyla kay magtrabáhu pud ku,</i> It is a great <tr>effort</tr> for me to study because I must also work. <pos>n</pos> <tr>sacrifices</tr> made. <form>&mdash; sa mísa</form> Sacrifice of the Holy Mass. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> expend unusual effort or money or deprive oneself for some end. <i>Magsakripisyu úsà kami arun sa ngadtungadtu makapalit mig balay,</i> We'll <tr>sacrifice</tr> ourselves so we can eventually buy a house. <i>Unsay dílì nákù isakripisyu pára nímu,</i> What wouldn't I sacrifice for you? <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> put s.o. to an extraordinary expenditure. <i>Ngánung sakripisyúhun man ku nímu ug paadtu ug dílì nà impurtanti?</i> Why do you make me go there to no purpose if that is not important? <number>3</number> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> sacrifice one's principles. <i>Sakripisyúhun (isakripisyu) man nímu ang ímung kadunggánan sa pagkúyug ánang mga tawhána?</i> Why do you sacrifice your honor so you can go around with those people? <number>4</number> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> sacrifice s.t. for a future advantage. <i>Isakripisyu ku ning túri arun mabábuy ang rayna,</i> I'll sacrifice my rook to checkmate your queen. <number>5</number> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> <tr>mortify</tr> one's body. <i>Magsakripisyu ang mga madri sa ílang láwas pinaági sa búnal inigka Byirnis Santu,</i> The nuns mortify their bodies on Good Friday by lashing themselves.

<p><form>sakris</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sack race</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b]</itype> hold a sack race.

<p><form>sakristan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sacristan</tr>, the priest's helper in performing various chores connected with religious duties. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; c1]</itype> become, serve as a sacristan. <form>&mdash; mayur</form> <pos>n</pos> senior <tr>acolyte</tr> or assistant to the priest.

<p><form>sakristíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sacristy</tr>.

<p><form>saks</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sax</tr>. <form>altu &mdash;</form> alto sax. <form>tinur &mdash;</form> tenor sax.

<p><form>saksak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>mix</tr> solids up or one solid into another. <i>Akuy musaksak sa baráha,</i> I will shuffle the cards. <i>Ayawg saksákig balas ang kupras,</i> Don't mix sand into the copra. <number>2</number> <tr>chop</tr> s.t. into pieces, usually to mix into s.t. else. <i>Akung saksákun ning sagínga,</i> I'll chop these bananas into pieces. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cook rice or corn mixed with chunks of sweet potatoes. <i>Musaksak mi ug wà miy sud-an,</i> We mix in chunks of sweet potatoes in cooking corn or rice when we don't have anything to go with it. <pos>n</pos> cooked cereals mixed with tubers, usually sweet potatoes. <form>&mdash; sinágul</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>SÁGUL</sc>.</xr> <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> corn or rice cooked with chunks of sweet potatoes.

<p><form>saksak<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>stab</tr> (slang). <i>Nakasaksak siya apan wà mamatay,</i> He has stabbed a person but he didn't die.

<p><form>saksak<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>LUMBIYA</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> the <tr>starch</tr> taken from this tree.

<p><form>saksak<sub>4</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small <tr>bird</tr>.

<p><form>saksi</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b2]</itype> <tr>see</tr>, <tr>witness</tr>. <i>Gustu kang musaksi ug bahugbáhug?</i> Would you like to see a free-for-all? <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> <tr>testify</tr>, say s.t. in evidence. <i>Ayawg isaksi nà sa hukmánan kay makadáut nà nímu,</i> Don't make that declaration in court because it can harm you. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>ask</tr> s.o.'s opinion about s.t. <i>Nakasaksi ka na ba sa ímung mga ginikánan mahitungud niíni?</i> Have you asked your parents about this? <form>&mdash; ug pamaláyi</form> for a man to notify his parents of his intentions of marrying. <i>Andam na mi ug musaksi ug pamaláyi ang ámung ulitáwu,</i> We are prepared if my son signifies his intention to get married. <pos>n</pos> <tr>witness</tr>. <i>Bungbung ray saksi sa ílang gibúhat,</i> Only the walls bore witness to what they had done. <form>&mdash; ni Hiyúba</form> a religious sect, <tr>Jehovah's Witnesses</tr>.

<p><form>saksupun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>saxophone</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN]</itype> play the sax.

<p><form>saktu</form> <xr><ix>short for</ix> <sc>IKSAKTU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sáku<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sack</tr> of cloth. <number>2</number> <tr>sackful</tr>. <i>Usa ka sákung humay,</i> A sack of rice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> put into a sack. <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> do by the sackful. <pos>n</pos> by the sackful.

<p><form>sáku<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SÁKÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sakù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> thrust the buttocks forward with a jerk. <i>Panagsaan ug sakù sa istriptis ang íyang sáyaw,</i> The stripteaser jerks her buttocks forward every so often as she dances. <pos>a</pos> <tr>busy</tr>, having intense activity. <i>Sakù kaáyu mi sa tindáhan matábù,</i> We are busy at the store on market days. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be intensely <tr>busy</tr>. <i>Nagsákù mi sa upisína kay duha ra ming katábang,</i> We are busy as heck at the office because there are only two of us helpers. <form>sakùsakù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> push the buttocks forward to and fro in rhythmic fashion. <i>Pastilang nakasakùsakù sa irù,</i> My! How the dog is pumping away at it.

<p><form>sákù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>refuse</tr>, not give s.t. <i>Ug sakúan ku níya sa pagpaiskuyla, unsay ákù?</i> Who cares if he refuses to send me to school? <i>Dalù giyud kay isákù pa ang paggáwì sa íyang libru,</i> He's selfish because he <tr>denies</tr> me the use of his books. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>begrudge</tr>, fail to give s.o. s.t., esp. s.t. abstract. <pb n=851><i>Dì siya muhinákug bísan unsay ímung pangayúun,</i> He will not begrudge you, whatever you ask. <i>Naghináku siyag hátag sa íyang gugma kang Pidru,</i> She refused to give her love to Pedro. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>greedy</tr>, <tr>selfish</tr>. <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> act <tr>selfish</tr>, <tr>ungiving</tr>. <i>Dì mi musinákù sa ámung kusug ug musampit ka námù,</i> If you call on us, we will not begrudge an ounce of our strength.

<p><form>sakub</form> <xr>= <sc>SAKLUB<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sákul</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <ix>pútu</ix>, a <tr>sweet</tr> made of fine corn flour, cassava flour, and shredded or squeezed coconut and steam-cooked. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, make into <ix>sákul</ix>. <form>-in-</form> <xr>= <sc>SÁKUL</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p><form>sakum</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>clearing</tr> in a forest or thicket for planting crops. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> make a clearing for crops.

<p><form>sakung</form> <pos>a</pos> bent downwards more than it should be. <i>Sakung kaáyu ning ímung sundang, bakikaw ug huyad,</i> Your bolo is bent too much downwards. It is awkward to use. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; a12]</itype> get to have too much of a downward curve. <i>Musakung ang tulawug ug palabihan ug banting,</i> The spring pole will get a curve in it if you weigh it down too much.

<p><form>sakup<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b4(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>catch</tr>, <tr>capture</tr>. <i>Walà ku makasakup sa bábuy,</i> I was not able to catch the pig. <i>Hingsakpan ta gihápun kang limbungána ka,</i> I'll catch you yet, you cheater, you. <number>2</number> <tr>come</tr> upon s.o. doing s.t. <i>Nasakpan ku sila nga nagháluk,</i> I <tr>caught</tr> them kissing. <number>3</number> come to <tr>understand</tr> s.t., esp. for the first time. <i>Sakpan ku na ngánung dílì muandar ang makina,</i> Now I understand why the engine won't start. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C3]</itype> <tr>meet</tr> each other. <i>Dì mi magsákup kay sayu man kung mulakat sa trabáhu,</i> We do not meet each other because I go to work early.

<p><form>sakup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> do s.t. for s.o. else at the same time as he is doing it for himself, include another action together with an action one is performing. <i>Sakpa (sakpi, isakup) kug paniudtu,</i> When you fix lunch, fix me some, <tr>too</tr>. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>included</tr>. <i>Ayaw na lang pagbáyad kay sakup nang ímu sa ákù,</i> Don't pay because what I gave already <tr>includes</tr> yours. <number>2</number> <tr>interior</tr>, the <tr>inside</tr> of a house or any enclosure. <i>Dayun diri sa sakup,</i> Come on <tr>in</tr>. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>member</tr>, part of a group. <i>Sákup ka ba sa ílang kapunúngan?</i> Are you a member of their organization? <i>Sákup pa sa Kabisay-an ang Sikihur,</i> Siquijor is a part of the Visayan Islands. <i>Dílì ni sákup sa átung liksiyun,</i> This is not <tr>included</tr> in our lesson. <number>2</number> member of a group subject to s.o. <number>3</number> household <tr>help</tr>. <i>Gihiyáan mig bíyà sa ámung mga sákup,</i> All of our household help left us at one time. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23B; c1]</itype> make, become a <tr>member</tr> of s.t. <i>Kining lungsúra nagsákup (gisakúpan) ug tulu ka baryu,</i> This town <tr>includes</tr> three barrios. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> have a household <tr>servant</tr>. <i>Dì ta magsákup arun trabáhu ang tanan,</i> We won't get a <tr>maid</tr> so that everybody works. <form>gin-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>member</tr> of a group subject to s.o. <i>Ang ginsakúpan ni Sultan Ramil,</i> Sultan Ramil's men. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>hire</tr> oneself out, be <tr>hired</tr> as household help.

<!-- NOTE: last meaning cannot be noun -->

<p><form>sakup<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> <tr>close</tr> s.t. <i>Ang maulahig lakaw mauy musakup sa pulta,</i> The last to leave the house will close the door. <i>Sakpa (sakpi, isakup) ang ímung libru,</i> Close your book. <pos><corr sic=n>a</corr></pos> <tr>closed</tr>.

<p><form>sákut</form> <xr>= <sc>SÁGUL</sc>.</xr> <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>spice</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put in spices. <i>Panakútig tángad ang tinúwa,</i> Put some lemon grass in the boiled fish.

<p><form>sakuting</form> <pos>n</pos> folk <tr>dance</tr> which portrays a mock fight between the Chinese settlers and native Filipinos. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> dance the <ix>sakuting</ix>.

<p><form>sakúung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; a12]</itype> bend forward when walking as if in pain. <i>Nagsakuung ang táwung bag-ung giupirahan sa apindisítis,</i> The man had been recently operated for appendicitis and bent forward in walking.

<p><form>sakwat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>lift</tr> s.t. up to carry it, putting the hands underneath it. <i>Sakwáta ang bátà ug ibutang sa katri,</i> Lift the child and put her on the bed. <pos>n</pos> action of <tr>lifting</tr>, amount carried at one time. <i>Usa na lang ka sakwat ug dá na ang tanan,</i> You can <tr>carry</tr> everything in your arms in one trip.

<p><form>sakyab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>spread out</tr> a blanket with a flinging motion, <tr>cast</tr> a net. <i>Gisakyab níya ang basang kurtína sa ibabaw sa lamísa,</i> She spread out the wet curtain on top of the table. <i>Dì makasakyab ang usa lang ka táwu ánang dakung báling,</i> One man cannot cast that huge net alone. <number>2</number> <tr>scatter</tr>, <tr>throw</tr> in a similar motion. <i>Misakyab ku sa sabud sa mga manuk,</i> I threw the chicken feed to the chickens.

<p><form>sakyud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> move, push one's buttocks forward and backward with the rest of the body stationary. <i>Nagsakyud siya sa pagpanghiláwas,</i> He was working his buttocks back and forth in the coital act. <i>Ngánung gisakyúran man ku nímung walay batasána ka?</i> Why did you nudge me with your lower region, you shameless man? <form>panakyuran</form> <pos>n</pos> the hip joints. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>ANANAKYUD</sc></xr> <ix>and</ix> <xr><sc>BANGKIYUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sála<sub>1</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>living room</tr>. <number>2</number> <formx>dakù, lapad ug &mdash;</formx> one who wears house slippers outdoors (making the area outdoors as an <pb n=852>extension of his living room&mdash;humorous).

<p><form>sála<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>strain</tr>, <tr>filter</tr> liquids. <i>Saláhun (saláun) nímu úsà ang asíti úsà itibul,</i> Filter the oil first before pouring it in. <form>salahan, salaan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>filter</tr>, <tr>strainer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> make, use as a strainer.

<p><form>salà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sin</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>fault</tr>. <i>Wà kuy salà nímu,</i> I haven't done anything wrong to you. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b(1)]</itype> <tr>commit</tr> a sin, fault. <i>Nakasalà ka sa ímung pagbiaybíay,</i> You have committed a sin in ridiculing him. <i>Siyay ímung gikasad-an,</i> He is the one you <tr>wronged</tr>. <form>paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> be committing a sin. <i>Nagpakasalà kag púyù ánang minyù,</i> You are committing a sin living with that married man. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> <tr>impute</tr> a fault on s.o. <i>Ngánung pakasad-un man ku nímu nga wà man gánì ku makahikap ánà?</i> Why do you blame me when I didn't even touch it? <form>sad-an</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>guilty</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be found guilty. <i>Ug masad-an ka, ipaprísu ka,</i> If you are found guilty, you will be put in prison. <form>kasal-ánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wrongdoings</tr> or <tr>guilt</tr>. <i>Ang kasal-ánan ímung gibúhat dílì mapasaylu bísan anus-a,</i> Your <tr>wrongs</tr> can never be forgiven. <form>maka-r-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sinner</tr>. <i>Ginúu, pasaylúa ning mapaubsánung makasasálà,</i> Lord, forgive this humble sinner. <form>masalad-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sinful</tr>, inclined to commit faults or sins. <form>tag-</form> <pos>n</pos> one who committed a specific fault.[+]

<p><form>*sálà<sub>1</sub>, salà</form> <form>&mdash; túud, gud</form> just as I expected. <i>Sálà ra gud túud. Dì wà mabakak ang ákung panagnà,</i> See, my guess turned out true. <i>Salà gud. Wà lagi kapasar,</i> Just as I thought. He didn't pass.

<p><form>sálà<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SÁLA<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>saláag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> lose one's way. <i>Nalángan mi kay nasaláag mi sa Magalyánis,</i> We were delayed because we lost our way downtown. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; c1]</itype> be off the topic, <tr>incoherent</tr> in speech, conversation. <i>Musalaag ang ímung tubag ug dì ka mamínaw sa diskasyun,</i> You'll be speaking off the topic if you don't listen to the discussion. <i>Nagsalaag ang diskursu sa pulitiku. Wà maáyu pagkahan-ay,</i> The politician gave an incoherent speech. It was not well planned.

<p><form>sálab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>singe</tr>, pass a flame over. <i>Gisában ku ang katring may kuting,</i> I passed a flame over the bed that was infested with bedbugs.

<p><form>salában</form> (from <ix>súlab</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> for an <ix>unglù</ix> to pass on the force that possesses him by inserting it in the food of the victim who then also becomes an <ix>unglù</ix>. <i>Kunu makasalában ang pagkáun sa salin sa usa ka unglù,</i> They say that eating the leftovers of an <ix>unglù</ix> will make you one. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> be won over to and become crazy for s.t. <i>Gisában na giyud ka sa madyung,</i> You have gone crazy for mahjong.

<p><form>salabat</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <xr>= <sc>TAHU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salábay</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> k.o. longline <tr>fishing</tr> for small fishes where several hooks are attached to a line with leaders spaced six feet apart, one end anchored to the sea bottom and the other end attached to a float. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> go fishing with a <ix>salábay</ix> line.

<p><form>sálad<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SANGGUT</sc>, <i>n, v.</i></xr>

<p><form>sálad<sub>2</sub></form> <form>tsíkin &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chicken salad</tr>. <form>saladsálad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> hide poor quality products underneath or between things of good quality. <i>Ang mga tindíra sa tabákù maáyung musaladsálad sa mga iskuhídu ug barut,</i> The tobacco sellers are adept in mixing the first class leaves with the poor ones.

<p><form>sálag</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>nest</tr>. <number>2</number> the <tr>home</tr> (literary). <number>3</number> <tr>source</tr>, place where s.t. or s.o. comes from. <i>Ang Pásil kunu mauy sálag sa mga butangíru,</i> Pasil is where the toughs come from. <form>&mdash; sa kaminyúun</form> state of being <tr>married</tr> (literary). <i>Bayinti anyus ang ílang ípun sa sálag sa kaminyúun,</i> They have been living together in wedded bliss for twenty years. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>nest</tr>. <i>Dílì musálag ang langgam dinhi kay duul sa agiánan,</i> The bird will not nest here because it is near a pathway.

<p><form>salagmà</form> <xr>= <sc>SULAGMÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salagsag</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>matting</tr> placed between layers of objects: <number>1</number> used in packing. <number>2</number> placed above boiling water to act as a double boiler. <number>3</number> in thatched roofing, the thin slat around which the cogon of the thatching is wound, tied to secondary rafters. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> install, pack s.t. with <ix>salagsag</ix>.

<p><form>salag-un</form> <pos>n</pos> the class of starchy foods consisting of plantains and root crops. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> have root crops as staple food.

<p><form>salagunting</form> <pos>n</pos> principal <tr>rafters</tr> of a roof. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2b6]</itype> put, make, make into a principal rafter.

<p><form>salahid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3S; ab2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>drag</tr>, search the bottom of water for s.t. with a net or grapnel. <i>Ang pulis musáhid sa línaw pagpangítà sa patay,</i> The police will drag the bottom of the lake to look for the body. <number>2</number> <tr>dig up</tr> information. <i>Sahírun mu ang tanang kasayúran báhin sa disgrasya,</i> Dig up all the information about the accident. <i>Mau ning tabía ákung nasahiran,</i> I stumbled across this little piece of gossip. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> general term for <tr>fish net</tr>, <tr>grapnel</tr> dragged along the bottom. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> go fishing with the <ix>sáhid</ix>. <pos>n</pos> fishing with the <ix>sáhid</ix>.

<p><form>salak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>catch</tr> s.t. in the hands. <i>Salka <pb n=853>ang búla,</i> Catch the ball.

<p><form>sálak</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. nonfatal <tr>sickness</tr> which is characterized by the yellowing of the white of the eyes, thought to be caused by stepping over certain plants or by walking at the back of s.o. who is believed to be a <ix>salakan</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; b4]</itype> get this disease. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> one who causes this disease if people walk behind his back. A person gets this supernatural power involuntarily and often may not realize he has it. He can also cure it by rubbing the patient's clothing and saying <ix>puyra sálak</ix>.

<p><form>sal-ak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>intersperse</tr>, <tr>insert</tr> in between. <i>Sal-ákan tag sáyaw ang átung prugráma,</i> We will insert a dance number every now and then in our program. <i>Isal-ak ning kartun sa libru,</i> Insert this cardboard between the pages of the book. <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>interspersed</tr> or <tr>inserted</tr>. <form>sal-aksal-ak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> place alternately, do s.t. at intervals. <i>Sal-aksal-ákan tag kamúti ning átung bugas kay layù pang tingsanggì,</i> We'll eat meals of sweet potatoes alternately with rice because the harvest is still a way off.

<p><form>salakut</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>SARUK</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr> <number>2</number> name of a folk <tr>dance</tr> which uses the <ix>saruk</ix> hat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>dance</tr> this dance.

<p><form>salamà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> mispronounce a word so that the resulting mispronunciation will mean s.t. else. <i>Bútù na man. Bútu diay. Nasalamà lang ku,</i> I don't mean vagina. I mean votes. I just <tr>misspoke</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> miss a step in walking. <i>Masalamà man gáning kábaw nga upat ang tiil, kita pa!</i> If a water buffalo with four legs can miss its step, how much more can we![+]

<p><form>salamabit, salamabits</form> <xr>= <sc>SALUMABITS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salamangka</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>sleight of hand</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> do sleight of hand tricks. <number>2</number> <tr>steal</tr>. <i>Ayawg isayàsayà nang kwarta kay salamangkáhun unyà,</i> Don't display your money carelessly. S.o. might just magic it away. <form>salamangkíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>magician</tr>.

<p><form>salámat</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <tr>thanks</tr>, <tr>thank you</tr>. <form>daghang &mdash;</form> thanks a lot. <form>&mdash; na lang</form> <tr>thank heavens</tr>! <i>Wà miy uban sa balay. Salamat na lang kay miabut si Bidung pagkahápun,</i> There wasn't anyone in the house. Thank heavens Bidong arrived by that afternoon. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>thank</tr>, give thanks. <i>Ángay kang mupasalámat níya,</i> You ought to thank him. <pos>n</pos> <tr>thanksgiving</tr>, <tr>thanks</tr>. <form>mapa-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>grateful</tr>, <tr>thankful</tr>.

<p><form>salámi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>salami</tr>.

<p><form>salamin, salaming</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>mirror</tr>. <number>2</number> s.t. made of glass: <tr>windshield</tr>, <tr>lens</tr>, <tr>spectacles</tr>. <number>3</number> <tr>paragon</tr>, example of s.t. good. <i>Salamin sa kakúgi,</i> A paragon of industry. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> look at oneself in the mirror. <i>Manalamin ta arun makítà ug bulingun ba tag nawung,</i> Let's look in the mirror so we can see if we have dirty faces. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> look at [so-and-so] and draw a lesson therefrom. <i>Panalamíni lang ang anak ni Nang Lúling. Mu nay mahitabù ug maglaaglaag,</i> Look at Loling's daughter. That's what happens if you go out. <i>Panalamíni siya kay gustu kung mag-iningun ka,</i> Look at her. That's what I want you to be like. <form>sulu-, salaminsalamin, -an</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>pomfret</tr>: <bio>Apolectus niger</bio>.

<p><form>salampáti</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> general term for <tr>pigeons</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>prostitute</tr> (euphemism). <form>&mdash; nga mubù ug lupad</form> <xr>= <sc>SALAMPÁTI</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr>

<p><form>salan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>varnish</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> apply varnish on s.t.

<p><form>sálan</form> <xr>= <sc>UNSINGÁLAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salánap</form> (from <ix>lánap</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>flood</tr> or <tr>spread</tr> over an area. <i>Huy, siradúhi ang grípu kay musalánap ang túbig diri sa kwartu,</i> Hey, turn off the faucet because the water will flood the room. <number>2</number> affect the emotions intensely (literary). <i>Nawung nga gisanápan sa túmang kalípay,</i> Face flooded with joy.

<p><form>sal-ang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>skip</tr> over, <tr>leave out</tr> s.t. <i>Si Pidru dílì musal-ang ug adtu sa sini káda adlaw,</i> Pedro doesn't <tr>fail</tr> to go to the show every day. <i>Muihap ka gíkan sa iskína, musal-ang kag tulu ka balay, ang ikaupat mau nay ámù,</i> From the corner, skip three houses. The fourth is ours. <i>Nakasal-ang ang taypist ug duha ka linya,</i> The typist skipped two lines. <i>Ayaw sal-ángi ang sunud yugtù,</i> Don't <tr>miss</tr> the next chapter. <number>2</number> <itype>[C; c1]</itype> be placed in alternate sequence. <i>Nagsal-ang ug lingkud ang mga láki ug báyi,</i> The boys and the girls were seated <tr>alternately</tr>. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>miss</tr>, the instance one fails. <i>Káda kablit usa ka butu. Walay sal-ang,</i> Each time you squeeze the trigger, one shot fires. It never misses. <number>2</number> amount of time or space intervening. <i>Dakù ang sal-ang sa ámung pangidarun,</i> There's a great interval between our ages. <form>sal-angsal-ang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; c1]</itype> mix in two different ingredients alternately in small amounts. <i>Isal-angsal-ang (sal-angsal-ángun) nímug lúnud ang harína ug asúkar,</i> Put in the flour and the sugar alternately in small portions. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do s.t. at intervals. <i>Isal-angsal-ang (sal-angsal-ánga) ang ímung pag-anhi dì kay káda adlaw,</i> Come here every other day, not every day.

<p><form>salánga</form> <xr>= <sc>PANTÍHAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salangásag</form> <pos>a</pos> for the teeth to be overlapping and protruding. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> for the teeth to get to be crooked and protruding. <i>Maung misalangásag (nasalangásag) ang íyang ngípun <pb n=854>kay mahadluk man magpaibut,</i> Her teeth are crooked because she was afraid to have her baby teeth pulled.

<p><form>salangásang</form> <xr>= <sc>SALANGÁSAG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salangkap</form> <xr>= <sc>LANGKAP</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salantà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>stop by</tr>, <tr>stay</tr> for a while. <i>Inigbiyáhi nákù sa Manílà, musalantà sà kug duha ka adlaw sa Rumblun,</i> When I take my trip to Manila I will stay for two days in Romblon. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> put a <tr>stop</tr> to s.t., <tr>prevent</tr> s.t. <i>Kapakyas nga makasalantà sa mga panganduy,</i> Failures that <tr>foil</tr> one's ambition. <i>Salantáun ku ang íyang laksut nga batásan,</i> I will put a stop to his bad habits.

<p><form>salapang</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>spear</tr> that is thrown or a <tr>harpoon</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> hit with a spear, harpoon. <i>Salapangun ku nang irúa ug mubálik diri,</i> I will spear that dog if it comes back here. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make into a spear.

<p><form>salapat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> for s.t. not to go directly into a hole but get splattered around the edge. <i>Kinsa may diri sa kasilyas nga nasalapat man ang tái sa bankíyu?</i> Who used the toilet that there's feces on the seat?

<p><form>salapáti</form> <xr>= <sc>SALAMPÁTI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salápi</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> corn stalks, esp. the younger ones. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> gather corn stalks as feed.

<p><form>salapì</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>money</tr>. <number>2</number> fifty-centavo <tr>coin</tr>. <number>3</number> <tr>silver</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> source of income. <i>Sa alkabála may panalapì ang lungsud,</i> The market fee provides a source of income for the town. <form>kalíhim sa &mdash;</form> Secretary of Finance. <form>maN-</form> <pos>n</pos> fifty centavos each. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>SÁPÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salápid</form> <xr>= <sc>SULÁPID</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salapsap</form> <pos>n</pos> collective term for various k.o. tiny <tr>fish</tr> that are found in large schools.

<p><form>salapwang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>carry</tr> s.o. with the arms underneath. <i>Nagsapwang sa patay níyang láwas,</i> Carrying her dead body in his arms. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> <tr>support</tr> that is placed on top of it. <i>Ang usang halígi sa balay sapwángun áning lapad nga batu,</i> This flat stone will support one of the posts.

<p><form>salapyaw</form> <pos>n</pos> dip <tr>net</tr> with a light mesh weight or a butterfly net. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> get with a dip net. <i>Salapyáwa ang pitupitu,</i> Dip out the pollywogs.

<p><form>sálas</form> <xr>= <sc>SÁLA<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salasa<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cut the leaflets from the fronds of the nipa palms for shingles. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> nipa palm frond leaflets cut and prepared for making into shingles.

<p><form>salasa<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>garfish</tr>: <bio>Ablennes hians</bio>.

<p><form>sálat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>catch</tr> s.t. by surrounding it, keep s.t. <tr>entrapped</tr> or <tr>confined</tr>. <i>Kural ang nakasálat sa mga manuk,</i> The fence kept the chickens penned. <i>Ang gagmayng isdà dílì masálat niánang balínga kay dagkug mata,</i> That net has too large of a mesh to catch small fish.

<p><form>salátan</form> <pos>n</pos> strong wind coming from the south during storms.

<p><form>saláud</form> (coined from <ix>salà</ix> and <ix>baláud</ix>&mdash;not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>crime</tr> against persons and property. <i>Ang saláud sa pagpatay,</i> The crime of murder.

<p><form>salawákì</form> <xr>= <sc>SALUWÁKÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salawásid</form> <xr>= <sc>SALUWÁSID</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>lay</tr> s.t. over s.t. else so that part of it hangs over. <i>Isalay lang ang tualya sa kurdísu,</i> Just hang the towel over the window sill. <number>2</number> <itype>[a3b8]</itype> for s.t. that fell to be caught atop s.t., not reaching the ground. <i>Ang gilábay nákung sinílas didtu masáy sa atup,</i> The slipper that I threw landed on the roof. <form>-an(&rarr;), saylanan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>drying rack</tr>. <number>2</number> boat <tr>rack</tr> made of two forked sticks. <number>3</number> wooden support for a stone mill.

<p><form>salaysalay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>fish</tr>, name given to various crevallies.

<p><form>salba</form> <pos>n</pos> shot fired into the air. <i>Kadtung salba pára pagpahúnung sa kawatan nga midágan,</i> That shot fired into the air was to make the thief that was running away stop. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> fire a warning shot into the air.

<p><form>salbabída</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lifesaver</tr> or <tr>life jacket</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> wear, make into a lifesaver.

<p><form>salbadur</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>SALB&Acaron;R</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salbáhis</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>cruel</tr> or incorrigibly <tr>ill-mannered</tr>. <i>Ang salbáhis níyang bána nanagmal na pud sa mga bátà,</i> That beast of a husband of hers is beating the children again. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become a <tr>beast</tr>. <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> behave like a beast. <form>ka-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>atrocities</tr>. <i>Ang mga kasalbahisánan nga nabúhat sa mga Hapúnis,</i> The atrocities that were inflicted by the Japanese.

<p><form>salb&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>save</tr> from defeat, ruin, or dishonor. <i>Aku may nagsalb&acaron;r sa íyang nigusyu,</i> I saved his business. <i>Ug dúnay kaláyu salbaha ang mga mahalung mga butang,</i> If there's a fire save the things of value. <form>salbadur dil mundu</form> <pos>n</pos> one who saves the honor of an unmarried woman whom s.o. else made pregnant. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56]</itype> be, become a woman's saviour.

<p><form>salbáru<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. round thin, baked <tr>wafer</tr>, big as a dinner plate (or nowadays also in other shapes), made from a mixture of flour, sugar, and shredded coconut. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make <ix>salbáru</ix>.

<p><form>salbáru<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> euphemism for <xr><sc>SALBÁHIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salbasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>salvation</tr> of the soul from sin and hell.

<p><form>salbid, salbids</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>salvage</tr> from s.t. destroyed, <pb n=855>saved for later use. <number>2</number> used clothing sold cheaply. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>salvage</tr> s.t. from s.t. destroyed. <i>Salbidyun ku ning mga butilya. Mahálin ra ni,</i> I will salvage these bottles. We can sell them. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> <tr>donate</tr> used things as relief. <i>Bag-u pa ning sapatúsa, apan salbidyun (isalbids) ku na lang,</i> These shoes are still new, but I'll donate them for relief.

<p><form>salbu</form> <pos>n</pos> style of fighting of a cock in which it leaps, slashing with its feet and moving backward at the same time to evade the blows of its opponent.

<p><form>salga</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> put in one's word in a conversation. <i>Íya ra tanang sulti. Dì ku makasalga,</i> She does all the talking. I can't get a word in edgewise. <number>2</number> <tr>enter</tr> in a game or some collective activity. <i>Way bátang makasalga áning súgal sa baráha,</i> No child may <tr>participate</tr> in this card game.

<p><form>salgu</form> <pos>n</pos> in carom billiards, the opening shot of a round. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> do the opening shot. <form>salguhan</form> <pos>n</pos> fixed points on the table where the three balls are placed for the opening shot.

<p><form>sáli</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; abc]</itype> [do] <tr>constantly</tr>. <i>Nagsáli ka lag pangáyù,</i> You are <tr>always</tr> asking me for s.t. <i>Ayaw isáli ug dukduk ang rúlir sa lamísa,</i> Stop tapping the ruler on the table <tr>all the time</tr>.

<p><form>saliabgaw</form> <xr>= <sc>ADGAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>saliat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>leave off</tr> what one is doing for the moment to do s.t. else. <i>Káda anhi níya sa syudad musaliat giyud sa rílis,</i> Every time he comes to town he stops in at the red light district.

<p><form>saliay</form> <xr>= <sc>SAG-ILAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salibadyaw</form> <xr>= <sc>SALIBAGYAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salibag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>throw</tr> s.t. with force. <i>Pagkabanggà sa mutur nasalibag siya sa kanal,</i> When his motorcycle crashed, he was hurled into the canal. <number>2</number> throw s.t. away so as to have it out of one's way. <i>Isalibag na nang mga butilya,</i> Throw those bottles away. <form>-anan(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> place where garbage and rubbish is thrown.

<p><form>salibagyaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> annoyingly <tr>noisy</tr>. <i>Gustu tà kung mutuun, piru salibagyaw ka kaáyu dihà,</i> I would like to study, but you are disturbing me with your noise. <number>2</number> having the head awhirl, not knowing what to do. <pos>n</pos> noise that is disturbing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> be, become annoyingly <tr>noisy</tr>. <number>2</number> be <tr>confused</tr> with the head awhirl. <i>Nagsalibagyaw ang ákung úlu karun ása kug ipalit ug bugas,</i> I'm at a loss now as to where to get my next meal. <i>Nasalibagyaw ang ákung úlu tungud sa pagpamabáyi sa ákung bána,</i> I'm very <tr>disturbed</tr> because my husband is fooling around with women.

<p><form>salibagyu</form> <xr>= <sc>SULAYBAGYU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salibay</form> <xr>= <sc>SALIBAG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salib-ay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>carry</tr> s.t. slung over on the shoulder. <i>Isalib-ay ang kamira,</i> <tr>Sling</tr> the camera on your shoulders.

<p><form>salíbu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> sprinkle water on live embers. <i>Gisalibúhan ku ang dáub únà mulakaw,</i> I <tr>doused</tr> water on the fire before I left. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23; b6]</itype> for rain to be blown in by the wind. <i>Ug musalíbu, tabúnig plastik ang mga písa,</i> If rain comes in the window, cover the spare parts with a plastic sheet. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for it to <tr>drizzle</tr> lightly. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> rain blown into a sheltered area from outside. <number>2</number> light <tr>drizzle</tr>. <i>Salíbu ra man ni. Dì na lang ta musílung,</i> All this is is a light drizzle. Let's not bother taking shelter.

<p><form>salibut</form> (from <ix>líbut</ix>) <pos>n</pos> dip <tr>net</tr> with a light weight mesh, used mainly in sea fishing. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> get with a dip net. <number>2</number> <itype>[a1]</itype> <tr>catch</tr> s.o. by means of a ruse or trick; be caught by means of trickery. <i>Nasalibut giyud ang kawatan sa gipan-an ug kwarta,</i> They finally caught the thief when they baited him with money.

<p><form>salibutbut</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>shrub</tr>, the leaves and milky sap of which have medicinal uses: <bio>Tabernaemontana pandacaqui</bio>.

<p><form>salída<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> appearance on stage. <i>Ikapila na ni níyang salída sa dráma?</i> How many times has she appeared in the play? <number>2</number> <tr>showing</tr> of a movie. <number>2a</number> <tr>movie</tr> shown. <number>3</number> <tr>exit sign</tr> in a public place. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> appear on stage. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23; c]</itype> <tr>show</tr>, <tr>expose</tr> s.t. conspicuously before. <i>Mangaláwat musalída giyud sa atubángan,</i> Making herself prominent when she goes to take communion. <i>Ayaw isalída kanang gisiun nímung sinínà,</i> Don't <tr>display</tr> your torn shirt.

<p><form>salída<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for sales to be brisk. <i>Way salída ang nigusyu,</i> Business is no good. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> for sales to be brisk. <i>Masalída ang tinda basta Pasku,</i> Sales are good during Christmas.

<p><form>salid-ay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>carry</tr> s.t. with a sling or strap, dangling it over the shoulder. <i>Misalid-ay siya sa ripli,</i> He slung the rifle over his shoulder. <i>Nagsalid-ay si Santa Kláwus ug sáku nga punù sa duláan,</i> Santa Claus was carrying a sack filled with toys over his shoulder.

<p><form>salidsid</form> (from <ix>sidsid</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> go, take s.t. along the edge of s.t. <i>Nanalidsid ang sakayan sa baybáyun,</i> The boat <tr>followed</tr> the coastline. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>skid</tr>, <tr>slide</tr> in doing a curve. <i>Musalidsid ang trák kay danglug ang karsáda,</i> The truck will skid because the road is slippery.

<pb n=856>

<p><form>sálig</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> <tr>trust</tr>, <tr>rely</tr>. <i>Dì ku musálig níya kay bakákun siya,</i> I don't trust him because he is a liar. <i>Nagsalig ku nga muanhi ka apan wà diay,</i> I was depending on you to come but you didn't. <number>2</number> <itype>[c]</itype> <tr>entrust</tr>, leave s.t. in s.o.'s care. <i>Isálig ku ning ákung kabtángan nímu ug wà ku dinhi,</i> I will entrust my property to you while I'm gone. <pos>n</pos> trust in s.o. <i>Wà kuy sálig níya,</i> I have no trust in him. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> <tr>depend</tr> on s.o. for s.t. <i>Nagsalig ka nákù sa ímung iskuyla,</i> You are depending on me for your schooling. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> assure, give assurance. <i>Mupasálig ku nímu nga buhátun ku nà,</i> I assure you that I will do that. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>confident</tr>. <i>Milakaw siya nga masalígun nga kabayran siya,</i> He went away confident that he would be paid. <form>pag-</form> <xr>= <sc>SÁLIG</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> person left s.w. entrusted to run the affairs in the owner's absence. <number>2</number> a team member considered the best on whom the rest put their hopes of success. <i>Napildi mi kay nadiskuwalipáyid ang ámung sinalígan,</i> We lost because our star player got disqualified. <form>saligsalig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13P]</itype> give assurances of doing s.t. when one has no plans to do it. <i>Nagsaligsalig (nagpasaligsalig) ka mag búhat nga hínay ka man,</i> You <tr>assured</tr> us that you could do the job, when you're so slow.

<p><form>sal-ig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> for s.t. standing to be leaning against s.t. <i>Nagsal-ig siya sa lubi,</i> He leaned on the coconut tree. <i>Isal-ig lang nang pála sa halígi,</i> Just <tr>lean</tr> the spade against the post.

<p><form>salig-ay</form> <xr>= <sc>SAG-ILAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>saligbay</form> <xr>= <sc>SALIB-AY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salihukngaw</form> (coined word from <ix>sakayan, líhuk</ix> and <ix>hungaw</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>steamboat</tr>.

<p><form>salíid</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S; ac]</itype> move very <tr>close</tr> or alongside. <i>Musalíid ang adlaw sa kasadpan inigsawup,</i> The sun sinks down close to the horizon at sunset. <i>Misalíid kug lakaw sa daplin sa karsáda,</i> I walked very close to the side of the street. <i>Gisalíid níya ang íyang kamut sa hubù nga láwas sa babáyi,</i> He ran his hand lightly over the woman's naked body. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2S3P]</itype> <tr>reel</tr>, leaning to one side due to a heavy load. <i>Nagsaliid ang trák tungud sa kapunù,</i> The truck is leaning to one side under the load.

<p><form>salíit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> sound shrilly, shriek. <i>Misalíit ang bumbíru samtang nagbagrung padulung sa káyu,</i> The fire engine roared towards the fire with sirens screaming.

<p><form>salik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> wind thread on a frame in a criss-cross fashion to determine its quantity. <number>2</number> for the water buffalo to wind its tether rope around its horns in an analogous fashion. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> for a water buffalo to gore using the analogous motion with its head. <form>saliksálik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> pass by frequently near s.o. or s.t. <i>Ang táwung nagsaliksálik sa ákung luyu mangunguut,</i> The man who was going back and forth in back of me was a pickpocket. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> H-shaped frame around which the thread is wound. <number>2</number> <tr>hammerhead</tr> shark, the head of which resembles this sort of winding frame. <number>3</number> <tr>horn</tr>.

<p><form>salíku</form> <pos>n</pos> sleeveless sweater or vest. <form>kamisin di-</form> sleeveless undershirt. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab]</itype> wear, make a vest or sleeveless sweater.

<p><form>salikubkub</form> <pos>a</pos> for the back to be bent in a curve. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> for the back to become bent. <i>Musalikubkub (masalikubkub) ang táwung matigúlang pag-áyu,</i> A man's back gets bent when he gets very old.

<p><form>salikwaut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>improper</tr>, lacking in tact and timeliness. <i>Salikwaut tung ímung pag-imbitar sa Múrus ug litsunáda,</i> It was very <tr>tactless</tr> of you to invite the Muslims to the roast pig feast. <number>2</number> awkward, lacking in grace. <i>Salikwaut ang pagkahan-ay sa mga púlung,</i> The words were awkwardly put. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4; b6]</itype> be, become <tr>awkward</tr> or improper.

<p><form>salikway</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> push s.t. aside to show dislike or gain passage. <i>Makasalikway ka ba ánang sanga nga nagbalabag sa dálan?</i> Can you <tr>push aside</tr> the branch that's in the way? <i>Salikwayi mig diyútay diri,</i> Toss some of that stuff you don't want this way. <i>Ayaw isalikway ang ímung pagkáun,</i> Don't push your food aside. <number>2</number> <tr>reject</tr>, <tr>spurn</tr>. <i>Ikaw nga nagsalikway sa ákung gugma,</i> You, who spurned my love. <i>Ang maung hukum sigúrung isalikway sa kurti supríma,</i> The Supreme Court will surely set that decision aside. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.o. rejected. <i>Gugmang sinalikway,</i> Spurned love. <i>Sinalikway sa pálad,</i> Unfortunate (lit. spurned by fate).

<p><form>salikyat</form> <xr>= <sc>DALIKYAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salikyaub</form> <pos>a</pos> having a deep bow, shaped and curved like a half sphere. <i>Ang salikyaub nga káhuy gihímung sakayan,</i> The <tr>curving</tr> tree trunk was made into a banca. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2P; a1c1]</itype> become <tr>curved</tr>, <tr>arc-shaped</tr>. <i>Bumba ang nakasalikyáub (nakapasalikyáub) sa yútà,</i> The bomb made holes in the ground. <i>Isalikyáub (salikyáuba) ang papil arun sudlan nátù sa bugas,</i> Fold the paper into a deep <tr>bowl</tr> to put the rice in. <form>-un nga búlan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>crescent moon</tr>.

<p><form>salíli</form> <xr>= <sc>ALÍLI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salimagaw, salimágaw</form> <pos>a</pos> for the vision to be <tr>blurred</tr>. <i>Salimágaw ang íyang panan-aw tungud sa katigúlang,</i> His vision is blurred from old age. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a4]</itype> for the vision to become blurred. <i>Gisalimágaw (misalimágaw) <pb n=857>ang íyang panan-aw sa asu,</i> Smoke made his vision blurred.

<p><form>salimbágat</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>vine</tr>.

<p><form>salimbángun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. erect, branched, smooth <tr>shrub</tr> of waste places, the leaves of which have medicinal uses and are used for bathing babies, coming in two species or varieties: <formx>&mdash; nga pula</formx> a variety with maroon-tinged stems and leaves, and <formx>&mdash; nga putì</formx> a variety with green stems and leaves: <bio>Pseuderanthemum sp</bio>.

<p><form>salimbung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>cover</tr> s.t. as a protection from view or the elements. <i>Dakung káhuy ang misalimbung sa ílang balay,</i> A huge tree <tr>hid</tr> their house. <i>Úlung gisalimbúngag piryudiku,</i> Head <tr>protected</tr> from the sun (or rain) by a newspaper. <number>2</number> <tr>hide</tr>, <tr>conceal</tr> from s.o.'s knowledge (literary). <i>Ang íyang mik-ap mauy misalimbung sa mga túig nga íyang gilukdu,</i> Her make-up concealed her age. <i>Gisalimbúngan níyag katáwa ang kaguul nga íyang gibátì,</i> She laughed to <tr>cover</tr> the sadness she felt. <pos>n</pos> <tr>screen</tr>, <tr>protection</tr> from view, the elements, or public knowledge.

<p><form>salimpúkut</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>PÚKUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salimuang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13P; a4b]</itype> be <tr>delirious</tr>, talk in a <tr>delirium</tr>. <i>Nagsalimuang (gisalimuang) ang tigúlang tungud sa hilánat,</i> The old man is delirious due to his fever. <i>Unsa may gisalimuangan sa pagsulti sa masakitun?</i> What is the delirious patient saying? <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>delirium</tr>. <number>2</number> random thoughts in one's musing (literary), <i>Kadtu mga salimuang lámang sa balaknun níyang hunàhúnà,</i> Those were the random thoughts of his poetic mind.

<p><form>salin</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>leftover</tr>, <tr>leftovers</tr>. <i>Ang salin ipasaw sa bábuy,</i> Feed the leftovers to the pigs. <i>Imúha ang usa ka dusína ug ang salin ihátag kang Bituy,</i> One dozen goes to you, and <tr>the rest</tr> give Bitoy. <number>2</number> s.o. <tr>left behind</tr> or <tr>abandoned</tr> by s.o. else. <i>Salin siya sa Kanù kay ang íyang amahan suldádung Amirkánung mipaúlì na,</i> He is a war baby left behind by an American soldier that went home. <number>3</number> s.t. or s.o. that <tr>survived</tr> a disease or accident. <i>Misánay ang íyang manuk nga salin sa átay,</i> His chickens that survived the chicken cholera multiplied. <form>&mdash; sa gúbat</form> <number>1</number> war <tr>veteran</tr>. <number>2</number> s.o. born during the war. <form>&mdash; sa úwak</form> <number>1</number> a <tr>fallen woman</tr>. <i>Mangasáwa ka ánang bayhána nga salin sa úwak?</i> You're going to marry that disgraced woman? <number>2</number> one who has lots of round scars on his head where the hair won't grow. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>set aside</tr>, leave s.t. for s.o. <i>Salinig sud-an ang kasíra,</i> Set aside some food for the boarder.

<p><form>salindánaw</form> <xr>= <sc>ALINDÁNAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salindrun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mouth organ</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2N2]</itype> play the mouth organ. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2N; c6]</itype> eat corn on the cob as if playing a mouth organ. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> action of playing the mouth organ or eating corn on the cob.

<p><form>salindut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>shove</tr> s.t. away with force to make it slide. <i>Isalindut ngari nang bangkítu,</i> <tr>Shove</tr> the stool this way. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; c6]</itype> cast or <tr>put aside</tr>, <tr>disregard</tr>. <i>Ug dì nímu palitun nà, nagsalindut ka sa talagsaung higayun,</i> If you don't buy that, you are casting aside a rare opportunity. <i>Isalindut lang níya nang átung pagmulù mu rag walà tay bili,</i> He just disregards our complaints as if we were nothing.

<p><form>salindy&icaron;r</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>challenger</tr> to a sports title or record holder.

<p><form>sal-ing</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>bird</tr> resembling the starling, the coleto: <bio>Sarcops calvus</bio>.

<p><form>salingawa</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>annoying</tr>, making one feel uneasy. <i>Salingawa kaáyung pamináwun ang kanúnayng panag-áway sa mga silíngan,</i> It's an annoyance to hear my neighbors constantly quarreling. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> feel <tr>ill at ease</tr>, <tr>bothered</tr>. <i>Mubalhin kug puyù. Gisalingawhan kaáyu ku niíning dapíta,</i> I'll move s.w. else. I feel ill at ease here.

<p><form>salingay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> put s.t. to one side or at some distance to get it out of the way. <i>Ang tinúla isalingay lang arun ka makalung-ag,</i> Put the stew off to the side so you can cook the rice.

<p><form>salingay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>carry</tr> s.t. on the shoulders. <i>Salingaya (isalingay) ang kahun,</i> Carry the box on one shoulder.

<p><form>saling-ay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> sling s.t. over the shoulders, hanging. <i>Isaling-ay (saling-áya) lang ang mga butung,</i> Just carry the young coconuts <form>slung</form> over your shoulders.

<p><form>salinggáay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>shrub</tr> of waste places and under coconut trees: <bio>Desmodium pulchellum</bio>.

<p><form>salinggáway</form> <xr>= <sc>GAWAYGÁWAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salinggúkud</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. lined <tr>snapper</tr>.

<p><form>saling-it</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> lodge s.t. firmly into s.t. V-shaped. <i>Kinsay nagsaling-it sa búla diri sa sandayung?</i> Who lodged the ball in the roof gutter? <i>Isaling-it ku ning munyíka sa luyu sa aparadur arun dílì makit-an,</i> I will lodge this doll behind the locker so they won't find it.

<p><form>salingkápaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>superficial</tr>, not heartfelt. <i>Pagdáyig nga salingkápaw,</i> <tr>Insincere</tr> praise. <i>Salingkápaw nga imbitasiyun,</i> An <tr>insincere</tr> invitation.

<p><form>salingkápaw<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>MANGÁGAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salingsing</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> new branch growing out from a mature branch. <number>2</number> one's <tr>offspring</tr> (literary). <pb n=858><number>3</number> <tr>outgrowth</tr>, <tr>outcome</tr> of s.t. (literary). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN2]</itype> <number>1</number> grow new branches. <i>Musalingsing ang sanga sa san pransiskug itanum,</i> A croton branch will send forth shoots if you plant it. <number>2</number> produce results (literary). <i>Manalingsing ang ímung kakúgi,</i> Your efforts will bear fruit.

<p><form>salingtuud</form> (from <ix>túud<sub>2</sub></ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1P; b6P]</itype> show s.t. around which one can see readily enough to draw people's attention to it. <i>Nagsalingtuud (nagpasalingtuud) siya sa íyang bag-ung rilu,</i> He was showing his new watch around.

<p><form>saling-uwang</form> (from <ix>ulang</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>scorpion</tr>.

<p><form>salinrun</form> <xr>= <sc>SALINDRUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salintuud</form> <xr>= <sc>SALINGTUUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salinyási</form> <pos>n</pos> <corr sic="o.">k.o.</corr> <tr>sardine</tr>.

<p><form>salip-ang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> carry a child astride the hips. <i>Ayaw salip-ánga (isalip-ang) ang bátà arun dílì mabakang,</i> Do not carry the baby astride your hips or he will get bow-legged.

<p><form>salipì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b8P]</itype> stay close beside or behind s.t in order to hide oneself. <i>Musalipì (mupasalipì) ku áring dakung batu arun dì ku makítà níla,</i> I will stay close beside this big stone so they won't see me.

<p><form>saliping, salíping</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB56C; ac]</itype> go, put s.t. next to s.t. <i>Musalíping ku sa kiliran sa ákung asáwa,</i> I will lie down next to my wife. <i>Si Nánay ang nagsalíping sa kúlun tupad sa takuri,</i> Mother put the clay pot beside the teakettle. <i>Salipínga nig butang,</i> Put these things down side by side. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>twins</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C23]</itype> be twins. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2356]</itype> for a pregnancy to turn out to be twins. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> one's twin.

<p><form>salip-ing</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c]</itype> put s.t. <tr>next to</tr> or in <tr>between</tr> s.t., be put in this position. <i>Musaliping pa lang ka sa luyu sa balay, dílì ka hikitan,</i> If you just keep <tr>close</tr> to the back of the house, no one will see you. <i>Nagsalip-ing kug kwarta sa libru,</i> I placed some money in between the pages of the book. <i>Makasalip-ing ba kug ínit túbig sa dinung-ag?</i> May I put a kettle of water next to the cooked pot of rice to heat it?

<p><form>salip-it</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1P; c6P]</itype> wedge s.t. in between. <i>Kinsa kahay nagsalip-it (nagpasalip-it) ug diyisun sa ákung libru?</i> Who could have placed a ten-peso bill in the book? <i>Isalip-it (ipasalip-it) ang lápis sa dalunggan,</i> Put the pencil behind the ear.

<p><form>salipnù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> duck down behind s.t. <i>Didtu ku musalipnù sa luyu sa batu mau nga wà ku makit-i,</i> I ducked behind the rock so they didn't see me.

<p><form>salipud</form> (from <ix>lipudlípud</ix>) <pos>a</pos> completely or partially <tr>hidden</tr> behind s.t. <i>Salipud kaáyu ang íla gíkan sa karsáda,</i> You can't see their house very well from the road. <pos>n</pos> s.t. that obstructs the view. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>obstruct</tr> the view. <i>Pangánud nga nagsalipud sa búlan,</i> Clouds that are <tr>hiding</tr> the moon. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> very well <tr>hidden</tr>. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b8]</itype> hide behind s.t. <form>paN-, paN-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>defend</tr>, <tr>protect</tr> s.o., oneself from danger. <i>Akuy manalipud (manalípud) nímu sa mga piligru nga maghulgà sa ímung kinabúhì,</i> I will protect you from the dangers that threaten your life. <pos>n</pos> <tr>defense</tr>, <tr>protection</tr>.

<p><form>salip-ut</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>narrow</tr>, having little room for motion. <i>Salip-ut nga sayal nga lisud ilíhuk,</i> A narrow skirt that is difficult to move in. <i>Salip-ut nga dálan,</i> A narrow road. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be narrow, get to have too little space. <i>Masalip-ut (musalip-ut) gánì ang kwartu, alimúut kaáyu,</i> If the room gets too <tr>crowded</tr>, it will be very hot. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>wedge</tr> s.t. in between s.t. <i>Isalip-ut nang papil sa pultahan arun dì maabli,</i> <tr>Stick</tr> a piece of paper into that door so it won't come open.

<p><form>salir<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>do</tr>, be <tr>useful</tr>, come out <tr>successful</tr>. <i>Dílì musalir nang ímung paági,</i> Your procedure will not do. <i>Misalir ang ákung buláda. Misugut siya,</i> My flattery <tr>worked</tr>. She accepted me.

<p><form>salir<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> engage in naughty behavior when there is some encouragement. <i>Musalir ra ba dáyun ning batáag pangáyug kwarta ug náay átung táwu,</i> The child comes out to ask for money when there are visitors around. <i>Misalir ang hubug nga giabibáhan,</i> The drunk started acting wild when the others egged him on.

<p><form>salírap</form> <xr>= <sc>SULÍRAP<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salíring</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> swerve, travel in a curve. <i>Pagbutu sa ligid, ag awtu misalíring ngadtu sa kanal,</i> When the tire blew, the car swerved into the ditch. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> pass by near s.t. for a purpose. <i>Musalíring ang bátà sa lamísa kay nakakità sa dulsi,</i> The child will veer over toward the table because he saw the candy.

<p><form>salisi, salísi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>drizzle</tr>. <number>2</number> rain or drops blown into a sheltered area. <i>Salisi ang nakahumud sa salug,</i> The rain that was blown into the house wet the floor. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>drizzle</tr>. <i>Buklása ang binlad nga humay ug magsalísi,</i> Take in the rice we're drying if it drizzles. <number>2</number> for the rain to be blown into a sheltered area. <number>3</number> <tr>sprinkle</tr> water on s.t.

<p><form>salìsì</form> (from <ix>sìsì</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cut into strips or slats. <i>Gisalìsì ang kawáyan,</i> The bamboo was cut into strips. <pos>n</pos> <tr>slat</tr>, <tr>strip</tr>. <i>Tagái kug usa ka salìsì,</i> Give me one strip.

<p><form>salit</form> <xr>= <sc>TSALIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salitri</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>saltpeter</tr>, <tr>potassium nitrate</tr> in crystal <pb n=859>form. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> use, put saltpeter on s.t.

<p><form>salíut</form> <xr>= <sc>SULÍUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>saliut-ut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> force one's way through a crowd or bushes. <i>Musaliut-ut úsà ka ug púngut úsà ka muabut sa baul,</i> You have to force your way through a thicket before you reach the field. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> force oneself into an overcrowded place to get accommodated. <i>Misaliut-ut giyud siya sa dyíp bísag kargádu na,</i> She squeezed herself into the jeep even though it was full.

<p><form>salíyab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> flap a cloth. <i>Isalíyab ang alpumbra pagtaktak sa abug,</i> Shake the rug to get the dust out. <number>2</number> scatter dust or water with a motion flinging it in the air. <i>Íyang gisalyában ug íhì ang nangharána,</i> She threw urine on the serenaders. <number>3</number> <itype>[A3P; c6P]</itype> scatter news, <tr>gossip</tr>. <i>Isalíyab (ipasalíyab) sa kayutáan ang malipáyung balità,</i> <tr>Spread</tr> the glad tidings to all the lands.

<p><form>salmu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>psalm</tr>. <form>-s</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>Book of Psalms</tr>.

<p><form>salmun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> canned <tr>fish</tr> in large cylindrical cans. <number>1a</number> k.o. <tr>herring</tr>. <number>2</number> the large cylindrical <tr>can</tr>, about 5&Prime; tall, used as a measure. <number>3</number> @<corr sic=orrange-colored>orange-colored</corr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear s.t. orange. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>SALMUN</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr>

<p><form>salmuníti</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small <tr>goatfish</tr>, reddish in hue.

<p><form>salmut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>enter</tr>, <tr>participate</tr> in a group activity. <i>Dì ka musalmut sa rípa?</i> Won't you participate in the raffle? <i>Dílì ka makasalmut sa lumbà,</i> You cannot participate in the race. <number>2</number> <tr>engage</tr> oneself in some occupation. <i>Unsang nigusyúha íyang gisalmútan?</i> What business did he engage in? <pos>n</pos> <tr>entry</tr> in a contest, <tr>contestant</tr>: <tr>participant</tr> in a play or game. <i>Ipadala ku ning ákung salmut sa banggà,</i> I'll send my entry.

<p><form>salpù</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible <tr>sea cucumber</tr>, brownish in color and measuring up to 3&Prime; long.

<p><form>salsa</form> <pos>n</pos> thick <tr>sauce</tr> made to eat with s.t. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make into a sauce. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> add <tr>sauce</tr> to.

<p><form>salsag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>break</tr> into several pieces, usually in slivers or fragments. <i>Ikay nagsalsag sa sag-ub,</i> You broke the bamboo tube water container into slivers. <i>Salságun ku nang kúlun sa ímung úlu,</i> I will break that clay pot on your head. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>flatten</tr> s.t. cylindrical. <i>Misalsag siyag kawáyan nga ibungbung,</i> He flattened bamboo poles for walling. <i>Gisalsag níya ang láta sa litsi,</i> He flattened out the milk can.

<p><form>salsal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>forge</tr>. <i>Gisalsal na sa tigúlang ang ímung sundang,</i> The old man has already forged your bolo. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>pound</tr>, <tr>hammer out</tr> metal that has not been heated. <i>Nasalsal ang puluan sa tigib sa pagdinukduk,</i> The handle of the chisel is all <tr>flattened</tr> due to constant hammering. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c2]</itype> <tr>masturbate</tr> (slang&mdash;from the notion of moving the arms as in pounding steel). <number>4</number> <tr>teach</tr>, <tr>train</tr>. <i>Makugíhun siyang misalsal sa íyang tím,</i> He trained his team with zeal. <form>-an(&rarr;), -anan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>blacksmith shop</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>anvil</tr>. <number>3</number> one's <tr>wife</tr> (the one on whom one forges his <corr sic=chilren>children</corr>&mdash;humorous). <form>-íru</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of masturbating. <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>blacksmith</tr>. <number>2</number> one who trains.

<p><form>salsitsas</form> <xr>= <sc>SURÍSU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salta</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> get <tr>loose</tr>, <tr>out of position</tr>, but not disengaged. <i>Ug musalta ang tabla ilansang ug bálik,</i> If one end of the floorboard gets loose and comes up, nail it back down. <i>Nasalta ang tikud sa sapátus,</i> The heels of the shoes got loose. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <tr>rise</tr>, <tr>raise</tr>. <i>Nasalta ang íyang tíngug sa kahikugang,</i> His voice rose in surprise. <i>Isalta (saltáha) ang ímung tiil,</i> Raise your feet.

<p><form>saltu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> style of fighting of a cock in which it leaps, at the same time lashing out with the feet and moving backward to evade the thrust of its opponent.

<p><form>saltu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> <tr>skip</tr>, <tr>miss</tr> doing s.t. <i>Dì siya musaltu ug simba maduminggu,</i> She attends mass every Sunday and never misses. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>stop</tr> doing s.t. <i>Misaltu nang tawhána sa ínum sa dihang giulsir na,</i> That man stopped drinking when he developed ulcers. <i>Nagsaltu ang trabáhu sa mína nga ákung gitrabahúan,</i> The mine where I was working has stopped operations.

<p><form>sálu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2C; b6]</itype> eat together with s.o. from the same plate. <i>Abúga ang irù kay gisalúan ang bátà,</i> Drive the dog away because it's eating off the child's plate. <i>Isálu ring bátà dihà arun ímung maatiman,</i> Have this child eat with you so that you can attend to him. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>share</tr> a place with s.o. for any action. <i>Nagsálu mig kamarúti sa pagpaingun námù sa Manílà,</i> We shared the same cabin when we went to Manila. <number>3</number> <itype>[C; c]</itype> go through s.t. together with s.o. <i>Ang asáwang gikasálu ku sa kalípayg kasákit,</i> The wife with whom I shared my sorrows and joys. <number>4</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> be born in the same period of time. <i>Ang duha nákù ka bátà nagsálu ug túig,</i> My two children were born in the same year. <form>salusálu</form> <pos>n</pos> get-together where food is served informally. <pos>v</pos> [A 13] hold such a party.

<p><form>salù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>catch</tr> s.t. thrown or falling. <i>Saw-a (sal-a) ang butilyang ákung ilábay,</i> Catch the bottle I'm going to throw. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> <tr>accept</tr>, <tr>receive</tr> s.t. from s.o. <i>Ang <pb n=860>múda gisalù sa mga batan-un sa madaling panahun,</i> The youth took to the fad in short order. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> for an ailment to develop into s.t. worse. <i>Tinúud ba nga ang sip-un sal-un ug húbak?</i> Is it true that colds will develop into asthma? <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> talk or answer right away after s.o. has spoken. <i>Sal-un dáyun nímu ug tubag ang íyang sukut arun dì ka dudáhan,</i> Answer his questions immediately so he won't doubt you. <form>salùsálù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> for several agents to do s.t. in succession. <i>Lahì na kaáyu ang isturya ug salùsalúun sa pipila ka bàbà,</i> The story changes when it is repeated by several mouths.

<p><form>sal-ub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> place, fit s.t. bigger over s.t. smaller. <i>Dì ku gustung musal-ub nímug sapátus arun ka makakat-un,</i> I won't put your shoes on you so you'll learn to do it yourself. <i>Sal-úbig iprun ang sinínà ug maghíkay,</i> Wear an apron over your dress when you cook. <i>Isal-ub (sal-úba) ang hapin sa makinilya,</i> Put the cover on the typewriter. <number>2</number> catch a bird with a <ix>sal-ub</ix> trap. <pos>n</pos> bird trap set above a bird's nest with three open sides through which the bird must pass in order to enter the nest. Each side is provided with a noose.

<p><form>sálud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>catch</tr> s.t. falling or thrown in s.t. <i>Salúra ang tulù ug salúri (isálud) ring palanggána,</i> Catch the dripping water and use this basin to catch it in. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> catch s.t. by being in its path. <i>Usa ka dakung kúmù ni Tasyu nasálud sa nawung ni Piduy,</i> Tasio's fist landed in Pidoy's face. <i>Sa búkid, ang húni ra sa mga langgam mauy masálud sa átung dalunggan,</i> In the mountains, all we hear is the songs of the birds. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a vessel used to catch falling liquids, e.g. the container for catching the dripping toddy. <number>2</number> a unit of liquid measure equalling one toddy container full.

<p><form>saludar</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>bow</tr>. <number>2</number> greet s.o. on meeting by nodding one's head. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> pass by s.o.'s place to say hello. <i>Káda anhi níyas syudad musaludar siya sa ámù,</i> Every time he comes to the city, he drops by my place to say hello.

<p><form>salúdu</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>salute</tr>. <i>Kinahanglan musalúdu ka sa bandílà úsà musaylu,</i> You must salute the flag before going by it. <pos>n</pos> salute. <form>&mdash; militar</form> <tr>military salute</tr>.

<p><form>salug</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>floor</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>storey</tr>. <i>Ikaupat nga salug,</i> The fourth floor. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> put, construct a floor. <form>panalganan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>storey</tr> of a house. <number>2</number> floor <tr>joist</tr>. <number>3</number> floor clearance from the ground. <i>Dílì kahuktan ug kanding ang sílung kay mabà ug panalganan,</i> We can not tie goats under the house because the floor is close to the ground.

<p><form>sálug</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>river</tr>, any body of flowing water.

<p><form>salugsug</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>splinter</tr> sticking into the skin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> get a splinter in the skin. <i>Makasalugsug ug tiil nang tabláha kay way sipilya,</i> You can get a splinter from that piece of wood because it wasn't planed.

<p><form>salukgu</form> <xr>= <sc>SALUGSUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>saluksuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give s.t. small, e.g. small farm animals, in exchange for a part of a bigger animal. <i>Nisawuksuk kug baktin niánang inasála,</i> I gave a piglet in exchange for a part of the roast pig.

<p><form>saluksuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>cricket</tr> living in fields.

<p><form>salukut</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <xr>= <sc>SARUK</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p><form>sálum</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S; ac]</itype> <tr>swim under water</tr>. <i>Misálum ang submarínu pag-abut sa bapur digíra,</i> The submarine <tr>dove</tr> when the battleship arrived. <i>Salúmun (sadmun, sagmun) ku tung imbaw,</i> I will <tr>dive</tr> for that clam. <i>Isálum ang úsuk,</i> Bring the stake to the bottom of the water. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2S]</itype> for the sun to set (literary). <i>Sa nagsalum na ang adlaw,</i> As the sun was setting. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; sa lubug</formx> <itype>[A12S3]</itype> be <tr>doubtful</tr> (lit. swim under murky water). <i>Way kasigurúan kun madáwat ba ku. Nagsawum pa ku niíni sa lubug,</i> It's not sure that I'll be accepted. I'm still unclear. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> go diving for fish, shells. <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>diver</tr>.

<p><form>salúma</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>song</tr>, melodious <tr>music</tr> (literary). <i>Ang dinagayday sa sapà salúma sa íyang památì,</i> The rippling of the river is music to his ears. <number>2</number> an improvised courtship song sung by a man and a woman (<ix>balítaw</ix>) and performed at social gatherings, accompanied by improvised dancing. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>sing</tr> a melodious song. <i>Walay makasalúma ug sáma kaníya,</i> Nobody could sing like him. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> hold a <ix>salúma</ix> session. <i>Magsalúma sila ug makainum na,</i> They'll start the salúma after they've had s.t. to drink.

<p><form>salumabit, salumabits</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) exclamation of mild anger shouted at s.o.

<p><form>salumsum</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dusk</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; b4(1)]</itype> be dusk, for the sun to sink. <i>Inigsumsum sa adlaw,</i> When the sun sets.

<p><form>salun</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) dance hall where a man goes to dance with girls employed by the management. <form>-ira(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>taxi dancer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be, become a taxi dancer.

<p><form>salundung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a2b2]</itype> <tr>gore</tr>. <i>Ayawg dúul kay salundúngun ka ánang báka,</i> Don't go near that bull because he will gore you.

<p><form>sálung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dammar resin</tr> in a soft state or <pb n=861>as an ingredient of the <ix>balaw</ix> used to caulk boats, esp. from the <ix>almasíga</ix> tree. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>ALMASÍGA</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; lúnay</form> <tr>dammar resin</tr> in a soft state. <form>salngan</form> <xr>= <sc>ALMASÍGA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salunggat</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sliver</tr>, <tr>splinter</tr>, or anything that pierces the skin at an angle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> for a sliver or splinter to lodge in the skin. <i>Ayawg dalus-us ánang buungun kay ang tunuk makasalunggat (makapasalunggat) sa ímung láwas,</i> Don't slide down the orange tree because the thorns can stick into your body.

<p><form>salungsung</form> (from <ix>sungsung</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN2; c6]</itype> <number>1</number> go directly against the current or wind. <i>Lúgus na mi makairug dihang nagsalungsung mi sa sulug,</i> We could hardly move when we went against the current. <number>2</number> <tr>brave</tr> adverse weather conditions or a battle. <i>Isalungsung níya ang ayruplánu sa nag-atak-atak nga bála sa kaáway,</i> He braved the hail of enemy bullets, driving his airplane directly into them. <number>3</number> bravely face s.o. difficult to approach. <i>Misungsung (nanungsung) siyag atúbang sa mga ginikánan sa babáyi,</i> He faced the parents of his girl friend bravely. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>adverse</tr>, coming from the opposite direction.

<p><form>salup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>skim</tr> or <tr>scoop</tr> s.t. off from a surface or from the upper portion. <i>Misalup siya ug tipasì unyà gisábud,</i> She scooped a handful of kernels and threw them. <i>Isalup (salupa) sa kutsára ang ayiskrim,</i> Scoop the ice cream with a spoon. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>SALÚPAN</sc>.</xr> <form>-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> unit of dry measure equivalent to one-sixth of a ganta.

<p><form>sálup</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S; ab8]</itype> for the sun to set. <i>Ug musálup ang adlaw pasigáa ang sugà,</i> When the sun sets, light the lamp. <i>Sa nagsalup ang búlan miinánay ug língay ang anínu,</i> As the moon was setting the shadows moved slowly. <i>Nasálup na ang adlaw ug namátug na ang mga manuk,</i> The sun has set and the chickens have gone to roost. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2S]</itype> for one's life to come to an end in old age (literary). <i>Sa nagsalup na ang kinabúhì sa tigúlang,</i> As the old man's life was reaching its end. <form>kasaladpan, sadpanan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>west</tr>. <form>tali-(&rarr;), -um-r-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> about to set.

<p><form>salúpan</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>SALUP</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salùsù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; c6]</itype> move s.t. scheduled ahead to an earlier date or time. <i>Gisawùsù ang kasal sa Sabadu imbis sa Duminggu,</i> The wedding was moved ahead to Saturday instead of Sunday.

<p><form>salut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>salute</tr> with the hands. <i>Gisalutan níla ang bandíra,</i> They saluted the flag. <form>han &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>hand salute</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> execute a hand salute. <form>gan &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> gun salute.

<p><form>sálut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2P; a12]</itype> cause stunted growth. <i>Ang taas nga húlaw musálut (mupasálut) sa tinubuan sa tanum,</i> The long drought will <tr>stunt</tr> the growth of the plants. <i>Masálut ang bátà ug kúlang ug tulug,</i> The child will be stunted if it lacks sleep. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> get <tr>sick</tr>, esp. for s.t. that brings general body weakening and loss of weight. <i>Nasáwut ka ba nga miníwang ka man kaáyu?</i> Were you sick? You lost so much weight. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>stunted</tr> or checked growth. <i>Salut kaáyug tinubuan ang lubi,</i> The coconut tree is stunted in growth.

<p><form>sálut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the south of Cebu (humorous&mdash;from <ix>sáwut</ix>, so called from the fact that the dialects in the south of Cebu retain <ix>l</ix> where the city dialect has <ix>w</ix>. Cf. <ref target=X>Section 5.211</ref> of the Introduction). <form>taga-</form> one from the south of Cebu. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become like the Southerners.

<p><form>sal-ut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>butt in</tr> on a conversation. <i>Dì ka musal-ut sa ámung panaglális,</i> Do not butt in in our argument. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>cut in</tr> on a queue or force one's way into a crowd. <i>Dì ka untà musal-ut sa tungà sa linya, adtu ka sa ulahi,</i> You should not have butted into the middle of the line. Go back to the end. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>take part</tr>, <tr>participate</tr> in a game or group activity. <i>Gustu kang musal-ut sa abat-ábat?</i> Would you like to participate in a game of tag? <number>4</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>include</tr> s.t. in a group or batch. <i>Kinsa may nagsal-ut sa imung papílis adtung grupúha?</i> Who included your documents in that batch? <i>Isal-ut ra ni dihà ug hílum,</i> Put this in there with the others secretly. <i>Nasal-ut ku sa kasábà bísag wà kuy salà,</i> I got scolded as well even though I hadn't done anything wrong. <number>4a</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> be <tr>interspersed</tr> with. <i>Ang íyang diskursu gisal-útan pud ug kumidiya,</i> His speech was interspersed with jokes. <form>sal-utsal-ut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456; c1]</itype> be arranged <tr>alternately</tr>, do s.t. alternately. <i>Gisal-utsal-útan ug mga áwit ug sáyaw ang prugráma,</i> The program had song and dance numbers inserted into it.

<p><form>salutaturyan</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>salutatorian</tr> in a graduating class. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be, become the salutatorian.

<p><form>salutsut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>SAGUTSUT</sc>, <i>n1, v.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>SUTSUT</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr>

<p><form>saluwákì</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>sea urchin</tr> with short, non-*venomous thorns and edible meat (<ix>tihìtihì</ix>).

<p><form>salúwal</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pants</tr>. <number>2</number> woman's <tr>panties</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> put on, wear pants. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> sew, make into pants.

<p><form>saluwásid</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>halfbeak</tr> with greenish coloring: <bio>Hemirhamphus georgii</bio>.

<p><form>salúyut</form> <pos>n</pos> commercial name for a wild vegetable: <pb n=862><ix>kukug banug</ix>. <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>KUKU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salwag</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ornamental <tr>palm</tr> similar to the areca palm: <bio>Adonidia merrillii</bio>.

<p><form>salwákì</form> <xr>= <sc>SALUWÁKÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salya</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>overflow</tr>, <tr>spill over</tr>. <i>Musalya ang mga manan-áway kun nindut ang salída,</i> There is an overflow of moviegoers when the picture is good. <i>Nagsalya ang sinakung bugas sa budíga,</i> Sacks of rice are spilling out of the door of the warehouse. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26; b2]</itype> be thrown off, splashed off from impact or pressure. <i>Misalya (nasalya) ang mga táwu sa trák pagkaigù niíni sa bumba,</i> The people were thrown from the truck when it was hit by the bomb. <i>Hingsalyahan ku sa bawud,</i> I was splashed by the water from the waves. <number>3</number> <itype>[A3; c]</itype> throw s.t. over into. <i>Akuy musalya sa mga káhuy ngadtu sa trák,</i> I will throw the firewood up into the truck. <i>Ayaw isalya sa ílang kural ang mga sagbut,</i> Do not throw the garbage over their fence.

<p><form>salyáda</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> in trawl fishing, pull in the net from the sea.

<p><form>sáma</form> <number>1</number> <tr>like</tr>, <tr>same</tr> as. <i>Sáma sa miáging iliksiyun, napildi siya pagkasinadur,</i> <tr>Just as</tr> in the last election, he lost in the race for senator. <number>2</number> <tr>similar</tr>. <i>Tan-áwa nang irúa, sáma kaáyu sa ímu,</i> Look at that dog. It is very similar to yours. <form>&mdash; ug balhíbu</form> <tr>birds of a feather</tr>. Sáma silag balhíbu. Púru sila sugarul, They're birds of a feather. Both of them are gamblers. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; b]</itype> be <tr>like</tr>, <tr>similar</tr> to. <i>Ug musáma ka níya, primyúhan ta ka,</i> If you can be like him, I'll give you a reward. <i>Samáhi ang íyang tanyag ug ákung ibaligyà,</i> <tr>Match</tr> his offer and I'll sell it. <number>2</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> <tr>treat</tr>, <tr>consider</tr> s.o. as, or similar to. <i>Ngánung isáma man ku nímu ni Pinduy nga dílì man ku nímu sulugúun?</i> Why do you treat me like Pindoy when I am not your servant? <form>samasáma</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C2]</itype> be <tr>fair</tr>, not taking undue advantage of one another. <i>Magsamasáma ta ug wà lay pamintaháay,</i> Let's be fair to each other and let's not take advantage of one another. <number>2</number> <itype>[C12]</itype> be in a spirit of good fellowship with s.o. <i>Dílì siya makigsamasáma nátù kay pubri ta,</i> He doesn't want to mix with us because we are poor. <form>paka-</form> <xr>= <sc>SÁMA</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr> <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.o. or s.t. that is <tr>similar</tr> to s.t. else. <i>Kasáma nákù siya ug dugù,</i> He has my type of blood. <form>kasamáhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>equity</tr>, <tr>fairness</tr>. <i>Usáhay sa pagpahamtang sa baláud mu rag walay kasamáhan,</i> Sometimes in the application of the law there seems to be no justice.

<p><form>samà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mistake</tr>. <i>Ákung usbun ang mga samà sa ákung trabáhu,</i> I'll correct the mistakes in my work. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; c1]</itype> make mistakes.

<p><form>sámad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>wound</tr>, <tr>hurt</tr>. <i>Ayawg dúlà ánang bildu kay makasámad nà,</i> Don't play with that glass because it can hurt you. <i>Samári (samdi) ug diyútay ang pánit arun makaguwà ang nánà,</i> Make a little incision in the skin so that pus can go out. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A123S; b8]</itype> manage to inflict a <tr>wound</tr>. <i>Ang íyang manuk walà makasamad sa ákù,</i> His cock wasn't able to <tr>wound</tr> mine. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> hurt s.o.'s feelings. <i>Púlung nga makasámad sa kasingkásing,</i> Words that can hurt one's feelings. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>wound</tr>, <tr>cut</tr>. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; nga walay pagkaáyu</formx> <tr>vagina</tr> (lit. the wound that never heals&mdash;humorous). <form>samaran, samarun, samdan</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>wounded</tr>. <i>Ang dinunggábay misamput sa tuluy samarun (samaran, samdan),</i> Three were wounded in the stabbing. <form>dughang samaran</form> <pos>n</pos> heart bleeding in sorrows (literary). <i>Kanus-a pa nímu kaluy-a ning dughang samaran?</i> When will you take pity on this bleeding heart?

<p><form>samágaw</form> <xr>= <sc>SALIMÁGAW</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>SALIMAGAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>samalabit, samalabits</form> <xr>= <sc>SALUMABITS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>samalúna</form> <xr>= <sc>SIMALÚNA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sam-ang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>cemetery</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>grave</tr>. <i>Mamíngaw kung sam-ang,</i> My lonely grave. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a <tr>burial place</tr> or cemetery. <i>Ang kanhi basakan sam-ángun sa gubyirnu munisipal,</i> The former marshland will be converted into a cemetery by the municipal government.

<p><form>Sámar</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Samar</tr>, an island in the Eastern Visayas. <form>-inyu, -nun</form> <pos>n</pos> one from the island of Samar.

<p><form>samàsamà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> dare do s.t. lightly, not in the proper place or time. <i>Nagsamàsamà mag súkul sa pulitikung tang-an, dì namunbun,</i> He had the nerve to take on a seasoned politician, so of course he was trounced. <i>Dì ta makasamàsamà ug pangáyù ug kwarta ni Máma ug sapútun,</i> We can't just ask Mother for money like that when she is in a bad mood.

<p><form>samaw, sámaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>glaring</tr> due to too much brilliance or light. <i>Magsan-glas ta kay samaw,</i> Let's wear sunglasses because it's glaring. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be dazzled or temporarily blinded because of glare.

<p><form>*samay</form> <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cloth</tr> woven from abaca fiber, used for stiffening parts of a dress that are meant to be stiff or for the lining of native bags and for other kinds of native costumes.

<p><form>samba<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. or hit the correct answer by luck. <i>Hingsambahan nákù ang tubag,</i> I hit on the right answer by luck. <number>2</number> get a chance to do s.t. that one isn't likely to get. <i>Maáyu gánì kay nakasamba kug sakay <pb n=863>sa ímung dyíp. Maglakaw lang untà ku,</i> Luckily I had the chance to get a ride on your jeep, because otherwise I would have had to walk. <pos>n</pos> s.t. done correctly by pure luck. <i>Samba lang tung pagkaigúa,</i> It was pure luck that you hit it.

<p><form>samba<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>samba</tr> music or dance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> dance the samba.

<p><form>sambà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> for plants to grow <tr>lush</tr> with plentiful leaves. <i>Musambà ang tanum ug abunúhan,</i> The plants will grow lush if you fertilize them. <pos>a</pos> having lush leaves.

<p><form>sambag<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>TAMBAG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>*sambag<sub>2</sub></form> <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>mackerel</tr> (<ix>tulíngan</ix>).

<p><form>sambag<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tamarind</tr>: <bio>Tamarindus indica</bio>. <form>sambagsambag</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>bush</tr> with leaves similar to tamarind leaves and which are used to bring a fever to a head.

<p><form>sambara</form> <xr>= <sc>PÍK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sambat</form> <xr>= <sc>SAKBAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sambil</form> <xr>= <sc>SUMBIL</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr>

<p><form>sambílat</form> <pos>n</pos> small loop at the end of a rope. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> make a loop at the end of a rope. <i>Sambiláti ang tumuys písì arun sayun nga kaw-ítan,</i> Make a loop at the end of the rope so it will be easy to put a hook to it.

<p><form>sambilay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> carry s.t. draped or slung over the shoulder. <i>Isambilay nang bag arun makahayun ka sa ímung buktun,</i> Sling the bag over your shoulder so you can swing your arms.

<p><form>sambíngay</form> <xr>= <sc>SUMBÍNGAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sambiri</form> <pos>n</pos> machine embroidery over the edges of cloth to prevent them from getting frazzled. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>embroider</tr> the edge of a piece of cloth.

<p><form>sambud</form> <xr>= <sc>SANGBUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sambug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>mix</tr> things together. <i>Isambug ring pipsi sa tubà,</i> Mix this Pepsi into the toddy. <number>1a</number> mix rice and corn together. <number>2</number> for emotions to have a tinge of s.t. else mixed. <i>Kalípayng gisambúgan ug panganduy,</i> Happiness <tr>tinged</tr> with a feeling of desire. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>mixture</tr>. <number>2</number> added <tr>ingredient</tr>. <i>Tambal sa ubu nga may sambug nga makapakatúlug,</i> Cough medicine that has an ingredient that will put you to sleep. <number>3</number> mixture of rice and corn. <i>Unsay átung lung-águn, sambug u lunlun?</i> What shall we fix for dinner. Pure rice or the mixture of rice and corn?

<p><form>sambul</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sensitive</tr>, readily susceptible to pain if touched. <i>Sambul ug masabdan ang uluk sa bag-ung gitúlì,</i> The head of a newly circumcised penis is highly sensitive. <i>Sambul kaáyu ning puling ug kipátun ning ákung mata,</i> The particle in my eye gives me discomfort when I blink my eyes. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> being <tr>sore</tr> and sensitive to pain if touched. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> be an eyesore. <i>Kanang barungbárung makasambul sa nindut nga parki,</i> These hovels are an eyesore in that beautiful park.[+]

<p><form>sambúlak</form> <xr>= <sc>SABÚLAK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sambúnut</form> <pos>n</pos> a rough <tr>scuffle</tr> with scrambling and no holds barred. <i>Sa sambúnut nahuslut ang íyang karsúnis,</i> In the scuffle his trousers came off. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; a2b3]</itype> have a rough scuffle with s.o. <i>Magsambúnut ta run ug dílì nímu iúlì ang ákung rilu,</i> We will have a real <tr>fight</tr> if you do not return my watch. <form>-ay</form> <xr>= <sc>SAMBÚNUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>samì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB56; ac]</itype> <tr>smudge</tr>, <tr>smear</tr> s.t. by not having s.t. hit the area intended. <i>Misamì (nasamì) ang lipstik sa íyang ngábil,</i> The lipstick smeared her lips. <i>Ayawg samia iniglitiring nímu,</i> Don't let it smudge when you print the letters. <i>Ayawg isamì inyung tái sa bangkíyu,</i> Don't let your feces smudge the toilet seat.

<p><form>sam-id</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>hone</tr>, <tr>sharpen</tr> s.t. to a high degree. <i>Sam-íra (isam-id) úsà nang labáha,</i> Sharpen that razor first. <number>2</number> <tr>sharpen</tr>, <tr>refine</tr> one's ability. <i>Sam-írun ku ang ákung ininglis,</i> I'll sharpen my ability in English. <form>sam-iran</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. to sharpen s.t. with. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. sharpened to gleaming sharpness.

<p><form>samilya</form> <xr>= <sc>SIMILYA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sámin<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SALAMIN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sámin<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>ISPÍHU</sc>, <i>n3.</i></xr>

<p><form>saminsámin<sub>1</sub></form> (from <ix>salamin</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>eardrum</tr>.

<p><form>saminsámin<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SALAMINSALAMIN</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>SALAMIN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sámir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>summer school</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b56]</itype> take summer classes. <i>Unsang sabdyíka ímung samírun (samíran)?</i> What subject are you going to take this summer? <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> take the ball used in practice shooting to the other goal for a short time, making a shot or two and bringing it back (slang).

<p><form>samkun</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3N2]</itype> be in the early stages of pregnancy. <i>Ug musamkun (manamkun) ku, kasukaun ku,</i> If I get pregnant, I feel like vomiting. <i>Dílì makasamkun (makapanamkun) ang íyang asáwa kay dipiktúsu siyag matris,</i> His wife cannot conceive because she has s.t. wrong with her uterus. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; c6]</itype> <tr>conceive</tr> an idea in the mind. <i>Dílì mulibkas sa ngábil nang mga pulúnga ug wà pa na isamkun sa hunàhúnà,</i> Those words would not have come out from the lips, if they had not been conceived in the mind. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> develop a craving or dislike in early pregnancy. <i>Ang mabdus nanamkun ug manggang hilaw,</i> The pregnant woman craved for green mangoes. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23; c]</itype> for a conceiving mother to have her child be like <pb n=864>s.t. she has a liking or craving for. <i>Gipanamkun siyag iring maung kusug mulayat,</i> When his mother was in her first few months with him, she took a liking to a cat. As a result he can jump high. <i>Ayawg panamkúni ang bábuy,</i> Don't conceive a fondness for pigs or your baby will be like one. <pos>n</pos> the cravings or dislikes one feels in early pregnancy.

<p><form>sampablu</form> <xr>= <sc>KARDÁBA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sampaday</form> <xr>= <sc>SAMPIRAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sampágà</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. deadly chicken ailment characterized by swelling on all parts of the body.

<p><form>sampagíta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jasmine</tr>, spreading and ornamental bush, grown for its fragrant flowers: <bio>Jasminum spp</bio>.

<p><form>sampak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23BN; c6P]</itype> be <tr>stuck</tr> or <tr>pushed</tr> all the way into s.t. else. <i>Misampak (nanampak) na ba ang gítung sa pul-an?</i> Is the tang stuck all the way into the handle? <i>Kinsay nagsampak (nagpasampak) áring lipak diri sa túbu?</i> Who stuck this stick all the way into the tube? <i>Isampak (ipasampak) ang pidal arun muháwid ang brík,</i> Push the brake pedal all the way down so that the brakes will hold. <number>2</number> <itype>[B256]</itype> for s.t. moving to come into contact with s.t. stationary. <i>Sa íyang pagtíra misampak ang táku sa táwu sa íyang luyu,</i> He hit the man in back of him with his cue when he was making his shot.

<p><form>sampáka</form> <xr>= <sc>TSAMPÁKA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sampal<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> <tr>slap</tr> s.o. with the hand on any part of the body, but esp. the face. <i>Akuy nagsampal sa ímung abága,</i> I slapped your shoulder hard.

<p><form>sampal<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. magic charm tied to the branches of fruit trees to prevent the fruit from being stolen. Stealing the fruits causes the victim to suffer swelling of the stomach and sometimes death. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> attach this charm to a tree.

<p><form>sampaling</form> <xr>= <sc>SAGPÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sampalita</form> <xr>= <sc>SAGPÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sampalung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> <tr>slap</tr> s.o. in the face. <i>Sampalungun ku nang mutsatsáha ug dílì mutúug sugúun,</i> I will slap that maid if she does not do what she's told to do. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>slap</tr> in the face. <number>2</number> an act or situation causing deep embarrassment.

<p><form>sampan</form> <pos>n</pos> a flat-bottomed, square-ended <tr>barge</tr> usually with no engines. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a1c]</itype> <number>1</number> go by, take a barge. <number>2</number> make into a barge.

<p><form>sampangkung -in-</form> <pos>a</pos> done poorly, shoddily. <i>Sinampangkung kaáyu ning pagkalutúa sa kík kay dinalian,</i> This cake is no good because we baked it hurriedly. <i>Sinampangkung ning ákung ininglis kay gamay ra man kug grádu,</i> My English is poor because I didn't go far in school. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> do s.t. shoddily.

<p><form>samparay</form> <xr>= <sc>SAMPIRAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>samparing</form> humorous pronunciation of <ix>sampaling</ix> &lsquo;slap in the face&rsquo; in imitation of Japanese soldiers.

<p><form>sampay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> hang laundry out. <i>Isampay ang linabhan sa hayhayan,</i> Hang the laundry on the clothesline. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>put up</tr> in s.o. else's place, cause one to do so. <i>Musampay unyà mi sa inyug higabin-an mi,</i> We'll put up at your house if it gets to be night. <i>Mga disgrasyáda nga nagsampay sa ílang mga anak sa asílu,</i> Unwed mothers who put their children in the orphanage. <i>Nasampay siya sa ámù pagkaílu níya,</i> He came to our place to live when he got orphaned. <form>sampaysampay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c]</itype> be shoved around from home to home as a dependent. <i>Nasampaysampay sa kaparyintíhan ang mga ílu,</i> The orphans were shoved around from one relative to another.

<p><form>sampayna</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> dish made of pig's innards and blood. <number>2</number> menstrual flow (humorous). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make <ix>sampayna</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[a4]</itype> <tr>menstruate</tr>.

<p><form>sampid</form> <xr>= <sc>SAMPIG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sampidru</form> <xr>= <sc>SAN PIDRU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sampig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put s.t. right next to s.t. else. <i>Isampig ang kaldíru sa kaláyu,</i> Put the pot next to the fire.

<p><form>sampil<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> moving with a <tr>limp</tr>. <i>Sampil kaáyung mulakaw si Badung kay balì siyag tiil,</i> Badong walks with a limp because he has a broken leg. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> get a <tr>limp</tr>.

<p><form>sampil<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> touch or brush against s.t. lightly. <i>Wà may nagsampil sa pluríra. Nahúlug lang nag íya ra,</i> Nobody <tr>touched</tr> that flower vase. It just fell by itself. <i>Sampíla ra nang táwu sa ímung duul arun mulíngì,</i> Please <tr>touch</tr> the man next to you so he turns around.

<p><form>sampilà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> carry s.t. astride the hips. <i>Ayaw sampilaa (isampilà) nang bátà kay tingálig mabakang nà,</i> Don't carry the child on your hip because she might become bowlegged. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> sit on one's buttocks with the legs crossed. <i>Binhúrun ka ug ímung sampilaun (isampilà) ang ímung paglingkud,</i> You will get cramps if you sit on your buttocks with the legs crossed.

<p><form>sampilay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> be drooping over the shoulders. <i>Misampilay ang úlu sa bátà,</i> The child's head was drooping on its shoulders. <i>Gisampilay níya ang tualya,</i> She drooped the towel over her shoulders.

<p><form>sampiling</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> swat on the cheeks.

<p><form>sampíling</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sideburns</tr>, the hair growing on <pb n=865>the face under the ears. <number>2</number> the back part of the jawbone under the ears or the analogous structure in animals. <form>paN-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> rest one's head by propping his cheeks in his hands. <i>Naglangkaw ka lang sa trabáhu kay síging nanampiling,</i> You're just sloughing off on the job because all you're doing is resting with your cheeks in your hands. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having thick sideburns.

<p><form>sampínit</form> <pos>n</pos> a thorny <tr>vine</tr> with compoundedly pinnate leaves of a yellowish, green color profusely armed. Several leaves, tied to the end of a stick, are used as a swatter to catch fruit bats in flight: <bio>Caesalpinia nuga</bio>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> catch fruit bats with <ix>sampínit</ix> leaves.

<p><form>sampiray</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> <tr>stagger</tr> or <tr>wobble</tr> in motion. <i>Magsampiray ang tinday nga bag-ung nahimugsù,</i> A newborn colt is <tr>wobbly</tr>. <i>Nagsampiray siya sa kahubug,</i> He was <tr>tottering</tr> because he was drunk.

<p><form>sampit</form> <xr>= <sc>SANGPIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sampiyad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> walk with the abdomen well forward. <i>Ang mabdus musampiyad ug lakaw,</i> A pregnant woman walks with her abdomen well forward.

<p><form>sampiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>champion</tr>, the most superior of all competitors. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a2]</itype> be, become a champion.

<p><form>sampul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sample</tr> given away to prospective users as a trial. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> give samples. <form>&mdash; bálut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sample ballot</tr>.[+]

<p><form>sampung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>cover</tr> or <tr>obstruct</tr> an opening or passage. <i>Akuy musampung ug tabla ánang bangag arun walay ilagà nga makaági,</i> I will cover the hole with a board so no rats can come in. <i>Sampúngi ug nuug arun dílì mutúlù,</i> <tr>Plug</tr> it with a rag so it won't drip. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> reach the highest part of s.t. <i>Ígù ming nakasampung sa bungtud mau say pagdulhug níla,</i> They were descending just as we had reached the summit. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>-AN(&rarr;)</sc>.</xr> <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> cover an opening in one's body. <i>Panampung ug muatsi ka,</i> Cover your nose and mouth when you sneeze. <form>-an(&rarr;), paN-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> the triangular portion in the upper part of the wall at the end of a ridged roof, from the level of eaves upwards. <form>kina-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> the highest part of s.t., <tr>apex</tr>. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> small part of the rice in the field left to be harvested. <i>Aku na lay tiwas ug áni sa sampungun,</i> I'll just finish up harvesting this remaining portion of the rice field.

<p><form>sampúngut</form> (from <ix>púngut</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>thicket</tr> of intertwining bushes, vines, and branches of trees. <i>Didtu ang langgam magbatug sa sampúngut,</i> The bird was perched in the thick growth of branches. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> form a thick tangle of branches and growth.

<p><form>sampura</form> <xr>= <sc>SAMPURÁDU<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sampurádu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a mixture of salt and fresh water or tasting thereof. <i>Ang túbig sa bukána sa subà sampurádu,</i> The mouth of a river is a mixture of salt and fresh water.

<p><form>sampurádu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> rice <tr>porridge</tr> with chocolate and sugar. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make <ix>sampurádu</ix>.

<p><form>sampuráwu</form> <xr>= <sc>SAMPURÁDU<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>samput</form> <xr>= <sc>SANGPUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>samsam</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> move the lips in speaking without making a sound. <i>Musamsam siya sa íyang urasiyun ug ang irù dílì makapaak níya,</i> He mumbles his magic formula and the dog can't bite him. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> eat light food to keep the mouth occupied while doing s.t. else. <i>Magsamsam giyud nà siya kanúnay ug biskwit sa íyang trabáhu,</i> He keeps eating crackers idly while he is at work. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> in folk belief, a magic charm chewed so that one does not get hit in battle. <number>2</number> k.o. wild <tr>vine</tr> which tastes like betel leaves and chewed to treat toothache.

<p><form>samsuy</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>hood</tr> made of woven palm leaflets covering the entire head and back, worn as a protection against rain. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, make this sort of hood.

<p><form>samtang</form> <tr>while</tr>, at the same time as. <i>Pagbása samtang nagpaábut ka,</i> Read while you are waiting. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> time in the <tr>meanwhile</tr>. <i>Sa kasamtángan, siya ang intsards,</i> For the <tr>meantime</tr>, he is in charge. <number>2</number> person acting in temporary or substitute capacity. <i>Kasamtángan nga mamahandì sa kapunúngan,</i> The <tr>acting</tr> treasurer of the organization. <form>ka-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>temporary</tr>. <i>Hatágan kag kasamtangan nga kagawásan kun magbinuutan,</i> You will be given temporal liberty if you behave well.

<p><form>samu</form> <ix>short for</ix> <bx>sa ímu</bx> it doesn't matter to me. <i>Samu ug madáut, maáyu man ug ákù nang mutur,</i> I don't care if the motorcycle gets broken; it is not mine anyway. <form>&mdash; lang</form> <number>1</number> <tr>never mind</tr>, don't take it to heart. <i>Samu lang ug wà iúlì ang libru, ákù man tà tung ihátag níya,</i> Never mind if she didn't return the book. I was going to give it to her anyway. <number>2</number> it doesn't matter. I accept the situation with good grace. <i>Samu lag pagawpaw ang yútà. Dì ku man nà tamnan,</i> It doesn't matter if the land is barren. I wasn't going to plant anything on it anyway.

<p><form>sámù</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. brown <tr>seaweed</tr> that grows rooted, with small nodules scattered over its branches. It is hung on plants to rid them of worms.

<p><form>samúal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P]</itype> talk unintelligibly due to a cold or when the mouth is filled with food. <pb n=866><i>Nagsamúal ka dihà. Búsà tunla ang kan-un nga ímung giúsap,</i> I can't understand a word you're saying, so swallow the food you are chewing.

<p><form>samúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> farm tenant. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56; a2]</itype> be a tenant. <i>Samuhánun námù ang ímung igágaw,</i> We will employ your cousin as a tenant. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> have one's land be taken care of by tenants.

<p><form>sámuk</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bothersome</tr>. <i>Sámuk kaáyu ning batáa nga galmun kay kanúnayng mangáyù ug túbig,</i> This child is a <tr>nuisance</tr> to take care of because he's constantly asking for water. <number>2</number> <tr>crowded</tr> and <tr>chaotic</tr> with activity. <i>Sámuk kaáyu ang Tabuan ug malúnis,</i> Taboan market is very <tr>busy</tr> on Mondays. <i>Sámuk kaáyu ang upisína kay namalhin mi,</i> The office is in an uproar now because we just moved. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>disturb</tr>, <tr>bother</tr>. <i>Latiguhan ang bisag kinsay musámuk dinhi,</i> I'll whip anybody that makes noise here. <i>Dúna kuy isámuk nímu kadiyut,</i> I have a favor to ask of you (lit. s.t. to disturb you with). <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fight</tr>, <tr>disturbance</tr>. <i>Dinhay sámuk sa ámung klási; nagsumbagay,</i> There was trouble in the class. S.o. was fighting. <number>2</number> that which bothers, annoys. <i>Maáyu puy-an sa búkid kay way sámuk,</i> The country is a nice place to live because there are no <tr>annoyances</tr>. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>trouble</tr>, <tr>bother</tr>. <i>Ang ímung pagkapalahúbug makahatag ug dílì gamayng kasámuk,</i> Your drinking causes us no end of trouble. <number>2</number> <tr>war</tr>, esp. the <tr>Second World War</tr>. <i>Natáwu siya sa miáging kasámuk,</i> He was born during the recent war. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> given to causing trouble or giving inconvenience. <form>-in(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> endearing way of referring to s.o. that is troublesome. <i>Samukin giyung bat-ána,</i> This kid is a cute little <tr>troublemaker</tr>. [+]

<p><form>samúk</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>fish</tr>: <bio>Gerres spp</bio>.

<p><form>samung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>top shells</tr>. <form>samungsamung</form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>top shells</tr>.

<p><form>samut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23P]</itype> become more so, do all the more. <i>Pagkabatì níya sa balità, misamut siya ug hílak,</i> After hearing the news, she cried all the more. <i>Misamut kaguul,</i> She got all the more worried. <i>Ug dílì ka mupahúway musamut ang ímung húbak,</i> If you do not rest your asthma will get worse.

<p><form>samuyaw, samúyaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>citrus tree</tr> 6&ndash;10´ tall, with marble-sized fruit, very juicy and sour, tasting like limes: <bio>Citrus hystrix var. microcarpa</bio>.

<p><form>san<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> title of address of most male saints.

<p><form>san<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SA<sub>1</sub></sc> <i>2, 3, 4, 5, 6</i> (dialectal).</xr>

<p><form>sán</form> <xr>= <sc>SÁLAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sana<sub>1</sub></form> <xr><ix>short for</ix> <sc>UNSA NA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sana<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SANASÁNA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sanad</form> (from <ix>anad</ix>) <tr>usually</tr> [do]. <i>Sanad siyang muanhi sa may mga alas trís,</i> He usually comes at about three o'clock. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> doing s.t. skillfully. <i>Sanad na kaáyu kung mumaníhug awtu,</i> I now drive the car very well. <number>2</number> being very <tr>familiar</tr> with s.t. <i>Magpahagíyus lang kus dálan sa Tulídu kay sanad na kaáyu ku ánà,</i> I just whizz over the road to Toledo because I am very familiar with it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become <tr>expert</tr> in doing s.t. or <tr>familiar</tr> with s.t.

<p><form>sanag</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>cheerful</tr> of countenance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a12P]</itype> be, become, make cheerful. <i>Karung balitáa makasanag (makapasanag) sa átung buut,</i> This piece of news can get us in a cheerful mood. <form>ma-un(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> characterized with cheer. <number>2</number> giving intimation of a bright outcome. <i>Masanágun siyag kaugmáun,</i> He has a bright future.

<p><form>sanan, sánan</form> and (dialectal).

<p><form>sánap</form> <xr>= <sc>SALÁNAP</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sanasána</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>practice</tr>, <tr>rehearse</tr> a particular skill or act. <i>Nagsanasána ku sa ákung pakigpúlung,</i> I am practicing my speech. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> try s.t. on before actually wearing it. <i>Isanasána ang sinínà ug angayan ka ba,</i> Try that dress on and see if it becomes you.

<p><form>sanaturyum</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sanatorium</tr>.

<p><form>sánaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a very watery <tr>porridge</tr>. <i>Magsánaw ta pára pamáhaw,</i> Let's make watery porridge for our breakfast. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> stew food in coconut juice. <i>Gisanáwan níya ang kinhasun,</i> He stewed the seashells in coconut juice. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> very watery <tr>porridge</tr>. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> food stewed in coconut juice.

<p><form>sánaw<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for heights to give a dizzy feeling. <i>Pagkasánaw tan-áwun sa ubus,</i> How <tr>dizzying</tr> it is to look below. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> give a dizzy feeling. <i>Gisanáwan ku sa ubus gíkan sa kampanaryu,</i> I felt <tr>dizzy</tr> looking down from the bell tower.

<p><form>sánay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a12P]</itype> <tr>multiply</tr>, <tr>procreate</tr>. <i>Ug musánay nang ímung ítik, baligyái kug usa ka pár,</i> If your ducks multiply, sell me a pair. <form>manggi-un, ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> prolific in reproducing.

<p><form>sanaysánay</form> <xr>= <sc>SANASÁNA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sanburn</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sunburn</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get sunburned.

<p><form>sandak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b4]</itype> for the stomach to be distended with gas. <i>Gipanúhut siya, maung nagsandak ang tiyan,</i> He has had gas pains, and so his stomach is distended.

<p><form>sandal</form> <xr>= <sc>SANDALYAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sandalyas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sandals</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> wear or use sandals.

<p><form>sandanan</form> <xr>= <sc>SANDANUN</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=867>

<p><form>sandánaw</form> <xr>= <sc>ALINDÁNAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sandanay, sandanun</form> <pos>n</pos> a name close friends or relatives call each other mutually. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c6]</itype> call each other by a special name mutually. <i>Nagsandanay ang mga mag-ágaw ug &lsquo;prímu&rsquo;,</i> The cousins call each other &lsquo;primo&rsquo;.

<p><form>sandaw</form> <pos>a</pos> for s.t. that normally produces a certain amount, to have a small yield. <i>Sandaw ang lubi kay dúgay ang húlaw,</i> The yield of the coconut trees decreased considerably in the long drought. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a4]</itype> come to give a low yield. <i>Nasandaw (gisandaw) ang kadagátan dinhi sa pagdininamíta,</i> The yield of the seas in this area has become considerably reduced because of all the dynamite fishing.

<p><form>sanday</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> lay or rest s.t. on and across s.t. else. <i>Kanang trúsu nga nagsanday sa kural mauy makapahugnù niánà,</i> The log that is laid across that fence will make it collapse. <i>Isanday ang sumbuhan arun makatíun kag maáyu,</i> Rest the barrel on s.t. so that you can take good aim.

<p><form>sandayung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> roof gutter. <number>2</number> gutter, usually made of a large bamboo tube, used to channel water from an elevated position. <i>Gihimúag sandayung ang tubud,</i> A gutter was made for the spring. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make into, attach a roof gutter.

<p><form>sandig</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB6; c]</itype> lean against s.t., cause s.t. to do so. <i>Ayawg sandígi ang kural kay matumba,</i> Don't lean on the fence because it will topple. <i>Isandig ang sag-ub sa káhuy,</i> Let the bamboo water container lean against the tree. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> rely on, depend on s.t. one can avail himself of. <i>Mudaug ang ímung kandidatúra ug musandig ka sa partídu,</i> You will win if you rely on the party. <number>3</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> pin one's hopes on s.t. <i>Anhà nákù isandig ang átung kaugmáun sa ímung kalampúsan,</i> I pin our hopes for the future on your success. <form>&mdash; sa kalíwat</form> take after a forebear's characteristic or peculiarity. <i>Palahúbug siya kay sandig man sa kalíwat,</i> He is a drinker, because he takes after his forebears. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> cause to lean. <number>2</number> base on. <i>Sugilánung gipasandig sa Biblíya,</i> A story based on the Bible. <form>-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> back rest.

<p><form>sandi skul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> Sunday school. <number>2</number> gambling games and cockfights held Sundays (humorous). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> hold a Sunday-school class.

<p><form>sandíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> watermelon. <number>2</number> watermelon seeds, dried and salted.

<p><form>sandu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sleeveless undershirt worn by women. <number>2</number> men's sleeveless undershirt of similar shape. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6(1)]</itype> wear this garment. <i>Náa nay brá. Magsandu pa giyud,</i> Are you going to wear chemise over your bra?

<p><form>sandúgù</form> (from <ix>usa</ix> and <ix>dugù</ix>) <pos>n</pos> blood compact. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; b6]</itype> make a blood compact. <i>Nagsandúgù sila si Ligaspi ug Sikatúna,</i> Legaspi and Sikatuna made a blood compact.

<p><form>sanduk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> scoop s.t. out or off of. <i>Sandúkun ta ning lápuk sa kanal arun makaagi ang túbig,</i> We will scoop out the mud from the ditch so the water can pass through. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> scoop. <number>2</number> utensil used to scoop rice from the pot. <number>3</number> a scoopful. <i>Butangi ug tulu ka sanduk balas,</i> Put in three shovelfuls of sand. <form>ig-l-</form> <xr>= <sc>SANDUK</sc>, <i>n1, 2.</i></xr>

<p><form>sandul</form> <xr>= <sc>SINDUL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sanduluy</form> <pos>n</pos> cooked cereals, usually corn, with sweet potato mixed in. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> cook rice or corn with sweet potato. <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>SANDULUY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sandúrut</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>intimate</tr>. <i>Sandúrut kaáyu silang amigúha,</i> They are very intimate friends. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C1]</itype> be, become intimate with s.o. <i>Dílì ku makigsandúrut ug tabian,</i> I don't want to become intimate with gossipmongers. <form>ma-in-un, ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>friendly</tr>, done as would be done to a friend. <i>Masinandurútun nga pagabiábi,</i> Entertaining in a most friendly manner. <form>maki-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>friendly</tr>, tending to treat people amiably. <i>Sayun ra siyang pakigsabútan kay makisandurútun man,</i> It is easy to make an agreement with him because he is amiable. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> one with whom one is on intimate terms.

<p><form>sandùsandù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b6]</itype> scurry about in all directions. <i>Misandùsandù ang mga humígas pagpangítag makáun,</i> The ants scurried about looking for food. <i>Nagsandùsandù mig dágan paglínug,</i> We ran every which way when the earthquake struck.

<p><form>sang</form> <xr>= <sc>SA<sub>1</sub></sc>, <i>2, 3, 4, 5, 6</i> (dialectal).</xr>

<p><form>sáng</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; c1]</itype> be strewn all over, be in disarray. <i>Nagsáng ang mga butang sa íyang lamísa,</i> The things on his table are all in disarray.

<p><form>sanga</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>branch</tr>, limb of a tree. <i>Ang langgam nagbatug sa sanga,</i> The bird perched on a branch. <number>2</number> lateral extension of a road or path. <i>Sa tuung sanga sa dálan,</i> On the right branch of the path. <number>3</number> fork of a slingshot. <number>4</number> bamboo or wooden hook attached to a rope used to draw up a fish trap from the water. <number>5</number> an extra finger or toe in addition to the normal five. <form>&mdash; nga buhatan</form> <tr>branch office</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1</number> have or grow a branch. <i>Ang mais dílì musanga,</i> Corn doesn't grow branches. <number>2</number> for the road to fork. <i>Inig-abut sa nagsangang karsáda, disilya,</i> When you get to the fork in the road, take the left. <form>&mdash; ang dílà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> be fierce and violent (like a snake with a forked tongue). <i>Musúkul <pb n=868>giyud ku nímu bísag nagsanga pa nang ímung dílà,</i> I'll fight back against you even if you are fierce and violent. <form>&mdash; ang tinggil</form> <pos>a</pos> for a woman to have sexual appetite (lit. have a forked clitoris). (&larr;) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <xr>= <sc>SANGA</sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr> <form>sangasanga</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> fell a tree branch by branch. <form>sanghan</form> <pos>a</pos> having an extra finger or toe branching off. <form>kinasang-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the place where the road forks off. <number>2</number> crotch of a tree branch.

<p><form>sánga</form> <xr>= <sc>PANTÍHAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sángab</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> swath or a long rectangular area designated as an area to be worked. <i>Maggálab ta ug kúgun, kining sangába ákù, ang píkas ímu,</i> We will cut down the cogon. This swath is mine and that one is yours. <i>Sángab nga ági sa ílang panggúna,</i> The swath that was left when they cut grass. <number>2</number> k.o. fish trap of shallow waters with a broad mouth tapering towards the bottom, set in the path of the fish. <pos>a</pos> right in the path. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. in swaths. <i>Sangábun (sangában) nátù nag sanggì ug tagurha ka dupa,</i> We will harvest it in swaths two fathoms wide. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put s.t. right in the path. <i>Nasángab sa íyang mata ang páa sa dalága nga atbang níyag lingkud,</i> He couldn't help seeing the thighs of the girl sitting directly across from him. <i>Isángab nang sugung sa túbud,</i> Put the mouth of the bamboo tube to the spring. <number>3</number> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> catch fish with a <ix>sángab</ix> fish trap.

<p><form>sángad</form> <xr>= <sc>SANGLAD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sángag</form> <xr>= <sc>SANGLAG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sángan</form> <xr>= <sc>PANTÍHAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sángat</form> <xr>= <sc>SANG-AT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sang-at</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> put s.t. up s.w. <i>Isang-at ni dihà sa paril arun dílì maabut sa irù,</i> Put this on top of the fence so the dog cannot get at it. <number>2</number> file a suit or complaint in court or petition with the proper authorities. <i>Ang piskal mauy nagsang-at sa kíha imbis ang tagtúngud,</i> The district attorney filed the complaint in place of the aggrieved party. <form>hi-/ha-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <i>1</i> be put up high. <number>2</number> for success or s.t. that one desires to be located s.w. (literary). <i>Anhà sa paningkámut mahisang-at ang ímung kalampúsan,</i> Your success rests on hard work. <form>-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shelf</tr>, usually higher than shoulder-level.

<p><form>sangay</form> <pos>n</pos> people having the same first name. <i>Ang santus kung sangay,</i> The saint I'm named after. (&larr;) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C3]</itype> have the same first name.

<p><form>sángay</form> <xr>= <sc>SANGLAY<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sang-ay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> carry s.t. on or sling over the shoulders. <i>Nagsang-ayg bátà,</i> Carrying a child on one shoulder. <i>Isang-ay (sang-áya) ang malíta,</i> Carry the suitcase on your shoulder.

<p><form>sangbat</form> <xr>= <sc>SAKBAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sangbud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b8]</itype> for the tether rope of an animal to get tangled on itself or around s.t. else. <i>Nagsambud ang písì sa kábaw ug diriyut matuuk,</i> The water buffalo's rope got tangled and the animal nearly choked. <form>sangburan</form> <pos>n</pos> length of tubing made of a piece of bamboo 7&ndash;8&Prime; long, used for storing yarn.

<p><form>sangga<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> <tr>barge in</tr> on a conversation, games. <i>Ngánung musangga man ka nga wà ka man mahibalu sa ámung gisultíhan?</i> Why do you barge in when you don't know what we are talking about? <i>Ngánung sanggáhun man nímu ang dúlà ug dì ka paapilun?</i> Why do you force your way into the game if you are not supposed to participate?

<p><form>sangga<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> in children's games involving bets (of rubber bands and the like), one's partner with whom one pools his bets. <i>Pangáyù ug sigay sa ímung sangga ug mapildi ka,</i> Ask for some more cowries from your partner if you lose. <number>2</number> close <tr>friend</tr>. <i>Kaila ku kaáyu níya kay sangga ku siya sa ámung pagkabátà,</i> I know him very well because he has been my <tr>chum</tr> since childhood days. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2C; ac3]</itype> make s.o. his partner for games. <number>2</number> <itype>[C1]</itype> be friends with s.o. <form>ka-</form> <xr>= <sc>SANGGA</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p><form>sanggà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> be underneath s.t. so that it supports or protects it. <i>Kanang língin nga nagsanggà sa misitíra plastik,</i> That round thing the flower pot is resting on is plastic. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> put s.t. under s.t. else. <i>Sanggáa ug batu ang halígi arun dílì suphun sa umug,</i> Place a stone slab under the post so moisture can't penetrate. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> catch s.t. dripping or falling with a container. <i>Nagsanggà siya sa inágay nga túbig sa íyang kamut,</i> He cupped his hands to catch the dripping water. <pos>n</pos> <tr>saucer</tr>.

<p><form>sanggab<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> catch a liquid that is dripping or falling by sticking s.t. under it. <i>Sanggába ang gátas nga nagtulù sa lamísa,</i> Catch the milk that is dripping off the edge of the table. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> be caught by the ear. <i>Ang huhungíhung sa pagwilga mauy nasanggab sa íyang dalunggan,</i> The rumors of the strike caught his ears. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make a palm toddy container <ix>sanggab</ix>. <pos>n</pos> a bamboo tube container for palm toddy, the length of one node, the bottom of which is the lower node.

<p><form>sanggab<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fishing <tr>net</tr> used in bays, attached to fish corrals, set such that the current hits them broadside at certain seasons of the year. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> set the <ix>sanggab</ix>. <i>Magsanggab <pb n=869>rung bulána,</i> The <ix>sanggab</ix> will be set this month. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> catch fish with a <ix>sanggab</ix>.

<p><form>sanggabun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> gamecocks of a kind that are killed during the first match. <number>2</number> woman that easily gets pregnant out of wedlock.

<p><form>sanggákà</form> <pos>a</pos> for plants to spread out in the branches or roots. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be, become <tr>outspreading</tr>. <i>Ug musanggákà kunu ang sanga, diyútay ang búnga,</i> If the tree has lush and spreading branches, they say it will bear few fruit.

<p><form>sanggaráyung</form> <xr>= <sc>SINGGURÁYUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sanggat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[Ab6; b8]</itype> catch or <tr>snag</tr> when being pulled; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Lagmit musanggat ang tagà sa mga batus ilálum,</i> Most likely the hook will snag on the stones on the bottom. <i>Ikay nagsanggat sa tagà; karun ikay tangtang,</i> You let the hook snag so you get it loose.

<p><form>sanggì</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>rip</tr>, <tr>break off</tr> s.t. stiff at the place of attachment. <i>Nasanggì ang palwa pagtunub níya,</i> The coconut palm frond broke off when he stepped on it. <i>Misalingsing ang gisanggían sa sanga,</i> The place where a branch was broken off grew new shoots. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> harvest corn. <i>Mananggì ta rung simanáha. Layà na ang mais,</i> We harvest the corn this week because it is ready now. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> action of <tr>harvesting</tr>. <i>Ang sanggì pagahimúun sunud búlan,</i> The harvest will be held next month. <number>2</number> output realized from a specific harvest. <i>Dakù mig sanggì,</i> We had a big <tr>harvest</tr>. <form>-l-un(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mature</tr>, ready for harvest. <form>maN-r-/l-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>harvester</tr>.

<p><form>sanggíkit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> for people, vegetation to be <tr>close</tr> to each other. <i>Nagsanggíkit ang mga káhuy sa anut,</i> The trees in the second-growth forest are growing <tr>thick</tr>. <i>Dílì ku makatulug ug dílì makasanggíkit sa láwas sa ákung bána,</i> I cannot sleep if I am not close to my husband's body. <i>Nasanggíkit ang pagbátì sa duha ka bihag,</i> The captives developed a close feeling for one another. <i>Ayaw sanggikíta (isanggíkit) pagbutang ang mga bangkù,</i> Don't put the benches close to each other.

<p><form>sanggra</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> vaccinate by pricking with a needle, not with a shot. <number>2</number> the wound caused by <tr>vaccination</tr> or the scar left. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>vaccinate</tr>. <i>Sanggráhan ka úsà ka makalangyaw,</i> You have to be vaccinated before you can go abroad.

<p><form>sangguli</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>drink</tr> made of palm toddy, chocolate, and eggs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make, have a toddy shake.

<p><form>sangguráyung</form> <xr>= <sc>SINGGURÁYUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sanggut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sickle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN2; b(1)N]</itype> get palm toddy from a coconut tree. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a sickle. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> coconut tree from which one obtains palm toddy. <form>-in-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pidgin</tr> (lit. s.t. just picked up as toddy from a coconut tree). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> speak pidgin. <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> palm toddy gatherer.

<p><form>sangguwar</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. white, somewhat round-grained <tr>rice</tr>.

<p><form>sanghid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6N]</itype> <tr>ask permission</tr>. <i>Misanghid (nananghid) siyang Máma níya nga muadtu siya sa sini,</i> He asked his ma to let him go to the show. <i>Ninyung tulu kinsay nananghid?</i> Which one of you three asked permission to go? <i>Ug nakasanghid (nakapananghid) kang Pápa, dad-a nang kabáyù,</i> If you have asked Dad, you may take the horse. <i>Kinsay ímung gisanghíran (gipananghíran) pagkúhà nímu sa mutur?</i> Who did you ask when you took the motorcycle? <pos>n</pos> <tr>permission</tr>. <i>Kini si Pidru kanúnayng mulakaw nga walay sanghid (pananghid),</i> Pedro always goes out without asking permission. <form>paN-</form> <xr>= <sc>SANGHID</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p><form>sangì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB6; a]</itype> break a piece off s.t. at its attachment or edge. <i>Kinsay nagsangì sa sabungánan sa kálù,</i> Who <tr>detached</tr> the thing to hang the hats on? <i>Dalì ra ning ákung kuku musangì (masangì),</i> My nails <tr>break</tr> easily.

<p><form>sángì</form> <pos>n</pos> road <tr>intersection</tr>.

<p><form>sangig</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. erect, hairy, aromatic <tr>herb</tr>, widely used as a spice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>season</tr> with sangig.

<p><form>*sángil</form> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>blame</tr>, <tr>impute</tr> s.o. with a fault. <i>Siyay nagpasángil nga akuy naglábay sa irù,</i> He is <tr>accusing</tr> me of stoning the dog. <i>Ang húlaw gipasanginlan sa kangihit sa bugas,</i> Drought was blamed for the scarcity of corn. <i>Ug náay pyansa ang gipasanginlan makaguwà sa prísu,</i> If bail is posted, the accused party can get out of jail. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> make excuses, pretend to do s.t. for a purpose. <i>Mupasángil ka ug pamisíta, sa tinúud naníid ka níla,</i> You make a pretense of visiting them when in truth you are observing them. <i>Ug mupalta ka, ipasángil lang sa labad sa úlu,</i> If you want to be absent, just say you had a headache. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>charge</tr>, <tr>accusation</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>excuse</tr> for not doing s.t. <form>-um-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> make or offer an excuse. <i>Walà siya katubag ug misumángil nga gidukà siya,</i> He was not able to answer and made the excuse that he was drowsy. <form>pasumángil</form> <xr>= <sc>PASÁNGIL</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr>

<p><form>sángit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b8cP]</itype> be in the way and <tr>hold</tr> s.t. in place, <tr>snag</tr>, <tr>catch</tr>. <i>Kining tungguytungguy mauy musángit sa pinsúti,</i> This lug is what holds the firing pin back. <i>Kuháa nang mga lipak dihà kay makasángit sa muági.</i> <pb n=870>Get those bamboo slats out of there because they might snag people that go by there. <i>Way kasangítan ang antiyúhus kay mubù siyag ilung,</i> The eyeglasses won't hold because her nose is so short. <number>2</number> <itype>[B125; b4(1)]</itype> be <tr>delayed</tr> by s.t. which ordinarily should not have caused the delay. <i>Naulahi mi kay nasángit mi didtu sa bilyaran,</i> We are late because we were delayed at the pool hall.

<p><form>sangkà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>contest</tr> matching skill, wit, strength or a q<tr>uarrel</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C; b8]</itype> have a contest of strength, wit, skill. <i>Magsangkà tag makatulu. Píhu giyud ug kinsay pildi,</i> We will play it off three times. Then it should be clear who is the loser. <i>Unsa may inyung gikasangkaan?</i> What did you two quarrel about? <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> <tr>pair off</tr> two contenders in a match. <i>Sangkáun nátù ang átung isig ka sunuy,</i> Let's pair off our gamecocks.

<p><form>sangkà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for the crotch to be too tight. <i>Apíking ilakaw ning karsunísa kay sangkà rag pundíyu,</i> It's hard to walk in these pants because the crotch is too tight. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> have a crotch that is too tight.

<p><form>sangkad</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>broad</tr>, having ample width. <i>Sangkad nga panaptun,</i> Cloth that is of ample width. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be completely <tr>covered</tr> with s.t. <i>Ang íyang nawung nasangkad ug bugas,</i> Her face is all covered with pimples. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> do s.t. to the entire area of s.t. <i>Sangkára ug páhid ug asíti ang káhuy,</i> Smear oil <tr>all over</tr> the wood. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12; c16]</itype> be <tr>enough</tr> for everybody. <i>Ang lima ka buuk tinápay ni Hisus nakasangkad sa gatusan ka mga táwu,</i> Jesus' five loaves of bread were enough to feed hundreds of people. <number>4</number> <itype>[b4(1)]</itype> have one's fill of s.t. <i>Nasangkaran sa bunal ang mga bátang nag-áway,</i> The quarreling children got a whipping such that they decided they never wanted to do it again. <form>ka-, gisangkarun, kasangkarun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>width</tr>, <tr>breadth</tr>. <i>Ang lamísa may kasangkad (gisangkarun, kasangkarun) nga duha ka mitru,</i> The table is two meters wide.

<p><form>sangkap</form> (from <ix>salangkap</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <tr>complete</tr>, having the necessary equipment. <i>Kusína nga sangkap sa galamitun,</i> A kitchen completely equipped. <i>Sangkap kaáyu siya sa pangáyu sa awtu,</i> He is completely equipped to repair cars. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> for equipment to become <tr>complete</tr>. <i>Ug musangkap na ang balhíbu, ang kuyabug makalupad na,</i> The nestling can fly once he gets his complete feathers. <i>Nasangkap na ang tangu sa bátà,</i> The child has all of his teeth now. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>equip</tr> with needed things. <i>Akuy sangkap nímug galamitun sa pamanday,</i> I will equip you with carpentry tools. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>SALANGKAP</sc>.</xr> <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>equipment</tr>, <tr>tools</tr>. <i>Gihímù ka lang kasangkápan arun mulusut ang kuntrabandu,</i> They are only using you as a <tr>tool</tr> to smuggle in their goods.

<p><form>sangkay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>friend</tr> (slang). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3PC; a12]</itype> make friends, <tr>befriend</tr>, be close to each other (slang). <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> group of friends, <tr>gang</tr>.

<p><form>sangkay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>throw</tr> s.t. with moderate force in an underhand motion. <i>Kinsay nagsangkay ug sinilhig diris asíras?</i> Who threw the sweepings on the sidewalk?

<p><form>sangkayud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; a12]</itype> walk slowly with halting steps and a slight forward thrust of the hips. <i>Nagsangkayud paglakaw ang babáying nagbatì,</i> The woman who was in labor walked haltingly with a thrust of the abdomen. <pos>a</pos> walking in this way.

<p><form>sangki</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. aromatic Chinese <tr>spice</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> spice with <ix>sangki</ix>.

<p><form>sangkíguy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; a]</itype> have <tr>sexual intercourse</tr> (humorous). <i>Bisan sa banyu nagsangkíguy sila,</i> They do it anywhere, even in the bathroom.

<p><form>sangkiig</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> <tr>totter</tr> as one walks under a burden or because of difficulty in getting one's footing. <i>Nagsangkiig ang kargadur,</i> The stevedore is tottering under the heavy load. <number>2</number> <itype>[B146]</itype> be heavily burdened financially. <i>Nagsangkiig ku sa pagpaiskuyla sa mga bátà,</i> I am staggering under the burden of sending my children to school.

<p><form>sangkil</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> <tr>touch</tr> or <tr>brush</tr> s.o. or s.t. lightly. <i>Ug musangkil ang alambri sa iliktrisidad sa linya sa tiligrama, náay hikurintihan,</i> If the electric line touches the telegraph wire, s.o. will be electrocuted. <i>Sangkíla sa kuhit arun matambug nang kartun,</i> Touch the box with the stick so that it will fall. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a1b2]</itype> gore with the horns. <i>Ayaw pagpaduul niánang kabáwa kay musangkil (manangkil) ra ba giyud nà,</i> Don't go near that water buffalo because it gores. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> for an unpleasant feeling to bother one. <i>Ang pangabubhu nga nagsangkil sa íyang dughan,</i> Jealousy which pricks his heart. <form>-aN-r-</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ANANANGKIL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sangkiríbut</form> <xr>= <sc>SINGKIRÍBUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sangkis</form> <xr>= <sc>SANKIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sangkiyud</form> <xr>= <sc>SANGKAYUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sangkù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; ac]</itype> <tr>reach</tr>, <tr>arrive</tr> at a point in time or place. <i>Kining dalána musangkù sa subà,</i> This path reaches the river. <i>Makasangkù sa lángit ang ákung kasukù,</i> My anger knows no limits (reaches the high heavens). <i>Unsay gitas-un ang gisangkúan sa íyang pagluksu?</i> <pb n=871>How high did he manage to jump? <number>2</number> <itype>[A23; b6]</itype> <tr>end up</tr>, <tr>result in</tr>. <i>Ang ílang dúlà misangkù sa áway,</i> Their game ended up in a quarrel. <i>Ang ílang panaghigála misangkù sa panaghigugmaay,</i> Their friendship eventually led to love.

<p><form>sangkung</form> <xr>= <sc>SAKUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sangkuráyung, sangkuriyung</form> <xr>= <sc>SINGGURÁYUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sangla</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>leprosy</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be afflicted with leprosy. <form>sanglahun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>leper</tr>.

<p><form>sanglad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2; c]</itype> <tr>run aground</tr>, <tr>stranded</tr> on the sand; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Mangluksu ang mga sundálu sa dì pa musanglad ang bards,</i> The soldiers jump off before the barge hits the beach. <i>Ang barku nasanglad sa bàbà sa subà,</i> The ship is stranded at the mouth of the river.

<p><form>sanglag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>roast</tr> s.t. in a pan with little or no oil. <i>Maáyung pagkasanglag sa kapi,</i> The coffee was well roasted. <pos>n</pos> action of <tr>roasting</tr> in a pan. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> thing roasted. <i>Sinanglag mani,</i> Roasted peanuts.

<p><form>san-glas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sunglasses</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> wear, make into sunglasses.

<p><form>sanglay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> carry things tied to both ends of a pole over one's shoulder. <i>Sangláyun (sinangláyun) ku lang ang duha ka táru nga tubà,</i> I will carry two cans of palm toddy on a pole over the shoulder. <form>-in-</form> <xr>= <sc>SANGLAY</sc>.</xr> <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> a pole on which things are carried.

<p><form>sanglay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> variety of wild <tr>tomatoes</tr> having red, oval-shaped fruits, less than &frac12;&Prime; in diameter and about 1&Prime; long. <number>2</number> <formx><r>[<ix>name</ix>]</r> nga &mdash;</formx> <tr>Chinaman</tr> [so-and-so]. <i>Nagpalit ug bugas sa ílang Singking Sanglay,</i> Buying rice at the Chinaman Sing King's store. <form>mistísu &mdash;</form> person of half Chinese, half Filipino blood.

<p><form>sanglit</form> <tr>since</tr>, for the reason that. <i>Sanglit siya may amahan ni Husi, íya nang tulubágun,</i> Since he is José's father, it is his responsibility. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>example</tr>, <tr>supposition</tr>. <i>Íning ímung pangatarúngan, kanang ímung pananglit dílì musalir,</i> In your argument, your example won't serve. <number>a</number> <tr>for example</tr>. <i>Pananglit, kining librúha dílì na mapalit ug dúsi,</i> This book, for example, cannot be had for twelve pesos. <number>b</number> if <tr>assuming</tr> that [such-and-such] a probable thing happens. <i>Pananglit muanhi si Tasyu, siyay mudala sa sulat,</i> Assuming Tasio comes, he will bring the letter. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> give an instance as an example. <i>Ipananglit ku nímu ang usa ka langgam nga ímung gipusil: mamumúnù ka ba?</i> Let me give you as an example a bird you shot. Are you a murderer for that? <form>paN-an</form> <xr>= <sc>PANANGLIT</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <form>-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.o. made into an example, reference. <i>Si Hub nahímung sanglitánan sa paílub,</i> Job became an example of patience. <number>2</number> story or saying made as an example. <i>Ang nahitabù sa Truy usa ka sanglitánan sa nagsubrang kumpiyansa,</i> What happened to Troy is an example of overconfidence.

<p><form>sangpit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>call</tr> s.o. to come or attract his attention. <i>Sangpítun ta ka ug manihápun na,</i> I will call you when supper is ready. <i>Gisangpit ku siya, apan wà siya mulíngì,</i> I called to him, but he did not turn his head. <number>2</number> <tr>ask a favor</tr> or help from s.o. <i>Sangpíta ang amígu nímu sa kustum,</i> Call on your friend in the customs for help. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>invite</tr> s.o. to partake in s.t. <form>lami nga dílì ikapanangpit</form> <tr>coitus</tr> (the delicious feeling one cannot invite s.o. to share). <number>2</number> in the <ix>búhat</ix> ceremony, to invoke the spirits and invite them to partake of the offering. <pos>n</pos> the invocation in the <ix>búhat</ix> ceremony.

<p><form>sangput</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; b(1)]</itype> <tr>result in</tr>, <tr>become</tr>. <i>Kanang inyung lantúgì musamput unyà sa áway,</i> Your discussion will <tr>end up in</tr> a quarrel. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>buttocks</tr>. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>-AN(&rarr;)</sc>.</xr> <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> seat of a pair of pants. <form>-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>outcome</tr>, <tr>result</tr>. <i>Laksut ug sangputánan nang ímung hingárig ínum ug álak,</i> You will come to a no good end the way you drink all the time. <form>paN-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> seat of pair of pants as reckoned for measurement.

<p><form>sangsang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>blunt</tr> s.t., bending the tip backward or spreading out the fibers at the tip. <i>Ang batuun nga yútà makasangsang (makapasangsang) sa tumuy sa bára,</i> Stony ground can blunt the tip of the bar. <i>Sangsángun ta ning tumuy sa lipak arun walay masámad,</i> Let's blunt the tip of the bamboo slat so nobody will get hurt.

<p><form>sangsang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>stuff</tr> a hole, cavity, or opening. <i>Siyay nagsangsang ug papil nga kinúmut sa lìliánan,</i> She stuffed a piece of crumpled paper into the peephole.

<p><form>sangù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B256; cP]</itype> for s.t. pulled, pushed, or thrown to get caught on an unmovable obstacle. <i>Wà masulud ang búla kay misangù (nasangù) sa búrd,</i> The ball didn't get into the loop because it hit the board. <i>Átung isangù (ipasangù) sa tuud ang kangga abir makabira ba giyug kábaw,</i> We will let the sled hit a stump and see if the carabao can pull it out. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> hit one's jaw while moving. <i>Nasámad ákung dílà kay nasangù ku sa kurdísu,</i> I hurt my tongue because I hit my jaw on the window sill. <number>3</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be <tr>stuck</tr> with s.t. hard to solve. <i>Nasangù ku sa ákung paghúbad sa isturya,</i> I was stuck in the translation of the story. <number>3a</number> <itype>[B2456]</itype> <pb n=872><tr>stammer</tr>, speak or sing haltingly. <i>Maáyu nga dílì ta musangù ug mudiskursu ta,</i> Better not to speak haltingly in giving a speech. <number>4</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be <tr>frustrated</tr>, <tr>foiled</tr>. <i>Ang íyang pamalíbad nakasangù sa ákung mga plánu,</i> His refusal foiled my plans.

<p><form>sángud<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>nickname</tr> intimate friends call each other. <i>&lsquo;Way uyab&rsquo; ílang sángud kay púrus sila way trátu,</i> They call each other &lsquo;no girl&rsquo; because neither of them has a girl friend. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2]</itype> call each other with a common nickname.

<p><form>sángud<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> an <tr>amulet</tr> which gives the owner an unusual chance for financial success or unusual power and strength. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> possess such a charm. <i>Nakasangud kunu nà si Sisuy kay síging makadaug sa búlang,</i> They say Sisoy has a <tr>charm</tr> because he always wins in cockfights. <form>sangúran</form> <pos>n</pos> s.o. who possesses a <ix>sángud</ix>.

<p><form>sanguhal</form> <xr>= <sc>SANGÚWAL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sángun</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>hitch</tr> up, <tr>harness</tr> an animal. <i>Kábaw ságad sangúnan ug dáru,</i> They usually hitch a water buffalo to the plow. <i>Isángun na ang yúgu sa kábaw,</i> Put the yoke over the water buffalo now. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> go out to earn money with a horse and rig or draft animal hitched to a cart. <i>Musángun ka ba rung buntag?</i> Are you going out to get passengers this morning? <number>2</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> be entrusted with a responsibility or onerous burden. <i>Ayaw kug sangúni ánang buháta kay dì ku suluguun nímu,</i> Don't <tr>burden</tr> me with that work because I'm not your servant.

<p><form>sangúwal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> speak or talk indistinctly because the mouth is full or because of difficulty in articulating. <i>Nagsangúwal ka kay punù man nang ímung bàbà,</i> You're talking indistinctly because your mouth is full. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>indistinct</tr> of speech. <i>Sanguwal na kaáyu ang sinultihan sa nagpinal,</i> The dying man's speech is very unclear now.

<p><form>sangyad</form> <xr>= <sc>SANGLAD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sangyag</form> <xr>= <sc>SANGLAG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sangyaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AP; c6P]</itype> <tr>disseminate</tr> news, information. <i>Ang balità nasangyaw na sa tibuuk gingharían,</i> The news has <tr>spread</tr> throughout the kingdom. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>proclaim</tr>, <tr>declare</tr> officially. <i>Ang partídu nagsangyaw nga si Rúsis kandidátu upisiyal,</i> The party proclaimed Roces an official candidate. <pos>n</pos> <tr>proclamation</tr>. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> group of proclamations. <form>mag-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>preacher</tr>.

<p><form>San Huwan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>St. John</tr>. <number>2</number> the twenty-fourth of June celebrating St. John's Day where people go to the sea to bathe. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> celebrate St. John's day by swimming.

<p><form>sani<sub>1</sub>, sáni</form> (from <ix>unsa ni</ix>) <number>1</number> pause word used when one cannot recall what is to be said. <i>Arun dílì mukángù ang makina hináyig búhì ang sani, klats diay,</i> So that the motor won't stall, slowly release the watchamacallit, <tr>um</tr>, the clutch. <number>2</number> particle expressing discomfiture or dislike at what s.o. is doing or is happening. <i>Sani gud nga bisitáha! Mupaúlì man lang ug way panamílit,</i> What kind of a visitor is he anyway! He just goes home without saying goodbye. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>UNSA</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p><form>*sani<sub>2</sub></form> <form>kasaníhan</form> <pos>n</pos> department of health. <form>sanidad</form> <pos>n</pos> department of health.

<p><form>sánib</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB16; c1]</itype> <tr>arrange</tr> in tiers, neat pile; be so. <i>Nagsánib siya sa mga papil,</i> She is <tr>stacking</tr> the papers in a neat pile. <i>Nagsánib ang mga tabla,</i> The boards are <tr>piled</tr> on top of one another. <pos>n</pos> <tr>layer</tr>. <i>May tulu ka sánib ang playwud,</i> Plywood is composed of three layers. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>insert</tr> into or in between. <i>Gisanib níya sa sakuban ang sundang,</i> He inserted the bolo into its scabbard. <number>2</number> <tr>support</tr>, give assistance. <i>Ang mga tinun-an misanib sa punduk sa mga mamumuu,</i> The students gave their support to the labor union. <i>Ang íyang súhul dílì makasanib ug lima ka táwu,</i> His salary cannot support five persons. <pos>n</pos> <tr>layer</tr> situated or inserted in between. <i>May sanib nga karni ang pán,</i> There was a layer of meat in between the pieces of bread.

<p><form>*sanib</form> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> court s.o.'s favor by showing exaggerated concern, giving lavish gifts, and the like. <i>Dalì ra siyang miusbaw kay maáyung mupasanib,</i> He quickly got promoted because he is great at <tr>boot-licking</tr>.

<p><form>sanidad</form> <xr>see <sc>*SANI<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sanílas</form> <xr>= <sc>SINÍLAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sanínà</form> <xr>= <sc>SINÍNÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sanípa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> edging similar to an eaves board which trims a roof. <number>2</number> a short curtain across the top of a window, framework of a bed, and the like. <number>2a</number> design in series at one side or around the edges of the cloth. <number>3</number> folding room divider. <number>4</number> <tr>lamp shade</tr> to concentrate light. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> install, use, use as, make into a <ix>sanípa</ix>.

<p><form>sanit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>pull</tr> with a <tr>jerk</tr>. <i>Ímung sanitun ang pasul ug dúnay isdà nga mukubit,</i> Pull the line with a jerk if a fish bites. <number>2</number> <tr>snatch</tr>, <tr>grab</tr>. <i>Maáyung musanit ug pisù ang banug,</i> Hawks are good at snatching chicks. <number>3</number> <itype>[B6; c]</itype> <tr>snag</tr>, <tr>pierce</tr> and get <tr>caught</tr> in s.t. <i>Musanit ang tagà sa bàbà sa isdà,</i> The hook will snag in the fish's mouth. <i>Nasanit sa gamut sa káhuy ang dáru,</i> The plow got caught in the roots of a tree.

<pb n=873>

<p><form>sanitári inspiktur</form> <pos>n</pos> sanitary inspector. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be a sanitary inspector.

<p><form>sankis</form> <pos>n</pos> sweet, juicy <tr>orange</tr> similar to the Valencia oranges (so called from the brand Sunkist). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> put orange into s.t. as flavoring.

<p><form>sanla</form> <xr>= <sc>SANGLA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>San Markus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> St. Mark. <number>2</number> reference to marriage. <i>Naliug siya sa bitik ni San Markus,</i> She was hooked into marriage (lit. caught by the neck in Saint Mark's trap). <i>Nagpainr&ucaron;l siya sa Unibirsidad di San Markus,</i> She enrolled in the University of Marriage (i.e. got married).

<p><form>San Pidru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> Feast of St. Peter and St. Paul (June 29). <number>2</number> <tr>gatekeeper</tr> (just as St. Peter is the keeper of the Gates of Heaven). <i>Sirádu man ang pultahan. Háin kahà ang san pidru dinhi?</i> The gate is closed. Where could the gatekeeper be? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13N]</itype> celebrate St. Peter's Day by going swimming. <number>2</number> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a gatekeeper. <form>&mdash; San Pablu</form> <xr>= <sc>SAN PIDRU</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr>

<p><form>sanpípar</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sandpaper</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> rub or smooth s.t. with sandpaper. <number>2</number> <itype>[a]</itype> use a certain k.o. sandpaper on.

<p><form>san pransisku</form> <xr>= <sc>KALÍPAY</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr>

<p><form>sansan</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>SANGSANG<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> in weaving, force the woof threads close to each other by swinging the beater hard. <i>Sansánun nímu ang hulug arun singpun ang panaptun,</i> Force the woof threads close to one another so that the cloth will be tightly woven, <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cloth</tr> made of abaca fiber tightly woven, as distinguished from the kind used as fish netting where the warp and woof are spaced far apart. [+]

<p><form>sansiyut, sansut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sunsuit</tr>, playing suit for children, usually backless and sleeveless. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; ac]</itype> make into, wear a sunsuit.

<p><form>sansuy</form> <pos>n</pos> collarless, short-sleeved <tr>shirt</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> wear a <ix>sansuy</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a <ix>sansuy</ix>.

<p><form>santa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> exclamation: short for <bx>Santa Maríya</bx> <xr>(<ix>see</ix> <bx>3b</bx>).</xr> <number>2</number> title for female saints. <i>Santa Katalína,</i> Saint Catherine. <number>3</number> <ix>in phrases:</ix> <form>&mdash; búla</form> the Papal Bull granting special indulgence to Spain and her colonies. <form>&mdash; iglisya</form> the Holy Church. <form>&mdash; Kláwus</form> Santa Claus. <form>&mdash; krus</form> <number>a</number> the Cross. <number>b</number> Feast of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, celebrated in the Philippines in May, a novena culminated with feasting and merry-making. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> offer a devotion to the Holy Cross. <form>&mdash; Krúsan</form> <pos>n</pos> the celebration of the Holy Cross as practiced in Luzon with a <ix>Rayna Ilína</ix>. <form>&mdash; lána</form> <number>a</number> holy oil. <number>b</number> extreme unction. <form>&mdash; Maríya</form> <number>a</number> <tr>Holy Mary</tr>. <number>b</number> exclamation of sudden surprise or worried fear. <i>Santa Maríya, mahúlug ang bátà,</i> <tr>Christ</tr>! The child is going to fall! <form>&mdash; santíta</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>SANTÍTA</sc>.</xr> <form>simána &mdash;</form> The Holy Week preceding Easter. <form>&mdash; sína</form> communion given by Protestants as part of their church service (as opposed to the Catholic communion&mdash;<ix>kaláwat</ix> or <ix>kumulga</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1</number> administer <tr>communion</tr>. <number>2</number> take communion.

<p><form>santà</form> <xr>= <sc>SALANTÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>santak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> pull a fishing line with a <tr>jerk</tr> to hook a fish that nibbled at the bait. <i>Tandugun gáning ímung pasul santáka dáyun,</i> If a fish tugs at your line, pull it up with a jerk.

<p><form>santáku</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>strike</tr> or <tr>beat</tr> heavily with the fist. <i>Hala, santakúhun man kunu ku nímu, sigi,</i> O.K. you said you would beat me. Let's see you do it.

<p><form>santal</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ornamental bushes: <bio>Ixora sp</bio>.

<p><form>santa lusíya</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ornamental crawling <tr>vine</tr> grown in pots: <bio>Zebrina pendula</bio>.

<p><form>santan</form> <xr>= <sc>SANTAL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>santas</form> <pos>n</pos> female saints. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a12]</itype> be, become a <tr>saint</tr>.

<p><form>santíban</form> (short for <ix>San Istíban</ix>) exclamation denoting helpless, sudden surprise. <i>Santíban ning batáa, gikablit ang gátu,</i> <tr>Heavens</tr> this child! He pulled the trigger!

<p><form>santik<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> build a <tr>fire</tr> by rubbing two dry bamboo sticks together. <number>2</number> build a <tr>fire</tr> by rubbing flint and steel together. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> method of producing fire by friction. <number>2</number> k.o. <tr>flint</tr> used in building a fire by friction. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> stone used for building fires by rubbing steel over it.

<p><form>santik<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>slingshot</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> hit with a slingshot. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> go hunting birds with a slingshot.

<p><form>santik<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>AMIMITAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>santilmu</form> <pos>n</pos> light seen at night moving over swamps or the sea caused by natural phenomena but thought to be the soul of a dead person coming back to the world. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> for this wandering light to appear. <i>Magsantilmu gánì, ayawg dágan,</i> Don't run if a <tr>will-o</tr>'-the-wisp appears.

<p><form>santing</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN]</itype> swell with a pricking, burning sensation. <i>Musanting (mananting) ang tútuy ug punù sa gátas,</i> The breasts swell with a pricking sensation when they are full of milk. <i>Nagsanting ang hubag nga wà pay buthanan,</i> The boil has not come to a head and is swelling with a pricking, burning sensation. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> for s.t. to penetrate the ear and stay there naggingly. <i>Nagsanting pa sa ákung dalunggan ang íyang mabiaybiáyung talidhay,</i> Her derisive laughter keeps <pb n=874>resounding in my ears. <number>3</number> for s.t. to appear suddenly to evoke recognition. <i>Misanting sa ákung hunàhúnà nga dílì maabli ang pultahan,</i> It suddenly struck me that the door couldn't be opened. <form>&mdash; ang dunggan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> {flare up} in excitement or anger upon hearing s.t. <i>Ang pagtubagtubag sa anak mauy makasanting (makapasanting) sa dunggan sa ginikánan,</i> Parents flare up when their children talk back to them.

<p><form>santisima</form> exclamation denoting sudden surprise at s.o.'s behavior. <i>Santisima, ning batáa, mulabang lang ug kalit bísan ug nangági ning mga awtu,</i> <tr>Heavens</tr>, this child suddenly rushes into the street even though there are so many cars passing. <form>&mdash; Trinidad</form> The Holy <tr>Trinity</tr>.

<p><form>santisimu</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>Blessed Sacrament</tr>. <form>&mdash; sakramintu</form> <xr>= <sc>SANTISIMU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>santisiyam</form> euphemism for <ix>santisimu</ix>. <form>&mdash; nga karáan</form> humorous expression of sudden surprise.

<p><form>santíta</form> <pos>n</pos> fake saint. <form>santa &mdash;</form> <pos>a</pos> pretending to be saintly in behavior. <i>Santa santíta silabun maldíta,</i> She pretends to be a saint, but she's naughty. <form>santitasantíta</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> pretend to be saintly.

<p><form>santítu, santítù<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SANTÍTA</sc> (male).</xr>

<p><form>santítù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> children's game played with marbles, shells, stones in which the pieces are thrown on the ground and a lead piece is flicked to hit a designated piece and no other. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; b6(1)]</itype> play this game.

<p><form>santu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> title for male saints. <i>Santu Tumas,</i> St. Thomas. <number>2</number> <ix>in phrases:</ix> <form>purdiyus pur-</form> exclamation denoting deep agitation at the gravity of a situation. <i>Purdiyus pursantu, Bidung, ibutang nang pusil!</i> God have mercy, Bedong! Put that gun down! <form>&mdash; Intiyíru</form> image of the dead body of Christ carried in a procession on Good Friday. <form>&mdash; Kristu</form> <number>a</number> the crucified Christ. <number>b</number> a small <tr>crucifix</tr>. <form>&mdash; lána</form> <tr>holy oil</tr>. <form>&mdash; Ninyu</form> <number>a</number> the <tr>Christ Child</tr>. <number>b</number> the image of the Christ Child thought to have been brought by Magellan. <form>b1</form> the church which houses it. <form>&mdash; Pápa</form> The <tr>Pope</tr>. <form>&mdash; Rusaryu</form> the <tr>Holy Rosary</tr>. <form>&mdash; santítu</form> <xr>= <sc>SANTA SANTÍTA</sc> (male)</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>SANTÍTA</sc>.</xr> <form>istígi &mdash;</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>*ISTÍGI</sc>.</xr> <form>pasantusantu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13P]</itype> put on a pretense of good behavior. <i>Magpasantusantu siya ug náa si Pápa níya,</i> He puts on a pretense of good behavior if his father is around.

<p><form>santul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> medium-sized <tr>tree</tr> cultivated for its deep-yellow fruits, the size and shape of a tennis ball, sour and juicy with a seed in several sections in the center: <bio>Sandoricum koetjape</bio>.

<p><form>*santul<sub>2</sub></form> <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>unsociable</tr>: tending to be quiet, keep to oneself and <tr>cranky</tr> if approached. <i>Kasagáran santulun kaáyu ang mga dalágang gúlang,</i> Usually old maids are very cranky. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become cranky.

<p><form>santup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> come to one's mind. <i>Misantup sa íyang buut ang usa ka sayun nga paági,</i> A simple method of doing it came to his mind. <i>Isantup (santúpa) sa ímung hunàhúnà ang mga tambag,</i> Implant the advice firmly in your mind.

<p><form>santus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>saint</tr>, one like a saint in character. <i>Kanhi mu ra ka ug santus, karun dakù kang salbáhis,</i> You used to be like a saint, but now you're a brute. <number>2</number> the <tr>sanctus</tr> of the Holy Mass. <form>&mdash; Diyus</form> <tr>Holy God</tr>. <form>&mdash; nga Mísa</form> the <tr>Holy Mass</tr>. <form>&mdash; nga Rusaryu</form> <tr>Holy Rosary</tr>. <form>túdus lus &mdash;</form> <tr>All Saints' Day</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a3]</itype> <number>1</number> be <tr>successful</tr>. <i>Dì ka masantus ánang ímung pagiskuyla kay daghan kag absin,</i> You will not be successful in your studies because you are always absent. <number>2</number> get a <tr>benefit</tr> from s.t. <i>Dílì ka masantus ánang ímung hubughúbug,</i> You will not reap any benefits from being drunk all the time. <number>3</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> get to the Sanctus of the Holy Mass. <number>4</number> <itype>[A13P; c16]</itype> make <tr>holy</tr>. <i>Magsantus ta sa adlaw nga igpapahulay,</i> Let us keep the Sabbath holy.

<p><form>sanu</form> <xr>= <sc>UNSA NU</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>UNSA</sc>, <i>4.</i></xr>

<p><form>san-u</form> <tr>when</tr>, at what time (dialectal).

<p><form>sanung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>agree</tr>, <tr>consent</tr> to s.t. <i>Wà musanung si Bin sa ákung hangyù nga muhulam ku sa íyang awtu,</i> Ben did not consent to my request to borrow his car. <number>2</number> <tr>obey</tr>, <tr>comply</tr> with a request. <i>Buútan ning batáa kay musanung dáyun sa ákung súgù,</i> This child is <tr>obedient</tr> because he at once obeys my command. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> verify that s.o. agrees to do s.t. <i>Kining risibúha nagsanung sa ímung báyad,</i> This receipt <tr>acknowledges</tr> your payment. <pos>n</pos> <tr>agreement</tr> to do s.t.

<p><form>sanùsanù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> be in rapid succession. <i>Misanùsanù ang mga bala sa atumátik,</i> The bullets from the machine gun came in rapid succession. <i>Nagsanùsanù ang mga pangutána sa nag-intirbiyu,</i> The interviewer's questions came in rapid-fire succession.

<p><form>san-ut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for clothing to be <tr>baggy</tr> or <tr>crumpled</tr> from having been subjected to unusual strain at one spot. <number>2</number> worn-out from having been subjected to unusual strain at one spot. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; a12]</itype> <tr>wear out</tr> or <tr>crumple</tr> s.t. by subjecting it to heavy wear; become so. <i>Musan-ut (masan-ut) ang sangput sa karsúnis ug idalus-us,</i> The seat of the pants will wear out if you slide in them. <i>Ang íyang karsúnis nasan-ut sa túhud,</i> His trousers became baggy at the knees.

<pb n=875>

<p><form>sanúud</form> (from <ix>suud</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <tr>intimate</tr>, <tr>close</tr> in relationship as friends. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>close</tr> in physical space. <i>Sanuud ra mu kaáyung pagkalingkud,</i> You are sitting too close to each other.

<p><form>sanuuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1</number> give the appearance of being <tr>weighted down</tr> under a heavy load. <i>Misanuuy ang sakayan sa kadaghan sa kuhà,</i> The boat is weighted down under the load of a great catch. <number>2</number> look <tr>enervated</tr>, without life. <i>Nagsanuuy ang bána pagkabuntag human sa kasal,</i> The groom looked enervated the morning after the wedding.

<p><form>sanwit, sanwits</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sandwich</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> make, make into a sandwich. <number>2</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> use as sandwich filling. <number>3</number> <itype>[A3P; a3]</itype> situate s.o. in between s.t. <i>Nasanwits ku pagkalingkud sa duha ka dalága,</i> I was seated <tr>between</tr> two ladies.

<p><form>sápa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>washer</tr>; disc with a hole or flattened ring. <number>1a</number> a rounded piece of coconut shell with a hole in the middle through which a tether rope is passed into to prevent it from slipping through the water buffalo's nose. <number>2</number> a flat piece of s.t. wedged between two things to prevent looseness. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a]</itype> make, make into, put a washer or <tr>wedge</tr>.

<p><form>sapà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>brook</tr> or <tr>creek</tr>.

<p><form>sapak</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>apt</tr>, <tr>exact</tr>, just the right one. <i>Ang ímung tubag sapak giyud kaáyu,</i> You gave just the right answer. <i>Sapak nga pagpangasáwa, dátù,</i> A <tr>perfect</tr> marriage&mdash;a rich wife. <number>1a</number> <tr>timely</tr>, <tr>well-timed</tr>. <i>Sapak ang pagabut mu kay tingkaun,</i> You arrived just at the right time. It's time to eat. <number>2</number> having just the right qualities. <i>Sapak sad ug láwas si Iyay ug magbáting sut,</i> Iyay has a beautiful body when she wears a bathing suit. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; a4b8]</itype> do s.t. at just the right time. <i>Nakasapak sad kag baligyà sa ímung mga ipiktus&mdash;subídu ang prisyu,</i> You sold your things at just the right time&mdash;when the prices went up. <i>Ug muadtu ka karun masapak (masapakan) nímu ang pista,</i> If you go there now, you'll be just on time for the fiesta. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2; b5]</itype> become perfect, having just the best qualities.

<p><form>sapal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b1]</itype> back up s.o.'s obligations. <i>Kinsa guy musapal sa ímung alkansi sa nigusyu,</i> Who is going to <tr>cover</tr> your losses in business? <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>take charge</tr> or care of another person's needs. <i>Akuy musapal sa ímung káun ug muuban ka nákug paniudtu,</i> I'll <tr>treat</tr> you if you go to lunch with me. <i>Saplan ku sa ákung tiyù sa gastu sa iskuylahan,</i> My uncle will <tr>shoulder</tr> my school fees. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> be enough to <tr>cover</tr> expenses. <i>Ang ákung swildu dì makasapal sa tanang galastúhan,</i> My salary cannot cover all the expenses.

<p><form>sápal</form> <pos>n</pos> the pulp residue of grated coconut meat after the juice has been extracted. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having more pulp than what is ordinary. <i>Tam-is ang buúngun apan sapálun,</i> The pomelo is sweet, but it is <tr>pulpy</tr>.

<p><form>sápang</form> <xr>= <sc>SALAPANG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sap-ang</form> <xr>= <sc>SALIP-ANG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sapar</form> <xr>= <sc>SAPAL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sápat<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> an <tr>animal</tr> or <tr>insect</tr>. <i>Kurali ang silinganan arun dílì makasulud ang sápat,</i> Fence off the yard so the animals cannot get in. <i>Tan-áwag unsang sapáta ning misulud sa ákung mata,</i> Look to see what k.o. insect got into my eye. <number>2</number> <pos>a</pos> brutal, cruel person. <i>Ang sápat nga hubug nanagmal na pud sa asáwa,</i> The drunken <tr>beast</tr> is maltreating his wife again.

<p><form>sápat<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SALAPAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sapatilya</form> <pos>n</pos> open-heeled <tr>shoes</tr> or <tr>slippers</tr> with low heels. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, make <ix>sapatilya</ix>'s.

<p><form>sapátus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>shoes</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa kabáyù</form> <tr>horseshoe</tr>. <number>2</number> part of the plow analogous to the <tr>landside</tr> of steel plows. <i>Sa dárung káhuy ang sapátus mauy hal-úpan sa punta,</i> In wooden plows the share is fitted over the landside. <number>3</number> <tr>presser foot</tr>, a piece on sewing machines that presses the cloth against the feed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> wear, make into, get a pair of shoes. <number>2</number> <tr>shoe</tr> a horse. <form>sapatíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shoe repairman</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> be a shoe repairman. <form>sapatiríya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shoe repair shop</tr>.

<p><form>sápaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; ac]</itype> wear two things one on top of the other. <i>Magsápaw ku ug midiyas,</i> I will wear two pairs of socks. <i>Sapáwi lang nang ímung amirkána ug rinkut,</i> Just wear a raincoat over your jacket. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC; b6]</itype> be in the same place as s.o. else at the same time. <i>Ngánung musápaw man mug dúlà nga kami may nahauna?</i> Why do you want to play in the same place as we are playing when we were here first? <i>Ngánung magsápaw man mung duha ug lingkud sa síya?</i> Why do you two sit on the same chair? <i>Sa maáyung radiyu ang usa ka istasiyun dílì makasápaw sa láin,</i> With a good radio one station doesn't overlap another. <number>2a</number> <tr>drown out</tr> a voice with another voice. <i>Ang ákung tíngug gisapáwan sa íyang danguynguy,</i> My voice was drowned out by her wailing. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13; a]</itype> place s.t., usually flat, over s.t. else. <i>Sapáwi ug sín ang kináma nga playwud,</i> Just <tr>cover</tr> the stacked plywood with a sheet of galvanized iron. <pos>n</pos> <tr>layer</tr>, esp. of cloth. <i>Nagsul-ub ku ug tulu ka sápaw,</i> I am wearing three layers (of clothing). <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> for teeth to be overlapping. <i>Magsapaw ang ngípun ug dì ibtun <pb n=876>ang tay-ug,</i> The teeth will overlap each other if the loose ones aren't extracted. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. worn or laid over s.t. else. <number>2</number> overlapping teeth. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>commit adultery</tr>. <i>Dílì ka manapaw,</i> Thou shalt not commit adultery. <form>maN-r-, maN-r-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> one who practices adultery. [+]

<p><form>sapay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> in weaving with straw or the like, terminate the run of the weave by folding the ends of the strands at a right angles under and over the next two parallel strands.

<p><form>sapayan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c4]</itype> <tr>mind</tr>, consider s.t. a bother or <tr>appreciate</tr> s.t. <i>Wà lang ka magsapayan sa bili sa kahágù ug panahun,</i> You just don't appreciate the value of effort and time. <i>Dílì ku igsapayan (isapayan) ang ákung sakripisyù,</i> I will not mind the sacrifice. <ix>in phrases:</ix> <form>&mdash; sa</form> as recognition for s.t. bad done to s.o. who pays it no heed. <i>Sapayan sa ímung pagtámay nákù, Diyus ray magígù,</i> God will repay you for the way you scorned me. <form>walay &mdash;</form> <number>1</number> <tr>you're welcome</tr> (reply to <ix>salámat</ix> &lsquo;thank you&rsquo;). <number>2</number> it doesn't matter. <i>Way sapayan ug kasab-an ku,</i> It's <tr>all right</tr> if I'm given a scolding.

<p><form>sapáyan</form> <xr>= <sc>PASÁYAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sapda</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> knock off s.t. being held or placed s.w. with a quick motion of the hand. <i>Sapdáha ang íyang síku inigsiyát níya,</i> Knock his elbow to the side when he shoots the ball. <i>Nabuak ang básu kay ákung nasapdahan,</i> I accidentally brushed my hand against the glass and broke it.

<p><form>saphag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> penetrate through a forest or thicket. <i>Saphágun sa mga bátà ang kalibunan sa pagpamayábas,</i> Children will penetrate thickets to gather guavas. <number>2</number> <tr>roam</tr> around with a purpose. <i>Dúnay mga táwu nga magsaphag pa sa pagpangítà sa ílang pagkáun,</i> There are people who roam around looking for their food.

<p><form>saphid</form> <xr>= <sc>SAPHIG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>saphig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> remove s.t. by brushing against it. <i>Balud nga nagsaphig sa húgaw sa baybáyun,</i> Waves which <tr>washed away</tr> the dirt on the seashore. <number>1a</number> <tr>brush against</tr>. <i>Ayaw isaphig ang ímung kamut sa pintal,</i> Don't brush your hand against the paint. <number>2</number> <tr>level off</tr> grains heaped up over a measuring container. <number>2a</number> <tr>level</tr> a cleaned rice paddy prior to planting. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>levelled</tr> off.

<p><form>sapi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>ward off</tr>, <tr>brush away</tr> with the hand. <i>Akuy misapi sa íyang kamut nga isagpà untà sa bátà,</i> He was about to strike the child, but I warded off his hand. <i>Wà ku makasapi sa búla nga gilábay sa ákung nawung,</i> I was not able to ward off the ball that was thrown in my face. <i>Hisapihan nákù ang tása sa kapi, nayabu hinúun,</i> I accidentally brushed the cup of coffee, and it spilled over. <number>2</number> <tr>level off</tr> s.t. heaping. <i>Sapiha ang bugas sa gantangan,</i> Level the rice in the ganta measure. <ix>exclamation:</ix> word uttered to brush s.t. away. <i>Sapi! Pahawà dihang irínga ka,</i> <tr>Scram</tr>! Get out of there, cat.

<p><form>sapì</form> <xr>= <sc>SAPLÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sápì</form> (from <ix>salapì</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>SALAPÌ</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23; a12]</itype> <tr>earn</tr> money from s.t. <i>Kining gidaghanúna musápig mga mil písus,</i> This quantity will <tr>derive</tr> some thousand pesos. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> be <tr>sufficient</tr> for a purpose. <i>Masápì nang ímung tíngug sa nayitklab,</i> Your voice will <tr>do</tr> in a nightclub. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> get hold of money. <i>Nakasapì kug utsinta písus adtung baligyáa,</i> I earned eighty pesos from that sale. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> make, squeeze money out of s.o. or s.t. <i>T&umacracu;, nanápì na pug pulis ug pangubrag tung,</i> There, the cop is making money collecting his protection money. <pos>n</pos> capacity for earning money. <i>Ang kahibalu mupauswag sa panápì sa usa ka mamumúu,</i> Knowledge can increase a worker's <tr>earning capacity</tr>. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>wealthy</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become wealthy. <form>hiN-, maki-</form> <pos>a</pos> too fond of money.

<p><form>sápid</form> <xr>= <sc>SULÁPID</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sapidpid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> move, be <tr>close</tr> to s.t. <i>Nagsapidpid siya sa bungbung kay nag-ulan,</i> He was walking close to the wall because it was raining. <i>Isapidpid ni sa bungbung kay mapatiran unyà,</i> Put this <tr>by</tr> the wall, for s.o. might stub his toe on it.

<p><form>sap-ig</form> <xr>= <sc>SAMPIG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sapígad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> move close to s.t. so as to be touching it. <i>Magkabalhibu ka ug musapígad ang iring sa ímung bitíis,</i> You'll get hair all over you if the cat <tr>rubs</tr> itself against your leg. <i>Natúlug ang ituy nga nagsapígad sa inahan,</i> The puppy slept snuggled close to its mother.

<p><form>sapil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> <tr>brush against</tr> s.t., usually accidentally. <i>Nataltag ang gihay sa buwak nga íyang hisapilan,</i> He brushed against the flower and knocked the petals off.

<p><form>sapilis</form> <xr>= <sc>SIPILIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sapilya</form> <xr>= <sc>SIPILYA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sapilyu</form> <xr>= <sc>SIPILYU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sapin</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>footgear</tr>: shoes, slippers, boots, but not socks. <number>2</number> <tr>diaper</tr>.

<p><form>sapinday</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>stagger</tr>, walk weaving from side to side. <i>Tingáli hubug ka kay nagsapinday man ka nga naglakaw,</i> You must be drunk because you are staggering. [+]

<p><form>sapinit</form> <xr>= <sc>SAMPÍNIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>*sapínu</form> <form>dì &mdash;</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b8]</itype> be <tr>trusted</tr> with s.t. <i>Dílì masapinúhan ug kwarta nang tawhána,</i> That <pb n=877>man cannot be trusted with money.

<p><form>sapípid</form> <xr>= <sc>SAPIDPID</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sapiray</form> <xr>= <sc>SAMPIRAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sapiring</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. hairy worm with very itchy hair. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4(1)]</itype> be stung by the itchy hair of this worm.

<p><form>sapiru<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>sapphire</tr>.

<p><form>sapiru<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> variety of cultivated <tr>guava</tr> with fruit sweeter and more reddish than the wild varieties.

<p><form>sapisápi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a simple <tr>kite</tr> constructed of a cross with string strung around the edge to which paper is attached. <number>2</number> general name for small <tr>slipmouths</tr>, less than 3&Prime; long: <bio>Leiognathus spp</bio>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make, make into this k.o. kite.

<p><form>sapiti</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>trip</tr>, block s.o.'s feet so as to make him stumble. <i>Siyay nagsapiti nákù pagbaskit námù,</i> He tripped me when we played basketball.

<p><form>sapla<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> slightly <tr>bitter</tr> in taste with an <tr>astringent</tr> effect, as unripe bananas. <number>1a</number> get this taste in one's mouth. <number>2</number> for unpolished cereals to be rough on the tongue when eaten. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> become slightly <tr>bitter</tr> and <tr>astringent</tr> in taste or get this taste in the mouth. <number>2</number> <itype>[B16]</itype> for cereals to be rough to eat.

<p><form>sapla<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> for branches to break off at the crook under weight or other force. <i>Nasapla ang sanga nga gitumban,</i> The branch broke at its juncture when he stepped on it.

<p><form>saplag<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1c]</itype> throw s.t. into s.o.'s face or hit s.o.'s face with the open hand, but not much force. <i>Kaáyu rang saplágun nang nawung mu áring usa ka plátu nga nilúgaw,</i> How I'd love to throw this plate of porridge into your face. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> brush, knock s.t. out of or off of s.t. that holds it. <i>Abtik siyang misaplag sa búla nga ákung gikaptan,</i> He quickly knocked the ball out of my hands.

<p><form>saplag<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>go about</tr> with or without a purpose. <i>Dílì makasaplag ang mga batan-*un human sa kurpyu,</i> Young boys don't <tr>go around</tr> after the curfew hour. <i>Gisaplag námù ang kabyabsan ug pamayábas,</i> We <tr>wandered about</tr> among the thick growths of guava trees gathering fruit.

<p><form>saplì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>pluck</tr> off a leaf, <tr>break off</tr> a branch at its point of junction with a downward pull. <i>Nagsaplì kug sanga pára itanum,</i> I broke off a branch to plant. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN]</itype> harvest corn. <i>Manaplì mi sunud simána,</i> We will harvest the corn next week. <pos>n</pos> <tr>harvest</tr>. <i>Pilay abut káda saplì?</i> How much do you get each harvest?

<p><form>saplína</form> (from <ix>disiplína</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>whip</tr> or <tr>lash</tr>, esp. reserved for disciplinary purposes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> discipline with a <tr>whip</tr>. <i>Arun ka mabut-an maáyung saplináhun ka ug sígi,</i> I should whip you constantly so that you will learn to behave.

<p><form>saplù</form> <xr>= <sc>SALPÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>saplud</form> <pos>a</pos> slightly <tr>bitterish</tr> in taste. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a2]</itype> get a bitterish taste. <i>Gisaplúran ku sa sirbísa,</i> I found the beer somewhat <tr>bitter</tr>.

<p><form>saplung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sling</tr>, an instrument for throwing stones and the like consisting of a pair of strings fastened to a strip of leather or cloth. The missile is hurled by whirling it (<ix>lambuyug</ix>) and releasing one string. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> hit with this instrument. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make s.t. into a sling.

<p><form>saplut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> put a rope with a noose or loop around s.t. or ring s.t. <i>Bi, akuy musaplut ug písì ánang naglutaw nga bátang,</i> Here, I will <tr>lasso</tr> that floating log. <i>Iitsa ang argulya nga musaplut sa butilya,</i> Throw the metal ring over the bottle. <i>Saplúti ang halígi makaduha,</i> Put a double loop over the pole. <number>2</number> <tr>encircle</tr> s.t. with a rope or s.t. analogous. <i>Gisaplútan nákù siya sa líug, wà makalíhuk,</i> I put my arm around his neck, and he couldn't move.

<p><form>sapnay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> carry s.t. laid across one's arms. <i>Nagsapnay sa binughà,</i> Carrying the firewood over the arms. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> for s.t. to <tr>cradle</tr> or <tr>support</tr> s.t. smaller placed on it. <i>Usa ka tablun nga batu nagsapnay sa usa ka dakung baril,</i> A slab of stone supported the big barrel. <i>Ang sulang gisapnay sa duha ka kamut,</i> His jaw was cradled in his hands. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <tr>carry</tr>, have s.t. as an attribute. <i>Kining katungdanána nagsapnay sa daghang mga pribilihiyu,</i> This office carries with it many privileges. <i>Kining kapangakuhána gisapnay sa ímung katungdánan,</i> This is a responsibility that pertains to your office. <pos>n</pos> an <tr>armful</tr>. <i>Usa ka sapnay nga dagámi,</i> An armful of corn stalks.

<p><form>sapnig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>strike off</tr>, <tr>level off</tr> s.t. heaping. <number>2</number> gather small things piled on s.t. flat towards the center by bringing up the sides. <i>Aku ray musapnig sa bugas arun dì mayabu,</i> I'll <tr>pile up</tr> the rice at the center of the mat so that it won't spill over the edges. <number>3</number> <itype>[C3; c1]</itype> for a sheet to overlap s.t. <i>Isapnig (sapníga) ang isig ka daplin sa papil,</i> Let the edges of the paper <tr>overlap</tr>. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put s.t. right next to s.t. else. <i>Isapnig ang kaldíru sa kaláyu,</i> Put the pot next to the fire.

<p><form>sapnut</form> <pos>a</pos> for a surface to be <tr>rough</tr> or <tr>tacky</tr>. <i>Sapnut ang salug kay nagkabálas,</i> The floor <pb n=878>is rough because it is covered with sand. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a12]</itype> be, become rough or <tr>sticky</tr>. <i>Ubang sabun makasapnut (makapasapnut) sa pánit,</i> Some soaps make the skin rough. <i>Masapnut ang buhuk ug dílì syampúhan,</i> The hair will become sticky if you don't shampoo it.

<p><form>sapsap<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b(1)]</itype> trim down a piece of wood by chipping pieces off. <i>Sapsápi ang usuk kay dì masulud,</i> Trim down the stake because it won't go in. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> chips of wood which result from this process.

<p><form>sapsap<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> be <tr>rough</tr>, not smooth to chew, esp. unpolished, unhusked corn.

<p><form>sapsap<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>fish</tr>, general name for <tr>slipmouths</tr>: <bio>Leiognathus spp</bio>.

<p><form>sapsing</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lean</tr>, <tr>scrawny</tr>. <i>Sapsing ning batáa, mau ra ug gíkan sa dapit nga may gútum,</i> This child is scrawny, as if he comes from a place where they had a famine. <number>2</number> for an amount to be too <tr>meager</tr> to meet the need (euphemism). <i>Mau ra nay kwarta mu pára átung ipanini? Sapsing ánà uy!</i> Is that all you have for the movies? What a meager amount! <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> be, become <tr>lean</tr> or <tr>scrawny</tr>. <i>Láyug ta ug gisapsíngan ka nákù,</i> Let's wrestle if you consider me scrawny. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> consider an amount meager for the need.

<p><form>sapsiyútir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sharpshooter</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become a sharpshooter.

<p><form>sapsuy</form> <pos>n</pos> Chinese dish of mixed vegetables. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> make, have <tr>chop suey</tr>.

<p><form>sapu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>wipe</tr>, put s.t. back in place using the hands. <i>Ayúhag sapu ang tipasì nga muaslay sa lusung,</i> Scoop the spilled rice back to the mortar carefully. <i>Sapuha kanang buhuk mu nga nagyungyung,</i> Put your loose strands of hair back in place. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> cover one's genitalia from view. <i>Panapu dihà uy. Kítà ímung antitirhi,</i> Pull the back of your dress up between your legs so people can't see your hoosy.

<p><form>sapud<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the first few mature leaves of the tobacco plants. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B23; b6]</itype> for the first few leaves of the tobacco plant to develop. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> gather the first few matured leaves of tobacco plants.

<p><form>sapud<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>next</tr>. <i>Akuy sapud nímu sa linya,</i> I am next to you in line. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23; c6]</itype> <tr>do next</tr> after s.o. does it. <i>Musapud ku nímu ug bása ug mahuman ka,</i> I will read it after you when you're all done. <i>Isapud ku ikaw ug latigu,</i> I will whip you next. <number>2</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> be followed by another event. <i>Wà pa gánì matúig ang bátà nasapdan dáyun,</i> Another baby followed even before the first was a year old.

<p><form>*sápul<sub>1</sub></form> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> bring oneself to do or <tr>undertake</tr> s.t. <i>Ngánung nagpasápul ka man ug dáru nga nagdaut pa man ka!</i> Why do you undertake to plow when you're still sick! <pos>n</pos> <tr>sponsorship</tr>. <i>Kining amatyúra ubus sa pasápul sa Akmi Tríding,</i> This singing contest is under the sponsorship of Acme Trading.

<p><form>sápul<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SYÁPUL<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sapun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; b2]</itype> catch s.o. doing s.t. <i>Hisapnan sila sa amahan sa dalága,</i> They were caught redhanded by the girl's father. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a12b2]</itype> be on time to catch s.t. before it leaves. <i>Makasapung pa ta sa byáhi,</i> We can still catch the bus.

<p><form>sapun<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SAPUD<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sapung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. river fish <tr>trap</tr>, usually cylindrical in form with an opening at one end, placed facing downstream to catch fish or shrimps going upstream. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> catch fish with this trap.

<p><form>sap-ung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>cover</tr> or <tr>block</tr> an opening. <i>Tingáli papil ang nakasap-ung sa túbu sa hugasan,</i> Probably a piece of a paper has blocked up the drainpipe. <i>Sap-úngi ug tabla ang bangag arun walay mabulasut,</i> Cover the hole with a piece of wood so no one will step into it accidentally. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> cover one's nose, mouth, ears with s.t. <i>Nanap-ung ku kay nanimáhù,</i> I covered my nose because it stank.

<p><form>sapunir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; a3]</itype> for an idea to pop into one's mind. <i>Misapunir sa ákung alimpatakan nga gibinuángan ku,</i> It suddenly <tr>occurred</tr> to me that I was being made a fool of. <i>Nasapunir sa ákung hunàhúnà ang pagpanimalus,</i> The idea of revenge came to my mind.

<p><form>sapúpu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> have, pick up s.t. in one's arms. <i>Ngánung misapúpu man tu siya sa íyang mga sinínà ug milakaw?</i> Why did she gather up her clothes in her arms and go away? <i>Sapupúha (sapupúa) ang masusu arun dì tugnawun,</i> Hold the baby in your arms so it won't feel cold. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> <tr>receive</tr>, get hold of what is there. <i>Ang bugtung anak mauy makasapúpu sa tanang kabílin,</i> The only son <tr>gets</tr> all of the inheritance. <i>Mauy nakasapúpu sa tanang kasábà,</i> The one who received all the scoldings.

<p><form>saput</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>clothes</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>wear</tr> clothes. <i>Kadtung nagsaput ug putì,</i> The one wearing white. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>cloth</tr> s.t. in s.t. <i>Saputan ang nangkà arun dílì tamasúkun,</i> <tr>Cover</tr> the jackfruit so the worms can't get at it. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>attire</tr>, the k.o. <tr>clothes</tr> one wears as opposed to the type worn by other classes or on other occasions. <i>Panaput sa tugnaw,</i> <pb n=879>Winter clothing. <number>2</number> the way one dresses. <i>Maáyu siyag panaput ug wà ilhing makalilímus,</i> He dressed well, and no one recognized him as a beggar. <form>panaptun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>cloth</tr>, ready to make into clothing. <number>2</number> piece of cloth, <tr>rag</tr>.

<p><form>sáput</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bad temper</tr> or mood. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146; a4]</itype> be in a <tr>bad mood</tr>. <i>Ayaw siya ug pangutan-a kay nagsáput (gisáput) siya rung buntága,</i> Don't ask him questions because he is in a bad mood this morning. <form>-un(&rarr;), salaptun</form> <pos>a</pos> easily given to bad moods. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become <tr>cranky</tr>.

<p><form>sapúti</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> do s.t. in a secret, dishonest way. <i>Abtik nga misapúti sa baráha ang dílir,</i> The dealer stacked the cards deftly. <i>Ang inyu ra pud nga mga diligádu ang nagsapúti sa kumpirinsiya,</i> It was your delegates that worked to undermine the conference. <i>Ug ímung saputíhun ang buksing, wà nay mupusta nímu,</i> If you throw the boxing match, no one will bet on you again. <pos>n</pos> thing done in a secret and dishonest manner.

<p><form>sapwang</form> <xr>= <sc>SALAPWANG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sapya</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for the waves to lap gently at. <i>Sapyáhun (isapya) sa mga balud ang mga lúsay ngadtu sa baybáyun,</i> The waves gently carry the seaweeds to the seashore.

<p><form>sapyà</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>flat</tr>, said of s.t. which is normally full and bulging. <i>Sapyà siyag dughan,</i> She is flat-breasted. <i>Sapyà nga batu ang íyang gilingkúran,</i> He sat on a flat stone. <number>2</number> for a plate or bowl to be <tr>shallow</tr>. <pos>n</pos> a flat liquor bottle containing about 375 cc. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3B; b6c1]</itype> <tr>flatten</tr>, <tr>become flat</tr>. <i>Musapyà (masapyà) ang úlu sa bátà nga pirming maghayang,</i> The head of an infant will <tr>get flat</tr> in the back if it is always laid on its back. <i>Hílum. Nagsapyà lang nang ilung mu,</i> Shut up! You and your flat nose. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> for s.t. rounded to become <tr>flattish</tr>.

<p><form>sapyag</form> <xr>= <sc>SABYAG</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p><form>sapyaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cup, scoop s.t. using both hands. <i>Musapyaw kug bugas sa sáku,</i> I will scoop up rice from the sack with my hands. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>SALAPYAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sapyur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>driver</tr> of an automobile vehicle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> <tr>drive</tr> a vehicle, be a driver.

<p><form>sapyut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> ungainly posture characterized with hips too far forward. <number>2</number> for the buttocks to be flat, not full. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a12P]</itype> having the hips too far forward or flat buttocks.

<p><form>sarà</form> <xr>= <sc>KARUN</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p><form>sarabya</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>GWAYABANU</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>KARDÁBA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>saragáti</form> <pos>a</pos> having a bad character, <tr>heartless</tr>, <tr>cruel</tr>, arousing resentment (euphemism for <ix>salbáhis</ix>). <i>Saragáti kaáyu nang maistráha, dì malúuy muhagbung,</i> That teacher is a real <xr><sc>S.O.B</sc>.</xr> She has no qualms about failing people. <i>Saragáti ning batáa, kahúgaw,</i> What a <tr>nasty</tr> child you are. You're so dirty.

<p><form>sarahintu</form> <xr>= <sc>SARHINTU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sarang</form> <number>1</number> <tr>adequate</tr>. <i>Mangítà kag trabáhu nga sarang nímu nga pangabuhían,</i> Look for a job that will give you an income adequate for you to live on. <i>Kaanyag nga sarang ikapanghambug,</i> Beauty that is worth bragging about. <number>1a</number> be up to doing. <i>Nalunúpan ang átung báy. Unsa may sarang nátung mabúhat niíni?</i> Our house is all flooded. What can we do about it? <number>2</number> <tr>properly</tr> and <tr>justly</tr>. <i>Mau nay sarang kung ikasulti áning kahimtánga,</i> That is what I can properly and with justice say about this situation. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; c5]</itype> be up to doing s.t. properly or adequately. <i>Makasarang kag báyad sa binulang balayranan?</i> Are you able to keep up with the monthly payments? <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. bamboo tray made of loosely woven bamboo strips, usually hung above the kitchen stove. <form>-in-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> a simple weave of wide bamboo strips or palm leaflets. <form>ka-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>average</tr>, <tr>moderate</tr>. <i>Mau niy kasarángang gidak-un sa púsù,</i> This is the <tr>usual</tr> size of the corn ear.

<p><form>saranggat</form> (from <ix>sanggat</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a sharp <tr>barb</tr> which is pointed in the opposite direction from a point at the tip of a dart, hook, or the like to prevent easy extraction. <number>2</number> group of four or more fishhooks tied together so that the hooks are facing in different directions, used for catching squid or any fish that come in masses. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> attach a <tr>barb</tr>. <number>1a</number> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> fish, catch with a <ix>saranggat</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[B6; b5c]</itype> <tr>lodge</tr>, <tr>take hold</tr> like s.t. with a barb. <i>Misaranggat sa íyang tutunlan ang bukug sa isdà,</i> The fish bone <tr>stuck</tr> in his throat. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>scratch</tr> with a sharp, pointed instrument. <i>Lansang nga tayaun ang nakasaranggat sa íyang lapalapa,</i> It was a rusty nail that scratched the sole of his foot.

<p><form>sarap<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>delicious</tr>, said only of food. <i>Kasarap sa sud-an,</i> What delicious food. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a]</itype> for food to be or become <tr>delicious</tr>.

<p><form>sárap</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>go over</tr> a place in fine detail so as not to miss anything. <i>Sarápun ta ang kakahuyan arun kit-an ang bátà,</i> Let's <tr>search</tr> the woods thoroughly to find the child. <number>2</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> move one's line of sight in a different direction. <i>Isárap ang ímung mata sa wala arun mu makítà ang sakayan,</i> Point your eyes to the left so you can see the boat. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; cP]</itype> dive and make a pass at s.t. <i>Misárap ang ayruplánu sa bapur sa kaáway,</i> The airplane buzzed the enemy ship. <i>Gisarápan sa lángaw ang sabaw,</i> The fly made a pass over the soup. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> go fishing with the <ix>sarap</ix>. <form>(&rarr;)<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> finely woven <pb n=880>fish <tr>net</tr> dragged by two or more people walking in shallow water.

<p><form>sarásay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; a3]</itype> move in a waving, zigzag manner. <i>Misarásay ang hubug,</i> The drunk <tr>zigzagged</tr> as he walked. <i>Usa ka kusug nga suntuk nakasarásay (nakapasarásay) nákù,</i> A strong blow made me <tr>stagger</tr>. <form>wátir &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> coconut palm toddy, or, by extension, any <tr>alcoholic drink</tr>.

<p><form>sardínas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fish</tr> in oval cans. <number>2</number> any fish canned whole. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> have canned fish. <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>closely packed</tr>, like sardines. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> be <tr>packed tight</tr> in a place for few people. <i>Nagsinardinas ang mga táwu ug sakay sa trák,</i> The people were packed in the bus like sardines.

<p><form>sargáti</form> <xr>= <sc>SARAGÁTI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sarguylas</form> <xr>= <sc>SIRIGUYLAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sarhintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sergeant</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B36; a12]</itype> be, become<corr>,</corr> make one a sergeant. <form>&mdash; dimísa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>desk sergeant</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B36; a12]</itype> become a desk sergeant.

<p><form>saril</form> <xr>= <sc>SALIR<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>saring</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>class</tr> in school. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> place where classes are held. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>classmate</tr>.

<p><form>sarìsárì</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> all different types of things sold in one place. <number>1a</number> category of store which sells miscellaneous items in small quantities. <i>Dì ka na mulukat ug lisinsiya kay sarìsárì ra man nang tindáhan mu,</i> You don't have to get a license for your <tr>dime store</tr>. <number>1b</number> be of all different types. <i>Sarìsárì ílang písang gibaligyà,</i> They sell spare parts of <tr>various</tr> brands. <number>2</number> dish made of pork with various vegetables and liver and sautéed. <number>2a</number> dish made of various greens mixed with diced squash and eggplants and stewed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> be <tr>varied</tr> or of different kinds. <i>Sarìsaríun nátù ang klási sa prútas arun náay átung kailin-ilínan,</i> Let's serve fruits of different kinds so we can have a choice.

<p><form>sarlistun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Charleston dance</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> dance the <tr>Charleston</tr>.

<p><form>sarsa<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SALSA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sarsa<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bottle cap</tr>.

<p><form>sarsaparilya</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. sweetened carbonated beverage similar to root beer.

<p><form>sarsuyla</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>zarzuela</tr>, a form of musical comedy. <number>2</number> the second part of the <ix>pastúra</ix> (shepherd's play) wherein each lady participant renders a song and dance number. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6c1]</itype> present, stage a zarzuela.

<p><form>sartin</form> <pos>n</pos> an enamel-plated metal plate or drinking cup. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> provide, use such a utensil.

<p><form>sáru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>goblet</tr>. <number>2</number> the heady wine of love in sexual pleasure (literary). <i>Malipáyun kaáyu ang nanaghigugmaay nga nagdimdim sa sáru sa gugma,</i> The two lovebirds are happy



</body>
</text>
</TEI.2>
