<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN" [

<!ENTITY larr       CDATA "&#x2190;"            -- leftwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY rarr       CDATA "&#x2192;"            -- rightwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY glots      CDATA "&#x0294;"            -- glottal stop -->

<!ENTITY amacr      CDATA "&#x0101;"            -- a with macron -->
<!ENTITY imacr      CDATA "&#x012B;"            -- i with macron -->
<!ENTITY umacr      CDATA "&#x016B;"            -- u with macron -->

<!ENTITY mgrave      CDATA "m&#x0300;"            -- m with grave -->

<!ENTITY amacrgra   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0300;"    -- a with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY imacrgra   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0300;"    -- i with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY umacrgra   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0300;"    -- u with macron and grave -->

<!ENTITY amacracu   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0301;"    -- a with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY imacracu   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0301;"    -- i with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY umacracu   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0301;"    -- u with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY Umacracu   CDATA "&#x016A;&#x0301;"    -- U with macron and acute -->

<!ENTITY amacrcir   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0302;"  -- a with macron and circumflex -->
<!ENTITY imacrcir   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0302;"  -- i with macron and circumflex -->
<!ENTITY umacrcir   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0302;"  -- u with macron and circumflex -->

<!ENTITY acaron     CDATA "a&#x030C;"           -- a with caron -->
<!ENTITY ucaron     CDATA "u&#x030C;"           -- u with caron -->
<!ENTITY icaron     CDATA "i&#x030C;"           -- i with caron -->

<!ENTITY schwa      CDATA "&#x0259;"            -- schwa (turned e) -->

<!ENTITY prime      CDATA "'"            -- prime -->
<!ENTITY Prime      CDATA "'"            -- double prime -->

]>

<!--

Step one

[X] Run pgpp.pl
[X] Fix page-breaks
[X] Fix hi tags (back to i tags)
[X] Insert p tags
[X] Run catpars.pl

Step two

[ ] tag pos: n v
[ ] tag pos: a
[ ] tag sense numbers (split of from b tags, look for /<b>word [0-9]</b>/ case
[ ] verify 'real' italics (not samples), look for /[a-z] italics>/ case
[ ] verify meaning numbers followed by sub-head-word or phrase <b>[0-9] word</b> case
[ ] italics and bolds midword. E.g. A<i>ng</i>
[ ] remove redundant tags near commas.
[ ] handle sup tags
[ ] verify starred entries (sub-entry immediately after headword)
[ ] handle [**proofer notes]
[ ] handle quotes. look for " '", etc.
[ ] Renumber pages.

Step three

Iterate:
    [X] Run WCED-uptag1.pl
    [ ] Run uptag.pl
    [ ] Verify output for anomalies and fix in source

Step four

[X] Run WCED-uptag1.pl
[ ] Integrate result into WCED-body-0.3

-->

<TEI.2 lang=en>
<teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
        <titleStmt>
            <title>A Dictionary of Cebuano Visayan</title>
            <author>John U. Wolff</author>
        </titleStmt>
    </fileDesc>
    <profileDesc>
        <langUsage>
            <language id=en>English</language>
            <language id=en-US>English (United States)</language>
            <language id=ceb>Cebuano</language>
        </langUsage>
    </profileDesc>
</teiHeader>
<text>
<body>

<pb n=1079>



<p>my watch is there. <i>2</i> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>stir</tr> s.t. thoroughly to <tr>mix</tr> it. <i>Ang muugkay sa harína kinahanglang ugag kamut,</i> Whoever wants to mix the flour must have dry hands. <number>2a</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for a home to be broken. <i>Naugkay ang ílang panimalay tungud sa bisyu sa bána,</i> The husband's vices finally broke their home.

<p><form>ugmà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tomorrow</tr>. <formx>&mdash; puhun (paabutun pa)</formx> <pos>n</pos> tomorrow, God willing (if I am allowed to see it). <i>Ugmà puhun na ku mularga,</i> I'll leave tomorrow, God willing. <number>2</number> one's <tr>future</tr>. <i>Kinsay nasáyud sa átung ugmà?</i> Who knows what the future holds for us? <form>&mdash; damlag</form> <pos>n</pos> in the future, someday. <i>Magkítà ra ta ugmà damlag,</i> We'll see each other again someday. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B256; b4(1)]</itype> for it to be the next day. <i>Miugmà (naugmà) na lang wà gihápun siya muabut,</i> Another day came and he still hadn't arrived. <i>Dì na nà siya kaugmaan (hiugmaan),</i> He won't live till the next day. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put s.t. off till the next day. <i>Ugmáa (iugmà) lang ang ímung híkay,</i> Put your party off till the next day. <form>ugmaugmà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put off doing s.t. <i>Dì ku muugmaugmà ug akuy musáad,</i> If I make a promise, I won't put it off. <form>pa-, paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> let s.t. be, delay oneself until the next day. <i>Ayawg pakaugmai. Buháta ni dáyun,</i> Don't let it wait till the next day. Do it right away. <form>ka-un</form> <pos>n</pos> one's future. <i>Wà kay kaugmáun dinhi sa baryu,</i> You have no future here in the village. <form>panghi-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> get to be about the next day. <i>Muabut si Mirli manghiugmà,</i> Mirlie will arrive by about tomorrow.

<p><form>ugmad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> 1 till the soil. <i>Upawng yútà nga dílì ángayng ugmárun,</i> Barren land not worth tilling. <number>1a</number> <tr>develop</tr> or <tr>cultivate</tr> a talent. <i>Ang mga magtutudlù mauy muugmad sa mga útuk sa mga bátà,</i> Teachers develop the minds of the children. <i>Masápì ang talintu ug mauy maugmad,</i> Talent that is developed is a source of livelihood. <number>2</number> <tr>build</tr>, <tr>establish</tr>. <i>Siyay nag-ugmad sa dráma balítaw,</i> He wrote the first drama wherein the dialogue was in the balítaw form. <i>Giugmad níya ang únang prindahanan,</i> She established the first pawnshop. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>prepare</tr> rice for storage, winnowing it and allowing it to dry out somewhat. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> set a <ix>paugmad</ix> fish corral. <pos>n</pos> a k.o. fish corral set in the deep waters and allowed to remain there until it falls apart. <form>ugmaran</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. which is cultivated, worked on for one's livelihood. <i>Ang dágat mauy ugmaran sa ílang panginabúhì,</i> The sea is the source of their livelihood. <form>kaugmáran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>development</tr>, s.t. <pb n=1080>attained by cultivation. <i>Siyay nagpaluyu sa kaugmáran sa pruyiktu sa riklamasiyun,</i> He was behind the development of the reclamation project. <form>mag-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>peasant</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> occupation of tilling.

<p><form>ugnat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>stretch</tr> out s.t. somewhat elastic. <i>Ugnáta (iugnat) ug maáyu ug dì ba tagù nga hilúha,</i> Stretch the string out hard and see if it is strong. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> <corr sic=loose>lose</corr> elasticity from getting stretched out. <i>Miugnat (naugnat) ang íyang swítir nga gilubágan,</i> His sweater is now all stretched out because he wrung it out when he washed it. <i>Nagkaugnat ang lastiku sa ákung hapslip,</i> The garter of my half-slip is getting loose. <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>exercise</tr> for the purpose of developing the body. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> exercise. <i>Mupaugnat (magpaugnat) ku sa kusug káda buntag,</i> I do some exercise every morning.

<p><form>ugnuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126P; b3]</itype> be <tr>stunned</tr>, suddenly <tr>surprised</tr>. <i>Naugnuk (napaugnuk) siya sa kalit nga butu nga íyang nadungug,</i> She was stunned by the sudden explosion that she heard. <i>Naugnuk siya dihang gisultían siya nga karnis irù tung íyang gikaun,</i> She did a double take when she was told that what she was eating was dog's meat. <i>Ang íyang hinanálì nga kamatáyun mauy nakaugnuk (nakapaugnuk) sa mga táwu,</i> His sudden death stunned the people.

<p><form>ugnut</form> <xr>= <sc>BUGNUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ugpak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cloth</tr> woven from abaca fiber. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> wear abaca-fiber cloth. 2 <itype>[b(1)]</itype> put abaca-fiber cloth as lining to stiffen the cloth. 3 <itype>[a12]</itype> weave into abaca-fiber cloth.

<p><form>ugpas</form> <xr>= <sc>UPAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ugpù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> leap up to defend oneself or escape. <i>Wà makaugpù ang kawatan kay hiabtan man sa pulis,</i> The policeman caught the thief before he was able to get out of there. <i>Wà makaugpù ang kuntra sa dihang milayat si Rubinsun arun pagribáwun sa búla,</i> There was nothing the other team could do when Robinson jumped to get the ball on the rebound. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> for a child to bounce up and down when held standing. <i>Miugpù na ang bátà,</i> The child has reached the stage he bounces. <pos>a</pos> characterized with a bounce in walking. <i>Ugpù ug linakwan ning tagabúkid,</i> Mountain folks walk with a bounce. <form>ugpuugpù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <tr>bounce</tr>, <tr>jounce</tr> up and down. <i>Nag-ugpuugpù ang trák sa karsádang batsihun,</i> The bus is jouncing on the road that is full of potholes.

<p><form>ugpung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for plants that die after maturity to bear their last leaves before bearing fruit. <i>Mamúsù na nang sagínga kay miugpung na,</i> That banana is about to flower because it has born its last leaf buds.

<p><form>ugput</form> <xr>= <sc>IGPUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ugsad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B36; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>land</tr>, <tr>touch</tr> the ground in a gentle manner. <i>Sa dihang miugsad ang buwà sa sabun sa yútà, mibutu kini,</i> When the soap bubble landed on the ground, it burst. <i>Ayaw iugsad (ipaugsad) ang tumuy sa kurtína sa sawug,</i> Don't let the end of the curtain touch the floor. <form>ugsad-ugsad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>UGSUD-UGSUD</sc>.</xr> <xr>see <sc>UGSUD</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>bounce</tr> or <tr>jounce</tr> in riding on a rough road or sea. <i>Nag-ugsad-ugsad ang trák sa kabatsihan,</i> The bus is bouncing up and down on the potholes. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>footfalls</tr>. <i>Kláru kaáyu sa sílung ang inugsad sa tiil sa naglakaw sa táas,</i> The <tr>footsteps</tr> upstairs are very loud downstairs.

<p><form>ugsud</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>stake</tr>, <tr>post</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>firewood</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> drive a stake into the ground. <i>Mag-ugsud na ta sa mga halígi sa kural,</i> Let's drive in the posts for the fence. <number>1a</number> throw s.t. down with force to the ground as if driving a stake. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> add firewood to make a flame higher. <i>Ákung ugsúran ang ákung gilung-ag arun malútug dalì,</i> I'll add firewood to the fire beneath the rice I am cooking so that it will get cooked soon. <form>ugsud-ugsud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> stamp the feet lightly, usually in childish refusal. <i>Ayaw ugsud-ugsúra (iugsud-ugsud) nang ímung tiil ug sugúun ka,</i> Don't stamp your feet when you're told to do s.t.

<p><form>ugsuk</form> <xr>= <sc>ÚSUK</sc> in all meanings except <i>n2.</i></xr>

<p><form>ugtad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B236]</itype> for ropes or like materials to snap under force or abrasion. <i>Miugtad (naugtad) ang písì sa kakusug sa pagbira,</i> The rope snapped when it was pulled strongly. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> get loose after the tether rope snapped. <i>Muugtad giyud nang kábaw kay gabuk na ang hikut,</i> That carabao will surely get loose because the tether rope is weakened.

<p><form>ugtak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> for chickens to squawk in fright. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2; c1]</itype> for the voice to be loud and abrupt. <i>Miugtak ang íyang sinultihan karung kwartáhan na siya,</i> He speaks in a loud and gruff tone now that he has become rich. <pos>n</pos> action of squawking. <pos>a</pos> having a gruff and loud voice.

<p><form>ugtas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1; c1]</itype> tire oneself out, be <tr>exhausted</tr>. <i>Nagkaugtas siya sa nadúgay nang lánguy,</i> He was becoming exhausted after swimming for a long time. <number>1a</number> get <tr>worn out</tr> emotionally. <i>Naugtas na ku ug tambag nímu,</i> I'm exhausted from trying to give you advice. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> for rope or wire to snap and break after heavy use or friction. <i>Muugtas (maugtas) ang alambri sa síging bag-id sa batu,</i> The wire will break from rubbing against <pb n=1081>the stone. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126; b]</itype> for a life to end, usually after long suffering.

<p><form>ugtud</form> (from <ix>utud</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a12]</itype> <tr>break</tr>, <tr>chip off</tr>, break into pieces. <i>Naugtud ang líug sa butilyang napangkà,</i> The neck of the bottle broke off when he banged it against s.t. <i>Naugtud ang mga halígi nga giánay,</i> The post broke into pieces when the termites attacked it. <pos>n</pos> pieces broken off.

<p><form>ugtuk</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>still</tr>. <i>Ugtuk karun ang dágat,</i> The sea is <tr>calm</tr> now. <number>2</number> <tr>slow</tr>, almost dragging. <i>Mas ugtuk mulakaw ang kábaw kay sa báka,</i> The water buffalo walks more slowly than a cow. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B46]</itype> <tr>stand still</tr>, <tr>stop</tr>. <i>Muugtuk ang rilu kun dì yawíhan,</i> The clock will stop if it is not wound. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> do s.t. slowly, <tr>drag</tr> in one's work. <i>Muugtuk (mag-ugtuk) sila sa ílang trabáhu kun way magbantay,</i> They drag their work when nobody is watching. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> <tr>mope</tr> or <tr>brood</tr> over s.t.

<p><form>ugtus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a12]</itype> exhaust oneself emotionally. <i>Naugtus kug gastu sa ímung pagtuun,</i> I've worn myself out paying for your schooling. <i>Ugtúsun pa giyud ku nímu ánang ímung binúang,</i> You still have to worry me to death with your shenanigans. <pos>a</pos> be exhausted emotionally.

<p><form>ugud</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>gud</bx>. <number>1</number> particle accompanying a statement of explanation. <i>Ang ákù gung gianhi nímu,</i> The reason I came here. <i>Nangutána lang gud ku kay ...</i> I'm asking you because ... <i>Ang ákù gud, ug mahibaw-an unyà,</i> The thing that I'm worried about is if he finds out. <i>Misyágit. Tíaw mu gud sakit kaáyu,</i> He screamed. Because imagine, it was so painful. <formx>man &mdash;</formx> <tr>because</tr>. <i>Wà ku palita kay mahal man gud,</i> I did not buy it because it was expensive. <number>1a</number> <formx>ugud ba</formx> particle initial in a sentence explaining why one has put a certain question. <i>&lsquo;Ngánung nangutána ka?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Ugud ba, arun mahibáwu,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Why do you ask?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Oh, I just want to know.&rsquo; <i>&lsquo;Ngánung nangutána kag muadtu ku?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Ugud ba, náa tay ákung ipadá nímu,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Why do you ask if I'm going?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;I would like to have you take s.t. for me, if you would.<corr>&rsquo;</corr> <number>1b</number> particle affirming s.o.'s statement casting aspersions. <i>&lsquo;Dátù man kahà ngánung nag-antus mag maistra?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Ugud,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;If she is rich, how come she puts up with teaching?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;I've been wondering that myself.&rsquo; <number>2</number> in questions or exclamations. <number>2a</number> <ix>with interrogatives:</ix> in the world. <i>Ngánu gud nà!</i> Why in the world should it be like that. <i>Anus-a gud nà nímu humana,</i> When in the world are you going to finish it? <number>2b</number> <ix>with nominal predicates:</ix> what [noun] are you talking about? <i>Sinsíyu gud. Wà man tuy suklì,</i> What change are you talking about? You don't have any change coming. <number>2c</number> <formx>ba &mdash;</formx> how is it possible that [so-and-so] should happen? <i>Kay wà pa ba guy halin?</i> You mean to say there haven't been any sales till now? <i>Mangáwat ba gud ku?</i> You think I could possibly steal? <number>2d</number> <ix>in exclamations:</ix> particle exclaiming about s.t. discovered for the first time. <i>Kadakù na gud nímug idad!</i> My! How old you are! <i>Kadaghan gud nímug gihátag,</i> You sure gave me a lot! <number>3</number> <ix>in commands:</ix> [do so-and-so] even though you don't want to. <i>Sígi gud. Ihatud na lang gud ku,</i> Come on! Take me there already! <i>Ihátag na gud nà,</i> Go on now, give it to him. <number>3a</number> <ix>used sarcastically in commands:</ix> why don't you just [do]. <i>Buk-a na lang gud nang tanan. Barátu bítaw,</i> Why don't you just break all of them while you're at it? They're so cheap. <number>3b</number> <form>ra &mdash;</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>RA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ug-ug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> (A; c1] <tr>jog</tr>, move bouncing up and down. <i>Muug-ug na gánì ning kabayúa timailhan nga gikápuy na,</i> Once the horse starts to jog it shows that it is tired. <number>2</number> <itype>[B3(1)6; b6]</itype> be <tr>jarring</tr>. <i>Muug-ug (maug-ug) gánì ang sakyanan pamaúlan ku,</i> If the vehicle <tr>jounces</tr> up and down, I'll get fatigued. <number>3</number> <itype>[AB; c16]</itype> <tr>shake</tr>, cause to move up and down or back and forth. <i>Dì mumata ang bátà ug akuy muug-ug,</i> The child won't wake up if I shake him. <i>Muug-ug (maug-ug) ang mga balay ug maglínug,</i> The houses will shake if there is an earthquake. <i>Nakaug-ug ka na sa midisína?</i> Have you shaken the bottle of medicine? <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>jogging</tr>, <tr>jouncing</tr>. <number>2</number> art of shaking s.t. <pos>a</pos> <tr>jouncy</tr>, <tr>bouncy</tr>. <i>Ug-ug kaáyu ang dálan,</i> The road is very <tr>bumpy</tr>. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bounciness</tr>, <tr>jounciness</tr>. <i>Tungud sa kaug-ug sa dyíp,</i> Because of the way the jeep bounced.

<p><form>ug-ug<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> for open wounds or sores to putrify.

<p><form>ug-úg</form> <xr>= <sc>ULUG-ÚLUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>uguk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>short-necked</tr> due to fat or thickness of the neck. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1N; b6]</itype> have a short and fleshy neck. <i>Ang báka nangúguk,</i> The cow has a hump on its neck. <i>Ang íyang katambuk mauy nakauguk (nakapauguk) sa íyang líug,</i> Obesity has caused his neck to look short.

<p><form>uguk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>moronic</tr>, having feeble mental capacities. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be moronic.

<p><form>úgum</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> hold or keep s.t. inside the mouth. <i>Ayaw ugúma (iúgum) ang kan-un sa ímung bàbà,</i> Don't keep the food in your mouth. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <tr>enclose</tr> s.t. within it as if contained in the mouth. <i>Nag-úgum ug pútut ang búlak,</i> The flower encloses a fruit <pb n=1082>bud. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>harbor emotions</tr>. <i>Ayaw ugúma (iúgum) ang ímung mga kaguul,</i> Don't keep your problems to yourself. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> swindle contributions, funds entrusted to one. <i>Ug siyay matisuríru, ugúmun lang níyag átung ámut,</i> If he is made the treasurer, he will just pocket our contributions. <number>5</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> answer or assume responsibility for a crime committed to keep accomplices from getting involved. <i>Ayaw mu kahadluk nga masakpan ta. Tutal ugúmun man nákù ang tanan,</i> Don't be afraid if we get caught. I'll take complete responsibility.

<p><form>úgung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> spin a top. <i>Ugúnga ang kasing arun hibaw-an ta ug karagan ba,</i> Spin the top so we'll know if it spins well. <number>2</number> <itype>[B23(1); c1]</itype> be <tr>steady</tr> and without a wobble. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> run or drive very fast and at a steady speed. <pos>n</pos> action of spinning a top. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> spinning steadily, without wobbling. <i>Úgung kaáyu ang ákung kasing,</i> My top spins very steadily. <number>2</number> running fast at a steady speed. <i>Úgung siyang midágan kay nahadluk man,</i> He ran fast without stopping because he was afraid.

<p><form>ugut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b3(1)]</itype> <tr>frown</tr> in distaste, or from not being permitted s.t. <i>Dì ku mag-ugut ug sugúun ku ni Nánay,</i> I won't frown if Mother sends me on an errand.

<p><form>ugut-úgut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> roll in suppressed laughter.

<p><form>uguy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> for growth to be retarded or <tr>stunted</tr>. <i>Miuguy (nauguy) ang mga búlak nga gitanum iláwum sa kasagingan,</i> The flowers planted under the banana trees did not do well. <i>Ang bug-at nga trabáhu makauguy (makapauguy) sa mga bátà,</i> Hard work can <tr>stunt</tr> a child's growth.

<p><form>úguy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> rock a child slowly in the arms, sway the body gently as in time to slow music. <i>Siyay miúguy (nag-úguy) pagpakatúlug sa bátà,</i> She rocked the baby in her arms to sleep. <i>Ugúya ang bátà,</i> Rock the child in your arms. <form>uguy-úguy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> dance to slow music (colloquial). <pos>n</pos> slow dance music with the partners close together (colloquial). <form>uguy-úguy blus</form> <xr>= <sc>UGUY-ÚGUY</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>ugwad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> turn the earth over with a knife, bar, or s.t. similar. <i>Ugwárun lang nátù ang yútà sa kabatuhan,</i> We'll dig up the soil near the rocks with a bar. <i>Ugwárun sa bábuy ang tanum ug dì kuralun,</i> The pig will <tr>uproot</tr> the plants if you don't fence them. <pos>n</pos> bar to dig the soil up with. <form>ugwad-ugwad</form> <xr>= <sc>IGWAD-IGWAD</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>IGWAD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ugyab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for a group to break into laughter. <i>Miugyab sila ug katáwa sa ákung sinínà nga nabali,</i> They broke into laughter <form>upon</form> seeing me with my dress on backwards.

<p><form>uha</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for a newborn child to cry. <i>Miuha ang bátà sa pagguwà,</i> The child cried when it came out. <pos>n</pos> cry of a newborn baby.

<p><form>uhag</form> a restlessly moving about. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> move restlessly with bouncy actions. <i>Way muuhag kun kantáhun na ang nasudnung áwit,</i> Nobody move when the national anthem is sung. <i>Kun mag-uhag mu matikwang ang búti,</i> If you move around restlessly, the rowboat will capsize.

<p><form>uhaldris</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>cookie</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make, eat, or serve <ix>uhaldris</ix>.

<p><form>uhális</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>buttonhole</tr>. <i>Ang dakung butúnis dakug uhális,</i> High rank carries great responsibility. (Lit. Big buttons have big buttonholes.) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make buttonholes.

<p><form>uhang</form> <pos>n</pos> space between two things which are supposed to be touching or fitting each other. <i>Dì ku makalusut sa uhang sa kural,</i> I can't pass through the spaces between the fence. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for things that are supposed to be solid to have spaces in between them. <i>Miuhang (nauhang) ang bungbung sa pagkúlù sa mga káhuy,</i> The wallboards developed spaces between them when the boards shrunk. <form>uhang-uhang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> eat snacks casually. <number>2</number> go to other people's houses to have meals. <i>Ang táwung manguhang-uhang mu rag irung way tag-íya,</i> A person who goes around to have his meals is like a stray dog.

<p><form>úhas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> cutting or piercing instrument that is part of s.t. bigger: drill bit, saw blade, knife blade, barbs on a hook, et al. <number>2</number> <tr>matchstick</tr>. <i>Mangáyù lang ku ug tulu ka úhas sa puspuru,</i> I'll just ask for three matchsticks. <number>3</number> lead of a pencil. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> put in a cutting or piercing instrument to its handle.

<p><form>úhas bulantis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>leaflets</tr>.

<p><form>uhaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>thirsty</tr>. <i>Maay tag náay túbig kay uhaw kaáyu,</i> It would be nice if there were water because I'm very thirsty. <number>1a</number> having a strong <tr>craving</tr>. <i>Uhaw ku sa lawasnung kalípay,</i> I'm <tr>hungry</tr> for pleasures of the body. <number>2</number> <tr>devoid</tr>. <i>Kinabúhing uhaw sa kalípay,</i> A life devoid of happiness. <pos>n</pos> <tr>thirst</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> <number>1</number> be <tr>thirsty</tr>. <i>Ug akuy uhawun muúgum lang kug kandi,</i> If I feel thirsty, I'll just put a piece of candy in my mouth. <number>2</number> feel a longing, craving. <i>Giuhaw aku sa pagpanggà sa inahan,</i> I <tr>thirst for</tr> a mother's love. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> (A13N; c6] quench the thirst. <pos>n</pos> s.t. to quench the thirst. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>thirst</tr>. <number>1a</number> <tr>craving</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>emptiness</tr>.

<p><form>uháwun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. big <tr>parrot fish</tr> about 2´ long <pb n=1083>and 8" wide, having blue-green scales on the dorsal region and whitish-yellow scales on the ventral region.

<p><form>uhay</form> <pos>n</pos> seed-bearing <tr>panicle</tr> (e.g. as of rice but not corn). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> harvest s.t. by just taking the whole panicle. <i>Uhayun nátù ang pag-áni sa humay,</i> We'll harvest the rice by panicles. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b4]</itype> grow panicles. <i>Miuhay (nanguhay, giuhayan) na ang átung humay,</i> Our rice is bearing panicles now.

<p><form>uhípan</form> <xr>= <sc>ULAHÍPAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>uhu</form> word representing the sound of coughing.

<p><form>uhú</form> so, I caught you. <i>Uhú, sayup na pud ka,</i> <tr>Aha</tr>, you made a mistake again. <i>Uhú, dáan pa lagi ku,</i> Aha! Just as I thought. <i>Uhú, pildi diay ka,</i> Aha! So you lost!

<p><form>uhù</form> <tr>as expected</tr>. <i>Ug uhù da man, miguwang mananáug si Ilurdi,</i> As expected, Elorde came out the winner. <i>Uhù túud, namatay ang masakitun,</i> Just as one would expect, the patient died.

<p><form>úhù</form> <tr>before</tr> [do]ing. <i>Úhù ka mutubag, panigurúa únag hustu ka,</i> Before you give your answer, make sure you are right. <form>&mdash; pa</form> <number>1</number> <tr>wait a minute</tr>. <i>Úhù pa kay nagkaun pa ku,</i> <tr>Just a minute</tr>. I'm still eating. <number>2</number> <tr>just a second</tr>, to change the subject. <i>Úhù pa diay, nagdá ba tu kug bág?</i> <tr>By the way</tr>, did I have my bag along?

<p><form>uhún</form> <xr>= <sc>UHÚ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>úhung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. white <tr>mushroom</tr>. <form>mudugù pay &mdash;</form> harder than getting blood out of a mushroom, said of women past child-bearing age who are not likely to menstruate or of people who are cheap. <i>Tihik siya kaáyu. Mudugù pay úhung,</i> He's terribly cheap. It's easier to get blood out of a stone (lit. mushroom). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> cook this k.o. mushroom. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> place where mushrooms grow readily.

<p><form>uhut, úhut</form> <pos>n</pos> straw of rice or other grain-bearing grasses. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b6]</itype> be reduced to straw, become all straw. <i>Miuhut (nauhut, nag-uhut) ang humay kay gikaun sa máya ang mga lugas,</i> The rice plant became all straw because the ricebirds ate the grains.

<p><form>úk</form> <xr>= <sc>ULUK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>uka</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> split one's sides with laughter. <i>Giukhan (nauka) giyud kug katáwa sa ímung binaylihan,</i> I just about died laughing at the way you dance.

<p><form>ukab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>open</tr> with an upward or lifting motion, get opened. <i>Akuy miukab sa kaban,</i> I opened the trunk. <i>Wà siya makaukab sa láta,</i> He could not open the tin. <i>Librung nag-ukab sa lamísa,</i> A book lying open on the table. <i>Ukba (iukab, ukbi) ang ímung bàbà,</i> Open your mouth. <number>2</number> <tr>pry</tr> s.t. up, open. <i>Akuy miukab sa batu,</i> I turned the stone over. <i>Dikabra ray makaukab sa mga salug nga ilisánan,</i> Only a crowbar can pry the floorboards loose. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> for a part of the body, clothing to get a rip or slash. <i>Naukab ang íyang lapalapa kay nakatunub ug bildu,</i> His sole got slashes in it because he stepped on glass. <pos>n</pos> opened upwards, ripped off, slashed open. <form>ukab-úkab</form> <pos>a</pos> s.t. that can be opened and closed. <pos>n</pos> the general name for <tr>bivalves</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be s.t. that could be easily opened and closed. <form>ukban</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tangerine</tr>, a loose-skinned orange that is easy to open. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> plant tangerines.

<p><form>ukabhang</form> <xr>= <sc>ALUKABHANG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ukadyang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> turn things upside down to search. <i>Ukadyánga (iukadyang) ang tanan arun makit-an,</i> Search everything so that it can be found. <number>2</number> put things in utter disarray. <i>Kinsay nag-ukadyang sa ákung aparadur?</i> Who <tr>disarranged</tr> the things in my cabinet? <number>3</number> <itype>[A123P; a3]</itype> be <tr>agog</tr> or put into frenzied action. <i>Naukadyang sila pagkatribukar nga kulángan ang sápì,</i> They were thrown into a <tr>dither</tr> upon finding out that the money was short.

<p><form>ukal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> <tr>peel off</tr>, <tr>detach</tr> s.t. from a surface to which it is firmly attached, esp. over its entire surface; become so. <i>Wà pa muukal (maukal) ang unud sa lubi,</i> The coconut meat has not detached from its shell. <i>Nag-ukal ang tikud sa sapátus,</i> The heel is <tr>coming off</tr> the shoes. <i>Nagkaukal na ang pintal sa dáang balay,</i> The paint of the old house is peeling off. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; a12]</itype> take out or away from s.t. as if detached. <i>Ukala na nang bátà sa íyang inahan,</i> Take that child away from its mother. <i>Dì na siya maukal sa pagkamaistru,</i> He can't be removed from his teaching post.

<p><form>ukang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB2; c1]</itype> remove s.t. attached to a surface. <i>Dílì na siya makaukang sa kwadru nga gilansang sa bungbung,</i> He can no longer remove the frame that he nailed to the wall. <i>Maukang ning gipapilit ug mainitan,</i> These things which are pasted on will come off when the sun gets on them. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB2C; a1]</itype> <tr>cease</tr> to do s.t. <i>Dúgay nà silang muukang (mag-úkang) sa ílang pag-ínum,</i> It will take them a long time to <tr>finish</tr> their drinking spree. <i>Dúgay naukang ang íyang panan-aw sa libru,</i> It took him a long time to take his gaze off the book. <i>Ukánga (uknga) nang nagsinumbagay,</i> Separate those people that are fighting.

<p><form>ukas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> <number>1</number> catch s.o. in the act. <i>Naukasan sa bána ang íyang asáwa sa makauúlawng kahimtang,</i> The husband caught his <pb n=1084>wife in an embarrassing position. <number>2</number> get a chance to do s.t. <i>Mangáwat siyag makaukas,</i> He steals if he is given the chance.

<p><form>ukasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>occasion</tr>, a favorable <tr>opportunity</tr>. <i>Ukasiyun nà nímu. Pahimudsi,</i> That's a chance for you. Take advantage of it. <i>Way ukasiyun nga sarang kagamítan ning sinináa,</i> There's no occasion for which I can wear this dress. <number>2</number> trip of public transportation. <i>Wà nay ukasiyun rung mga urása,</i> There are no more buses at this hour. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> take advantage of an opportunity. <i>Nangukasiyun siya pagbisíta samtang wà didtu ang ginikánan,</i> He took the opportunity of visiting her while her parents weren't there. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> <tr>get a chance</tr> to do s.t. <i>Mangáwat siya ug makaukasiyun,</i> He steals if he gets a chance. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> action of taking an opportunity. <i>Kining ákung pagkúyug nímu pangukasiyun kay malibri kus plíti,</i> I'm taking advantage of the chance to go with you to get a free ride.

<p><form>úkat</form> <xr>= <sc>UGKAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ukay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>stir</tr> or <tr>agitate</tr> s.t. <i>Ukaya nu ang linúgaw,</i> Please stir the porridge. <i>Rík ang iukay sa humay nga gibulad,</i> Use a rake to <tr>mix up</tr> the rice we are drying. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <corr sic=blow>plow</corr> lightly, esp. a second time, across existing furrows. <i>Maáyu giyud nga ukayun ang daruhan úsà tudlínga,</i> It is wise to plow the field lightly a second time before you make the furrows. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a2]</itype> turn things upside down in searching. <i>Náa ra nà dihà ug ímu nang ukayun,</i> If you turn everything upside down, you'll see it is there. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> find s.t. by turning things upside down. <i>Naukayan ang píkas sinílas sa basúra,</i> He found the other slipper after they <tr>ransacked</tr> the garbage. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> stir s.o. up. <i>Naukay ang mga táwu pagsúnug,</i> The people were all <tr>excited</tr> when there was a fire. <pos>n</pos> s.t. to stir with. <form>ig-l-(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>UKAY</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>úkay</form> @<xr><sc>O.K</sc>.</xr>, I give agreement.

<p><form>ukba</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> get detached from what it was stuck to. <i>Ákung ukbáhun ang pánit sa inasal,</i> I'll <tr>peel off</tr> the skin from the roasted pig. <pos>a</pos> having come off.

<p><form>ukhab</form> <xr>= <sc>ABHAK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>úki</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> @<xr><sc>O.K</sc>.</xr>, <tr>all right</tr>. <i>Úki kaáyu ang ímung trabáhu,</i> Your work is all right. <number>2</number> <tr>in agreement</tr>. <i>Dílì ku úki ánà,</i> I won't <tr>go along with</tr> that. <pos>n</pos> <tr>approval</tr>. <i>Nagpaábut pa sa íyang úki,</i> Still waiting for his approval. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a3b]</itype> give one's approval. <i>Siyay miúki (nag-úki) sa ákung ripurt nga gisumitir,</i> He <tr>approved</tr> the report that I submitted. <i>Wà maúki (maukíhi) ang plánu,</i> The plan was not approved.

<p><form>ukiduk, ukidúki</form> emphatic expression of approval or agreement.

<p><form>ukikà</form> humorous for <xr><sc>UKIDUK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>úkit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> peel off s.t. with the front teeth or take little things off or apart with the fingers. <i>Ukítun pagkáun ang pakwan,</i> You eat watermelon seeds by peeling them with your front teeth. <i>Mahímù nga kuku ang iúkit,</i> You can peel it off with your fingernails. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> <tr>pry</tr> into s.o.'s secrets. <i>Ngánung mangúkit ka sa ákung kagahápun?</i> Why do you want to pry into my past? <number>3</number> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> study s.t. in detail to find s.t. out. <i>Nangúkit siyag unsay dipirinsiya sa mutur,</i> He's <tr>examining</tr> the motorcycle to see what is wrong with it. <form>ukit-ukitan, ukit-ukitun, ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>curious</tr> or <tr>nosey</tr>. <i>Ukit-ukitun kaáyu ning táwung libakíra,</i> This gossipmonger sure is nosey.

<p><form>ukíuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>squeeze</tr>, <tr>penetrate</tr> deep into. <i>Miukíuk sa íyang tanlag ang mga sudiyà sa namatay níyang inahan,</i> The words of reproach from his dying mother penetrated deep into his soul. <i>Dì ka makaukíuk dihà kay bagà kaáyu ang táwu,</i> You can't elbow your way through because the crowd is so thick. <i>Húmuk ang yútà nga giukiúkan sa wati,</i> The worm wiggled into the soft earth.

<p><form>ukiut, ukíut</form> <xr>= <sc>KULÍKUT</sc> (but not <ix>kulikut</ix>).</xr>

<p><form>uklab</form> <xr>= <sc>UKAB</sc>, <pos>v</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>uklaba</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> fall down forward. <i>Nauklaba ku dihang nasángit ang ákung tiil sa tuud,</i> I fell down forward when my foot got caught on a stump.

<p><form>ukmil</form> <xr>= <sc>UTMIL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>uknul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P; a3]</itype> be mildly <tr>surprised</tr> or <tr>startled</tr>. <i>Mauknul (mahiuknul) giyud ang táwu nga makakità nímu,</i> People will be surprised to see you. <i>Nauknul ku pagkabalità nákù,</i> I was <tr>taken aback</tr> on hearing the news. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> <tr>hesitate</tr> to do s.t., esp. with the action of starting and then stopping suddenly. <i>Ngánung muuknul ka man sa pagsulud?</i> Why do you <tr>stop suddenly</tr> before coming in? <i>Muuknul kung mugámit ánà kay dilikádu ang tag-íya,</i> I hesitate to use that because the owner is fussy. <form>uknul-uknul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> move in a bouncing, jouncing way. <i>Nag-uknul-uknul ang trák sa libaungung karsáda,</i> The bus <tr>jounced</tr> over the road that was full of holes. <i>Tagabúkid nga mag-uknul-uknul nga maglakaw,</i> A mountaineer that bounces up and down as he walks.

<p><form>ukpaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> leap while in a squatting position or in a manner like the frog. <i>Miukpaw ang bakì ngadtus túbig,</i> The frog leaped into the water. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> walk with a bounce. <pb n=1085><i>Muukpaw ang linakwan sa táwung naánad ug puyù sa búkid bísan ug mapátag na ang laktan,</i> People who are used to the mountains bounce when they walk, even on level areas. <form>ukpaw-ukpaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> walk with a bounce or <tr>gallop</tr>. <i>Nag-ukpaw-ukpaw ug maáyu ang kabáyù,</i> The horse was galloping wildly.

<p><form>ukra<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>okra</tr>.

<p><form>ukra<sub>2</sub></form> (from <ix>rauk</ix>&mdash;slang) <pos>n</pos> <tr>money</tr>.

<p><form>uksidy&icaron;n, uksihína</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>oxygen</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b5]</itype> use oxygen on s.o.

<p><form>uksihináda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hydrogen peroxide</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> apply or clean s.t. with hydrogen <tr>peroxide</tr>.

<p><form>uksihínu</form> <xr>= <sc>UKSIDY&Icaron;N</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>uksilyu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>borrow</tr> s.t., esp. for immediate and temporary use. <i>Kun masakit ang mga bátà muuksilyu mig binatunan sa ka Máma,</i> When the children get sick we temporarily use Mother's maid. <i>Uksilyúha ang íyang awtu sa Duminggu,</i> Borrow his car on Sunday. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> request or <tr>hire</tr> s.o. to help or assist in work. <i>Nag-uksilyu kug kusiníru pára sa pyista,</i> I'm hiring a cook for the fiesta. 2a be an assistant. <i>Ang ákung mga anak ang muuksilyu nákù sa nigusyu,</i> My children are the ones who assist me in my business. <pos>n</pos> <tr>helper</tr>, <tr>assistant</tr>.

<p><form>uksináda</form> <xr>= <sc>UKSIHINÁDA</sc>.</xr> <form>agwa &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>UKSIHINÁDA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>uksirb&acaron;r</form> <xr>= <sc>UBSIRB&Acaron;R</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>uksu</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for OXO, a gang of Visayan hoodlums in Manila.

<p><form>Ukt</form>. abbreviation for <ix>Uktubri</ix> &lsquo;October&rsquo;.

<p><form>uktába<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; c16]</itype> <tr>postpone</tr>, <tr>put off</tr> to a later date. <i>Wà nay lugar nga uktabáhun (iuktába) pa ang inyung kasal,</i> There's no more time for your wedding to be postponed. <i>Mauktába ang sibil sirbis ug náay líkids,</i> They will postpone the civil service test if there is a leakage. <pos>n</pos> <tr>postponement</tr>. <i>Pila ka adlaw ang uktába sa didláyin?</i> How many days is the postponement of the deadline<corr sic=.>?</corr>

<p><form>uktába<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>octave</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> raise the pitch an octave higher. <i>Átung iuktába ang paníngug kay ubus ra kaáyu,</i> We shall raise the pitch an octave higher because it is too low now.

<p><form>Uktubri</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>October</tr>. <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ABRIL</sc></xr> <ix>for verb forms</ix>.

<p><form>uku, ukù</form> expression uttered to babies three or four months old, the interpretation of the baby's cooing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> for a three- or four-month-old baby to coo in response when talked to, tickled, blown. <i>Makalingaw ang bátà basta makamau nang muukù,</i> A baby is a lot of fun when it starts to coo back at you when you talk to it.

<p><form>úkù</form> <xr>= <sc>ÚKUY<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>úkub</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> cling or hold on firmly to. <i>Miúkub ang bátà sa íyang yáya dihang ákù untà siyang kuháun,</i> The child held on firmly to her nursemaid when I was about to take her. <i>Miúkub na ang kula,</i> The glue has <tr>set</tr>. <i>Hiukuban giyud ka dihà ug lintà ug muúbug ka,</i> If you go wading over there you will get leeches on you. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; a]</itype> for two convex things to fit together at their brims. <i>Muúkub ning duha ka kartun,</i> These two boxes are the same size because the edges match perfectly. <i>Nag-úkub ang duha ka ngábil,</i> Their two lips met and held to each other. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>bite</tr>, letting the teeth sink in, or for an insect to bite. <i>Miúkub lang dáyun ang irù sa ákung bitíis nga wà muúsig,</i> The dog sank its teeth in my legs without barking at me. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> apply dry cupping on s.t. to suck out undesirable matter. <i>Nawálà ang sakit sa ákung likud nga gipaukúban,</i> My backache disappeared after dry cupping was applied. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>penetrating</tr>, <tr>piercing</tr> (literary). <i>Maukúbung pagsud-ung,</i> A penetrating look.

<p><form>uk-uk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23P; c1]</itype> <tr>draw back</tr>, <tr>shrink back</tr> into.<i> Miuk-uk ang úlu sa bau pag-ági nákù,</i> The turtle drew its head back when I passed by. <i>Gustu na lang kung muuk-uk sa kaúlaw,</i> I wanted to <tr>shrink into</tr> the floorboards with shame. <form>&mdash; ang butbut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; b4]</itype> <tr>back out</tr>, decide not to do s.t. that one earlier showed interest in doing. <i>Miuk-uk ang butbut ni Pidru. Karun nga pakantáhun na untà, midumílì na hinúun,</i> Pedro <tr>chickened out</tr>. Now that we want to have him sing, he refuses. <form>&mdash; ang dílà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2456]</itype> be <tr>tongue-tied</tr>. <i>Walà dáyun siya makatíngug kay miuk-uk ang íyang dílà sa túmang katingála,</i> He couldn't say a word because he was tongue-tied with amazement. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26; b6]</itype> <tr>shrink</tr>, esp. of cloth. <i>Miuk-uk (nauk-uk) ang ákung panaptun human ihúmul,</i> My cloth shrunk after it was soaked. <number>3</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> go down in value or worth. <i>Miuk-uk ang prisyu sa palalítun,</i> The price of goods has gone down. <number>4</number> <itype>[A123P; a4b4]</itype> be infested with cockroaches. <pos>n</pos> <tr>cockroach</tr>. <i>Pubripubri sa suuk náa giyuy uk-uk,</i> No matter how homely a girl may be, s.o. will court her. (Lit. No matter how poor the corner, there is bound to be a cockroach.) <i>Ngánung nagminátay ka, mu ra ka mag namatyag uk-uk,</i> Why are you wailing? You're acting as if you lost a beloved cockroach (i.e. it's not worth crying about).

<p><form>úkul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> lump which is small enough to be held in the hand. <number>2</number> lump of leftover rice. <pb n=1086><i>Nagbitbit ang bátà ug úkul nga gisulaan níyag bulad,</i> The child is carrying a lump of leftover rice which he ate with his dried fish. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> <tr>form lumps</tr>, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Muúkul ang pawdird milk ug dílì kutáwun pag-áyu,</i> Powdered milk will form lumps if you don't stir it well.

<p><form>ukun-úkun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> <tr>hesitate</tr> to do s.t. <i>Dì ku muukun-úkun arun ingnun nga ísug ku,</i> I won't hesitate so that they'll say that I have guts. <i>Ayaw ukun-ukúna (iukun-úkun) ang ímung pagdáwat, ábi pa lang wà ka kaayun,</i> Don't hesitate to accept it or else they will think you don't appreciate it.

<p><form>ukupar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>occupy</tr> or <tr>take possession</tr> of by settlement or seizure. <i>Wà pay nakaukupar ánang isláha,</i> No one has ever <tr>settled</tr> on that island. <i>Ang lugar nga giukupahan sa armi,</i> The place occupied by the army. <number>2</number> take up most of a space. <i>Ang lamísa miukupar sa gamayng lawak,</i> The table took up most of the space in the small room. <number>2a</number> <tr>take up time</tr>. <i>Naukupar ang tanan kung panahun sa mga pitsipitsi,</i> My time was taken up with trivialities. <form>ukupádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for a space to be <tr>occupied</tr>. <i>Ukupádu ning lingkuranána,</i> This seat is occupied. <i>Ukupádu na kaáyu ang átung sakyanan,</i> Our bus is already <tr>full</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>busy</tr>. <i>Ukupádu kaáyu mi kay nagpriparar sa pista,</i> We are busy preparing for the feast. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> get occupied. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be <tr>busy</tr> with much work.

<p><form>ukupasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>occupation</tr>. <i>Wà ka bay láing ukupasiyun gawas sa pagyampungad sa tubaan?</i> Have you nothing else to occupy your time than hanging around the toddy stand? <number>2</number> the Japanese occupation in World War Two.

<p><form>ukut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B456; b6]</itype> get stuck into s.t. deep such that it is hard to disengage. <i>Miukut ang dyip sa lápuk,</i> The jeep got stuck in the mud. <i>Mga libun<note>P2?: lib un</note> nga nag-ukut sa dunggan sa irù,</i> Ticks sticking to the dog's ears. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>penetrating</tr> (literary).

<p><form>ukuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> <tr>snoop</tr>, look about in a sneaking prying way. <i>Muukuy nang bayhána sa íyang bána,</i> That woman <tr>spies</tr> on her husband. <i>Akung ukuyun (ukyun) ang mga bátà ug wà ba manglákaw,</i> I'll <tr>spy on</tr> the children and see if they didn't go out.

<p><form>úkuy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> dish of meat, shrimp, and bean sprouts fried in dough. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> have, make <ix>úkuy</ix>.

<p><form>úkuy<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a supernatural being in the shape of a small man, residing in the sea, said to drown people. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be drowned by an <ix>úkuy</ix>.

<p><form>ukyab</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23P]</itype> be suddenly excited or <tr>startled</tr>. <i>Miukyab ang ákung ginhawaan sa pagkahibalu nga may dakung h[=á]s nga nakasulud,</i> I was startled to know that a big snake had entered the house. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> make an uproar due to excitement and thrill. <i>Miukyab ang mga táwu pagpangatáwa pagkakità nílang Dulpi nga nagbinabayi,</i> The people laughed uproariously when they saw Dolphy dressed as a woman. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26; b3]</itype> leave hurriedly in fright. <i>Miukyab (naukyab) ang mga langgam pagkakità námù,</i> The flock of birds flew away upon seeing <form>us</form>. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> talking in an upsetting, overly-frightened way. <i>Hápit na kunu matápus ang kalibútan, p[=ú]ng pa sa mga táwung ukyab kaáyung manulti,</i> The people who are nervously apprehensive say the world is going to end. <number>2</number> easily stirred into doing s.t. <i>Ukyab kaáyu nang mga tawhána kay dalì ra kaáyung patuúhun,</i> Those people are easily stirred up because it's easy to lead them to believe. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> cause excitement or <tr>thrill</tr>. <i>Ang íyang pagsulti nga ubsirbahan ang tanang klási nakapaukyab sa mga maistru,</i> He got the teachers nervous by telling them that their classes would be observed. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> flush a bird from hiding. <i>Akuy mupaukyab sa buntug. Listus pagtíru,</i> I will <tr>flush out</tr> the quail. Be ready to shoot. <pos>n</pos> thrill, s.t. causing excitement. <i>Punù sa mga paukyab ang isturyang ditiktib,</i> A detective story is full of <tr>suspenseful</tr> episodes. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>suspenseful</tr>.

<p><form>ukyù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2P; b(1)]</itype> shrink back into a hole or a place of hiding. <i>Miukyù ang kágang dihang íyang gikúhit,</i> The land crab shrunk back to the hole when he poked it with a stick.

<p><form>ukyut</form> a <number>1</number> <tr>tapered</tr>, <tr>tapering</tr>. <i>Ukyut ang tumuy sa lápis,</i> The tip of the pencil is tapered. <number>2</number> body or form having irregularly shaped surfaces or sides. <i>Ukyut ang pabúrut níya,</i> His balloon has an <tr>irregular</tr> form. <pos>n</pos> the part of a body or form that has sunk or depressed. <i>Anhà putla sa ukyut ang lubi,</i> Cut the coconut tree on the part of the trunk that is <tr>narrow</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> for part of a body or form to become depressed or irregularly shaped due to depressions, become tapered. <pos>n</pos> <tr>sweepstakes</tr> (humorous).

<p><form>úlà</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> shed blood as a sacrifice (literary). <i>Muúlà ku sa ákung dugù álang sa yútang natawhan,</i> I'll shed my blood for my native land.

<p><form>úlag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN2; b(1)]</itype> for animals to copulate. <i>Giulágan na ang bigal sa butakal,</i> The boar <tr>served</tr> the sow. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2SN]</itype> be in <tr>heat</tr>, crave intercourse. <i>Nag-ulag na ning irúa kay hingári <pb n=1087>lang ug kúyug sa laki,</i> This dog is in heat because it is going around with the male. <number>2a</number> behave flirtatiously to evoke masculine attention (as if in heat&mdash;somewhat coarse). <i>Kanang íyang kinataw-an ug linihukan way láin kun dílì nag-úlag,</i> She is laughing and acting no different from a bitch in heat. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>KAÚLAG</sc>.</xr> <form>ulag-ulag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> act immodestly by being <tr>forward</tr> to men. <i>Ang babáying mag-ulag-ulag dì tahúrun sa mga laláki,</i> An <tr>immodest</tr> woman is not respected by men. <pos>a</pos> <xr>= <sc>ULÁGUN</sc>.</xr> <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>UWAGÚWAG</sc>.</xr> <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>-UN</sc>.</xr> <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sex urge</tr>. <form>ma-un, -un</form> <pos>a</pos> sexually <tr>lustful</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become <tr>over-sexed</tr>.

<p><form>ulahi</form> a <number>1</number> last in a group to do s.t. <i>Ulahi siya kaáyu nga nakahuman,</i> He was the last to finish. <number>2</number> <tr>late</tr>. <i>Ulahi ka na kaáyu sa paniudtu,</i> You are very late for dinner. <number>3</number> <tr>recent</tr>, <tr>latest</tr>. <i>Mau niy ulahi nga gulà,</i> This is the most recent issue. <form>karung &mdash;</form> <tr>recently</tr>. <i>Naáyu na siya apan karung ulahi nabughat,</i> She had already recovered but recently she had a relapse. <number>4</number> <tr>later</tr>, not the early days of one's life. <i>Sa ulahing mga panahun sa íyang kinabúhì nabúang siya,</i> In the later days of his life he became crazy. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be the last in doing s.t. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be late for s.t. <i>Maulahi ka giyud ug maglangaylángay ka dihà,</i> You'll surely be late if you tarry over there. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>leave</tr> s.t. for later. <i>Ulahia (iulahi) na lang ang uban nga dì na madala,</i> Just leave those things you cannot take along behind. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> be the last, do s.t. as the last thing. <i>Aku lay mupaulahi,</i> I'll just be the last one to go. <i>Ipaulahi ang pagplansa,</i> Do the ironing as the last thing. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> allow oneself to be left behind. <i>Dì giyud si Maríya magpaulahi sa urug,</i> Maria won't allow herself to be left behind by the styles. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> <number>1</number> be way too late, be <tr>behind the times</tr>. <i>Karun ka pa kadungug? Nangulahi ka diay,</i> You just heard about it? You are behind the times. <number>2</number> be at the rear of s.t. <i>Nangulahi sila sa prusisiyun,</i> They were at the rear of the procession. <pos>n</pos> the one at the rear. <i>Pangulahing ligid,</i> <tr>Rear wheel</tr>. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>delay</tr>, <tr>lateness</tr>. <form>kaulahían</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>last</tr>. <form>sa &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>SA KAULAHÍAY</sc>.</xr> <form>pangulahían</form> <xr>= <sc>PANGULAHI</sc>, <i>n, v2.</i></xr> <form>kaulahíay sa &mdash;</form> <tr>in the long run</tr>. <i>Tingáli ug magbásul ka sa kaulahíay,</i> You might regret it in the long run (in the days to come). <form>kinaulahian</form> <pos>n</pos> the last one in the group.

<p><form>ulahípan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>centipede</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa baybáyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sandworm</tr>, any of numerous annelids which burrow in the sand. They are used as bait.

<p><form>ulalag</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> pus concentrated in an infection coming to a head. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b4]</itype> have pus coming to a head. <i>Mangulngul ang hubag nga mag-ulalag,</i> A boil that is coming to a head throbs. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23N; b]</itype> remove pus.

<p><form>ulan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>rain</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>rainwater</tr>. <i>Lad-ang ang lamì sa ulan,</i> Rainwater tastes flat. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a4b4]</itype> <tr>rain</tr>. <i>Giulan ang bayli,</i> The dance was rained out. <i>Kalígù na lang kun hiulanan (maulanan) ka,</i> Take a bath if you get caught in the rain. <number>1a</number> <itype>[b4(1)]</itype> be <tr>crazy</tr> (as if having been caught in the rain&mdash;from the belief that being caught in the rain after too much fun or lack of food causes one to become crazy). <i>Naulanan tingáli nà siya kay láig linihukan,</i> He must be crazy because he is acting strange. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> rain or <tr>pour</tr> as if rain. <i>Miulan ang mga bulantis sa syudad,</i> The leaflets <tr>rained</tr> on the city. <form>(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>TING-</sc>.</xr> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> stay out in the rain. <i>Dì ka magpaulan kay mahumud ka,</i> Do not stay out in the rain because you'll get wet. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> rain in large quantities. <i>Mipaulan ug suntuk ang buksidur,</i> The boxer rained blows on his opponent. <form>ulan-úlan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>drizzle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B456]</itype> <tr>drizzle</tr>. <i>Dì ku mulakaw ug mag-ulan-úlan,</i> I won't go out if it drizzles. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> give s.o. a <tr>treat</tr> or give cash in return for a favor. <i>Makauwan-úwan ku ninyug tabángan ku ninyu sa ákung ripurt,</i> I'll give you a treat if you help me with my report. <form>paulan-úlan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> give s.o. a treat or cash in return for a favor. <i>Gipauwan-uwánan mi sa kandidátu ug usa ka kahun nga sirbísa,</i> The candidate treated us to a case of beer. <pos>n</pos> treat or money showered on one in exchange for a favor. <form>pasiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b4]</itype> go out in the rain. <i>Mipasingulan siyag hatud,</i> He braved the rain to deliver it. <form>ting-, ting-(&larr;), tali-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rainy season</tr>.&dagger;

<p><form>ulandis</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> white-skinned pig. <number>2</number> <tr>Hollander</tr>, <tr>Dutchman</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> become bald and white; shave bald and white. <i>Akuy muulandis ánang ímung úlu ug dì nímu paputlan nang ímung lambúngay,</i> I'll shave you bald if you don't cut that mane of yours. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>UWANDIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ulang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> for dogs to howl. <i>Miuwang ang irù gabíi,</i> The dogs were howling last night. <pos>n</pos> the action of <tr>howling</tr>.

<p><form>ulang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>separate</tr>, <tr>keep apart</tr>. <i>Kurtína ra ang miulang sa duha,</i> Only a curtain separated them. <number>1a</number> separate s.o. or s.t. fighting. <i>Ulanga ang irù nga nagbugnù,</i> Break up the dogs that are fighting. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> stop a wedding ceremony on account of an objection. <i>Giulang ang kasal kay miabut ang asáwa sa pamanhunun,</i> The wedding <pb n=1088>was stopped because the real wife of the groom came on the scene. <number>3</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> <tr>bar</tr>, constitute a detriment to one's success. <i>Kapubri nga nag-ulang níya sa kalampúsan,</i> Poverty that was a bar to his success. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. used to block the way. <i>Ang ulang itrangka sa pultahan,</i> Bolt the door with the piece of wood. <number>2</number> age that separates people. <form>&mdash; ug pitu ka lawud</form> Heaven forbid! (lit. may it be separated by seven seas!) <i>Ulang ug pitu ka lawud dílì tà mudagsang nang sakítas átù,</i> Heaven forbid that the sickness strike us here. <form>ulang-úlang</form> <pos>n</pos> the space between the anus and the vagina. <form>ulang-úlang sa ilung</form> <pos>n</pos> cartilage dividing the nostrils. <form>ka-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>impediment</tr>, <tr>barrier</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> a concoction of oil and plants to protect one from natural or supernatural evils.

<p><form>ulang<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fresh-water shrimp</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> have, cook fresh-water shrimps. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b6(1)]</itype> catch fresh-water shrimps. <pos>n</pos> trap used for catching fresh-water shrimps. <form>ulang-úlang</form> <pos>n</pos> fishing lure in the shape of a shrimp.

<p><form>ulan-úlan</form> <xr>= <sc>HUKIHUK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ul-ap</form> <pos>n</pos> the situation in mahjong where one is ready to make mahjong without having opened any pieces. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a2]</itype> win with an <ix>ul-ap</ix> hand.

<p><form>ulápì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a4]</itype> <tr>shiver</tr> with cold or have <tr>chills</tr>. <i>Giulápì ang bátà kay gitas-an sa hilánat,</i> The child has the chills because he's running a high fever.

<p><form>ulasíman</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>purslane</tr>: <bio>Portulaca oleracea</bio>.

<p><form>ulat<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>ignorant</tr> of ways or facts. <i>Uwat ku dinhi sa Sugbu,</i> I don't know my way around Cebu. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be ignorant of s.t. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> <tr>fool</tr> s.o. <i>Giuwat ku sa tindíra kay báhaw ang ákung napalit,</i> The salesgirl pulled one over on me because it was leftovers I bought. <form>(&larr;)</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>ULAT</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> disappointed and embarrassed when s.t. is different from what one supposed and the whole world knows about one's error. <i>Wà ku mahibalu nga giuswag diay ang adlaw sa ílang kasal. Naúlat lang ku pag-adtu ku sa simbahan,</i> I didn't know that their marriage had been postponed. I was embarrassed when I went to the church.

<p><form>ulat<sub>2</sub>, úlat</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>scar</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B36; b4]</itype> form a <tr>scar</tr>. <i>Miúlat (naulat) na ang ákung samad,</i> My wound has formed a scar. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> covered with scars. <i>Ulátun ug páa nang bayhána,</i> That girl has scars on her thigh.

<p><form>ulátiw</form> <xr>= <sc>BÁLÙ<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>úlaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>ashamed</tr> of what people think, <tr>embarrassed</tr>. <i>Hastang uláwa nákù dihang nadiskubrihan ku,</i> How ashamed I was when they caught me! <i>Hastang uláwa nákù sa pagkadalispang nákù,</i> How embarrassed I was when I fell. <form>walay &mdash;</form> <tr>shameless</tr>. <i>Wà ka bay úlaw pagbúhat sa ingun?</i> Doesn't it shame you to do that? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b4(1)c5]</itype> be <tr>ashamed</tr>. <i>Naúlaw kung pakítà níya kay sad-an ku,</i> I'm ashamed to show myself to him because I am guilty. <i>Kagahápun nga makaúlaw (makapaúlaw) sa táwu,</i> A past that can cause one to be ashamed. <i>Nauláwan ku niadtung pangutanáha,</i> I was <tr>put to shame</tr> by that question. <i>Ikaúlaw ku ang pagpangáyù ug pagkáun,</i> I'd be ashamed to have to ask for food. <form>ulaw-ulaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> tease by saying embarrassing things. <form>paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> make s.o. feel ashamed. <i>Kanang maistráha kusug kaáyung mupakaúlaw sa mga bátà,</i> That teacher is good at making the children feel embarrassed. <number>2</number> bring shame on s.o. <i>Ang ímung pagpangáwat nakapakaúlaw sa ímung ginikánan,</i> You put your parents to shame when you stole. <i>Ngánung gipakauláwan mu man aku,</i> Why did you put me to shame? <form>paka-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> do s.t. to put oneself to shame. <form>-an(&rarr;), manggi-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bashful</tr>, <tr>shy</tr>. <i>Uwawan siya. Wà makasulti,</i> He's terribly bashful. He didn't say a word. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125]</itype> be, become <tr>shy</tr>, <tr>bashful</tr>. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shame</tr>, <tr>embarrassment</tr>. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> cause for shame. <i>Gihatágan níyag kauláwan ang babáyi kay wà pangasaw-a,</i> He caused the girl great shame because he did not marry her. <form>ka-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> shame as an end effect. <i>Kay ímu nang búhat, ímu nang kaulawun,</i> Because it is your doing it will be your shame. <form>maka-r-</form> <pos>a</pos> causing shame. <i>Kanang ímung batásan makauúlaw kaáyu,</i> You have <tr>shameful</tr> manners. <form>manggi-un</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>-AN(&rarr;)</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>KIPÌKIPÌ</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>KÍPÌ</sc>.</xr> <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> characterized by bashfulness. <number>2</number> be full of embarrassment. <i>Nangatarúngan siya nga mauláwun,</i> He offered reasons <tr>shamefacedly</tr>.

<p><form>úlay</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>virgin</tr>, <tr>chaste</tr>. <i>Úlay nga pagkababáyi,</i> A chaste woman. <i>Úlay untà apan putling anay diay,</i> She's about as much a virgin as a sow is chaste. <i>Úlay nga lasang,</i> Virgin forest. <number>2</number> <tr>pure</tr>, <tr>free from sin</tr>. <i>Úlay kaáyu ang ákung gugma kanímu,</i> My love for you is very pure. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B16; b6]</itype> remain chaste. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for a woman to be so pure her body fails to decay. <i>Nag-úlay si Inday Putinsiyána kay ang íyang láwas walà man malatà bísag napúlù ka túig siyang gilubung,</i> Inday Potenciana was so pure that her body hadn't decayed ten years after she was buried. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chastity</tr>.

<p><form>ulbu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b28]</itype> <tr>flare up</tr>, {burst forth} or out as in a fire or explosion. <i>Miulbu dáyun ang táru sa gasulína,</i> The can of gasoline <pb n=1089>burst at once into flames. <number>1a</number> <tr>erupt</tr>. <i>Ug muulbu ang bulkan, mulínug usab,</i> If the volcano erupts there will also be an earthquake. <number>2</number> <itype>[B46; b4]</itype> for an emotion to <tr>flare up</tr>. <i>Ngánung miulbu ka man lang dáyun nga wà ka man masáyud sa hinungdan?</i> Why did you flare up when you didn't know the cause? <number>3</number> <itype>[B246]</itype> for war to <tr>break out</tr>. <number>4</number> <itype>[AP; c1]</itype> <tr>puff up</tr> the hair by teasing. <i>Ákung ulbúhun (iulbu) ug diyútay ning ímung buhuk arun mutáas ang ímung náwung,</i> I'll tease your hair a little to give length to the face. <pos>n</pos> the height of s.t. that rose up. <i>Ang ulbu sa asu lápaws pangánud,</i> The pillar of smoke went beyond the clouds. <form>pina-</form> <pos>n</pos> puffed-up hairdo. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B136; c6]</itype> do one's hair in a teased style.

<p><form>uldáwun</form> <pos>n</pos> a hand in mahjong where all the pieces are open on the table except the one or two pieces which one is holding waiting to get mahjong.

<p><form>uldug</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>puffed-up</tr>, <tr>heaped-up</tr>. <i>Uldug kaáyu ang ímung hirdu,</i> You have a puffed-up hairdo. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); c1]</itype> be, become puffed-up or <tr>piled up</tr> in a mound. <i>Uldúgun (iuldug) ku ang sagbut úsà daúban,</i> I pile the trash into a heap before I burn it.

<p><form>ulhi</form> <xr>= <sc>ULAHI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ulhus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c1]</itype> take turns doing s.t.; do s.t. by turns or alternately. <i>Mag-ulhus ta ug káun kay gamay ra ang lamísa,</i> Let's eat in turns because the table is small. <i>Nagkaulhus mig anhi kay way mabilin sa báy,</i> We are coming here one at a time so s.o. can be left home to watch the house.

<p><form>úli</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>oil cloth</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> cover with, use oil cloth.

<p><form>úlì</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>return</tr> s.t. to s.o. <i>Nag-úlì ku áring libru nga hinulaman,</i> I am returning this book I borrowed. <i>Kinsay giulían mu sa tigib,</i> Whom did you return the chisel to? <i>Iúlì ni ngadtung Túni,</i> Return this to Tony. <number>1a</number> <formx>&mdash; ang lisinsiya</formx> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> for a couple to stop having babies because the wife is no longer able to or because they choose to. <i>Dì sà mi muúlì sa ámung lisinsiya kay wà pa miy babáyi,</i> We won't stop having babies until we have a girl. <i>2</i> <itype>[A; a1c]</itype> return s.t. to its place, <tr>reassemble</tr>. <i>Antígu kang muúlì áning karburadur,</i> Do you know how to put this carburator back together? <number>2a</number> <xr>= <sc>ULÌ BALAY</sc>.</xr> <number>3</number> <itype>[C; a12]</itype> be reconciled after having quarreled. <i>Nag-úlì na mi human sa ámung panagbángì,</i> We are on good terms again after our quarrel. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> buy s.t. from s.o. which he had originally not bought for resale. <i>Ulían ta ning ímung sapátus,</i> I'd like to buy from you that pair of shoes that you bought for yourself. <number>5</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>reimburse</tr> s.o. for what he had spent. <i>Muúlì ka nákù sa gastu sa ákung byáhi,</i> Will you reimburse me for my expenses on my trip? <pos>n</pos> amount paid for s.t. which was not originally for sale. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> come, <tr>go home</tr>. <i>Dì ta makaulì kay way trák,</i> We can not go home because there's no bus. <number>2</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> regain consciousness. <i>Naulian na ba ang táwu nga gikuyapan?</i> Has the man that fainted regained consciousness? <number>3</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> be relieved of anxiety or emotional distress. <i>Naulian ku human makadungug sa maáyung nutisya,</i> I was relieved after I heard the good news. <number>4</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> for dried corn or rice grains which have been stored to become damp again. <form>(&rarr;) bálay</form> <pos>n</pos> in circumcision, the condition where the slit skin reverts to its former condition. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B25; b4]</itype> for a circumcision to revert. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be home from time to time. <i>Tagsa ra ku mag-ulian sa ámù,</i> I seldom go home. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN2; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>replant</tr> in spaces where seeds failed to sprout. <i>Hingulíi ang ímung bitsuylasan pára dakug abut,</i> Replant the vacant spaces in your bean patch to obtain a good yield. <number>2</number> weed the second time around. <i>Ug dì ka muhingúlì sa maisan, masálut ang túbù sa mais,</i> If you do not weed the cornfield a second time around, the corn will grow stunted. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>ÚLÌ</sc>, <i>4.</i></xr> <form>hiN-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b4]</itype> be in one's second childhood. <i>Lisud atimanun ning tigúlang nga maghingulì (gihingulian) na,</i> It's difficult to look after an old man who is in his second childhood. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <xr>= <sc>ULÌ</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr> <number>1a</number> <itype>[c]</itype> bring s.o. back home. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> go back to the place one started. <i>Mupaúlì ang prusisiyun sa simbahan,</i> The procession will return to the church. <number>2a</number> <i>bísag unsa kataas sa prusisiyun mupaúlì giyud sa simbahan<corr>,</corr></i> no matter how wayward a husband is he will eventually go home to his wife. <number>2b</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> be on the receiving end of s.t. bad. <i>Ang ímung paghubug mupaúlì sa ímung láwas,</i> Your drunkenness will affect your health. <i>Akuy paulían sa íyang kapungut,</i> I will be on the receiving end of his anger. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>ÚLÌ</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr> <form>pa-(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>PAHI-(&rarr;)</sc>.</xr> <form>pahi-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> play a prank on s.o. and set him straight afterwards. <i>Pait siya nga mukumidiya, dílì siya mupahiulì,</i> He plays mean pranks and does not set you straight afterwards. <number>2</number> regain one's health. <i>Mubakasiyun ku kay magpahiulì ku sa ákung láwas,</i> I'll take a vacation to regain my health. <i>Pahiulii úsà ang ímung láwas úsà mubálik sa trabáhu,</i> Regain your health first before going back to work. <form>paha-ay</form> <xr>= <sc>ÚLÌ</sc>, <i>v3.</i></xr> <form>sa-(&rarr;)</form> <pb n=1090><pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> <corr sic=contact>contract</corr> s.o. else's disease by treating him. <i>Muhílut gánì kug hilantan saulian giyud ku,</i> Whenever I massage s.o. with fever, I will always get the fever from him. <form>hiniN-an, -in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. one bought from s.o. who had bought it previously not intending to resell it again. <form>ulìúlì kalag</form> <pos>n</pos> a magic formula uttered three times while shaking a child that has been intensely frightened, to prevent him from getting boils. <form>ka-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> feel like going home. <form>pa-anan, pa-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>home</tr>, a place one goes home to. <form>pumapa-(&rarr;), tali-(&rarr;), talipa-(&rarr;), -um-r-(&rarr;), pumapa-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> on the way home. <form>-unun, -únun(&rarr;)<note> -unun(&rarr;) ?</note>, ig-r-ay, ig-r-ay(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. that is to be returned. <i>Mga hinuwamang uliúnun (ig-uulíay),</i> Borrowed things which are to be returned. <form>pa-unun, pa-unun(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. one has to go home to get. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>TAMBAÚLÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ulianun</form> <xr>= <sc>KULIANUN</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>KULÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>úlib</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>olive</tr>. <form>&mdash; drab</form> <pos>n</pos> olive drab cloth. <form>&mdash; úwil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>olive oil</tr>.

<p><form>ulíba</form> <xr>= <sc>PALMA ULÍBA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>*ulíba, *ulíbu</form> <form>asayti di-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>olive oil</tr>.

<p><form>uligark</form> <pos>n</pos> the wealthy families and their members that run the Philippines.

<p><form>ulíhad</form> <xr>= <sc>KULÍHAD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ulihi</form> <xr>= <sc>ULAHI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ulílang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> off-season planting of rice and corn. <number>2</number> crop planted off season. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b]</itype> plant an off-season crop. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <number>1</number> plant an off-season crop. <number>2</number> do s.t. later than the usual or normal time for doing it. <i>Nangulílang ka na sa paniudtu,</i> You are <tr>late</tr> for dinner. <i>Nangulílang ka sa nutisya,</i> You got the news late. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>ULÍLANG</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>ulimpíkir</form> <pos>n</pos> a champion athlete who has been to the Olympics.

<p><form>ulimpiyan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tennis shoes</tr> (from the brand name Olympian). <pos>a</pos> a simple wedding without much fuss (so called because it should be kept silent, like walking in tennis shoes). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1</number> wear tennis shoes. <number>2</number> hold a simple wedding. <i>Ulimpiyánun (iulimpiyan) ku untà ang ákung kasal, nabakyà man hinúun,</i> I want to keep my wedding quiet and simple, but the news has spread everywhere.

<p><form>ulin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stern</tr>, the rear end of a ship. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> steer a boat from the stern.

<p><form>úling</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>charcoal</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB26; c1]</itype> make charcoal; become charcoal. <i>Pag-úling para iutaw,</i> Make charcoal to iron with. <i>Ang usa ka sákung bagul muúling ug duha ka taru,</i> A sack of coconut shells will make two cans of charcoal. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b(1)]</itype> put, add charcoal into. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> use charcoal. <form>-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> things suitable to be made into charcoal. <number>2</number> k.o. <tr>tree</tr> of the secondary forest.

<p><form>ulingì, ulingig</form> <xr>= <sc>TULÍNGÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ulipad</form> (from <ix>lipad</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>walking sideways</tr>. <i>Ulipad ang linaktan sa lambay,</i> A crab walks sideways. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; ang tinan-awan</formx> <tr>cross-eyed</tr>. <pos>v</pos> 1 <itype>[A]</itype> walk sideways. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> be, become cross-eyed.

<p><form>*uliping</form> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> hide standing behind s.t. with the head partially exposed for observation. <i>Mupauliping ku sa sira arun makítà kug unsay ílang gibúhat,</i> I'll hide behind the door so I'll see what they're doing.

<p><form>ulípun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>slave</tr>. <number>2</number> slave to some power. <i>Ulípun sa salapì,</i> Slave to money. <form>&mdash; sa tamalà</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. univalve <tr>seashell</tr> having its mouth covered wholly with some of its flesh, about 1&ndash;1/4&Prime; in length. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; c1]</itype> <tr>enslave</tr>, become a slave to. <i>Nagkaulipun ka sa ímung bisyu,</i> You are becoming a slave to your vices. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> let oneself become a slave. <form>kaulipnan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bondage</tr>, <tr>slavery</tr>. <i>Ang kaulipnan sa Pilipínas ubus sa mga Katsílà,</i> The Philippines' <tr>enslavement</tr> to the Spaniards.&dagger;

<p><form>ulísi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>walking cane</tr>, <tr>staff</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> carry, use a cane. <i>Muulísi ku iniglakaw kay daghang buguy,</i> I'll carry a cane when I go out because there are lots of thugs. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a cane, staff. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a1b8]</itype> beat with a cane or rod.

<p><form>ulit</form> <pos>a</pos> desiring s.t. greatly in an indiscriminate way. <i>Mukáun ug ransiyu kay ulit,</i> He'll even eat spoiled food, he is such a glutton. <i>Ulit sa babáyi,</i> Hungry for women. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become <tr>greedy</tr>. <form>(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>ULIT</sc>, <pos>v</pos>.</xr> <form>ka-, ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gluttony</tr>, <tr>great desire</tr>.

<p><form>úlit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P; b3c1]</itype> <tr>provoke</tr> s.o.'s anger. <i>Maúlit na siya ug kataw-an,</i> She'll become angry if they laugh at her. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; a1]</itype> be <tr>frustrated</tr> or <tr>disappointed</tr> in one's expectations. <i>Naúlit kug huwat níya ug wà giyud mutunga,</i> I waited for her but she didn't show up.

<p><form>ulitáwu</form> (from <ix>táwu</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bachelor</tr>, <tr>unmarried man</tr>. <i>Ulitáwung gúlang,</i> An old bachelor. <number>2</number> young man old enough to be married. <i>Tapulan ámung ulitáwu. Magpúnay lag panista,</i> Our son is lazy. All he does is sit around playing the guitar. <i>Ayawg binátà kay ulitáwu ka na,</i> Don't be childish. You're grown-up now. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> <tr>court</tr> a girl. <i>Kinsa may ímung giulitawhan run,</i> Whom are you courting now? <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>court</tr> a girl. <i>Nangulitáwu si Pidru ni Istir,</i> Pedro is courting Esther. <pos>n</pos> <tr>courting</tr>, <tr>wooing</tr>. <form>ulitawhay</form> <pos>n</pos> boy about to embark onto adolescence. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> be an adolescent boy. <form>kaulitawhan</form> <pos>n</pos> group of young men.

<p><form>ulíut</form> (from <ix>líut</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> squeeze, <tr>wriggle <pb n=1091>through</tr> or deep into. <i>Wà siya makaulíut ngadtu sa unáhan kay punù kaáyu ang lugar,</i> He couldn't elbow his way to the front because the place was full.

<p><form>ulput</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> pop or <tr>bounce up</tr>. <i>Miulput (naulput) ang tabun sa tirmus pagbutang nákù,</i> The thermos cork <tr>popped up</tr> when I put it on. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; b28]</itype> <tr>bounce</tr> the ball against s.t. else. <i>Dì makaulput ang búla sa lápuk,</i> The ball cannot bounce on mud. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> <tr>start back</tr> with a jerk upon being surprised. <i>Naulput ku pagkadungug ku sa kusug kaáyung hagsà,</i> I <tr>started</tr> when I heard the loud crashing sound. <number>2a</number> <itype>[B46]</itype> for the heart to thump. <i>Nag-ulput ang ákung kasingkásing sa kahínam,</i> My heart is thumping with expectation. <form>&mdash; ang kabúhì</form> <xr>= <sc>ULPUT</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr>

<p><form>ulsir, ulsira, ulsíra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stomach ulcers</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> get an <tr>ulcer</tr>. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> having stomach <form>ulcers</form>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> having stomach ulcers.

<p><form>ultima</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>last</tr>, <tr>final</tr> after all the others. <i>Ultima na lang ning ákung pag-anhi dinhi,</i> This will be my last visit here. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>ULTIMU</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr> <form>&mdash; úra</form> at the <tr>last minute</tr>. <i>Ultima úra giyud nang idisidir ug lakaw,</i> She always decides to go at the <tr>eleventh hour</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> ask s.o. to give his final decision. <i>Giultimahan siya nákù ug magpakasal ba siya u dílì,</i> I asked him once and for all if he was going to marry me.

<p><form>ultimatúm</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ultimatum</tr>, <tr>final offer</tr> or proposal. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6(1)]</itype> give an ultimatum. <i>Giultimatúman siya nákù sa pagpabalhin ug layù dinhi,</i> I gave him an ultimatum to move far from here.

<p><form>ultimu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> last, <tr>lowest price</tr>. <form>&mdash; prisyu</form> <xr>= <sc>ULTIMU</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <form>&mdash;</form> [<ix>noun</ix>] even [so-and-so], when it is the most unexpected thing. <i>Daginutan kaáyu ning bayhána kay ang ultimung mumhu hipúsun pa,</i> This woman is very thrifty. She even saves the crumbs from the table. <i>Grábing sugarúla nímu, ultimung sapátus gibaligyà pára pamuhúnan,</i> You are an incorrigible gambler! You even sold your shoes in order to secure money for betting.

<p><form>ultimu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>private</tr>, the lowest rank of an enlisted man in the Army. <number>2</number> an <tr>ordinary person</tr> or <tr>small fry</tr> as opposed to one who is at the top. <i>Padáyun lang mu sa inyung pagtugbaw sa táas, aku magpabílin nga ultimu,</i> Proceed with your rise to stardom while I remain here a mere nothing. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> be a private. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be a small fry.

<p><form>úlu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>head</tr>. <number>1a</number> head as the source of thinking power. <i>Gamíta ímung úlu,</i> Use your head. <number>2</number> <tr>each person</tr>. <i>Dus písus da ang báyad sa káda úlu,</i> The cost is only two pesos <tr>per head</tr>. <number>3</number> head, <tr>forefront</tr>. <i>Banda sa pulis ang úlu sa paráda,</i> The head of the parade was the police band. <form>&mdash; ug amù</form> <xr>= <sc>INÚLUG AMÙ</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; sa bagyu</form> <tr>eye of the typhoon</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa bahà</form> the first onrush of floodwaters. <form>&mdash; nga buhatan</form> main (lit. head) office. <form>&mdash; sa hilánat</form> in folk medicine, a lump in the muscle which bulges and when massaged, alleviates one's fever and pains. <form>&mdash; sa sakit</form> source of an ailment. <form>&mdash; sa sibúyas</form> the bulb of an onion. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; b(1)]</itype> <tr>lead</tr>, be at the <tr>head</tr>. <number>1a</number> lead s.o. to do s.t., usually bad. <i>Ikay nangúlu sa tanang mga tinuntu,</i> You led them into doing all their mischief. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> shape, make a head. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126; c]</itype> be, become a <tr>leader</tr>, <tr>chief</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[c]</itype> have as its title. <i>Ang sugilánun gipangulúhan ug &lsquo;Líwas Sa Ugmà&rsquo;,</i> The story is entitled &lsquo;Beyond Tomorrow&rsquo;. <pos>n</pos> <tr>leader</tr>, <tr>chief</tr>. <form>sag-(&rarr;), sag-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>memorize</tr>, learn s.t. by heart. <number>2</number> skip a meal. <i>Sag-ulúhun ku na lang ang paniudtu,</i> I'll just skip lunch. <form>siN-(&rarr;)</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>SINGULU</sc>.</xr> <form>uluhan, ulúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. at the top at the head: head of a bed, <tr>title</tr> of a song, et al. <pos>v</pos> 1 <itype>[A3; c]</itype> give s.t. a title. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> have s.t. as a title. <i>Bálak nga nag-uluhan ug &lsquo;Lúhà&rsquo;,</i> A poem that is entitled &lsquo;Tears&rsquo;. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> shaped like a head. <i>-in- ug amù</i> waxing gibbous moon. <form>inulúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> having a head, e.g. a pin. <form>kaulúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>capital city</tr>. <form>kapangulúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>editorial board</tr> or staff.

<p><form>úlub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> cut even around the edges. <i>Ulúbun nákù pagputul ang bàbà sa baril,</i> I will <tr>trim</tr> off around the mouth of the barrel. <i>Ang íyang buhuk maáyung pagkaúlub,</i> His hair was nicely <tr>trimmed</tr> all around.

<p><form>úlud</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>worm</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4b4]</itype> be infested with worms. <i>Ginamus nga giúlud,</i> Salted fish that was full of worms. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> pick out the worms from. <i>Akuy muhingúlud (manghingúlud) sa tabákù,</i> I'll pick out the worms from the tobacco plants. <form>ighihingulud, ighilingulud</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to pick worms out from inaccessible parts. <form>ulud-úlud</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>decayed teeth</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> be <tr>decayed</tr>. <i>Misakit ang ákung ngípun nga giulud-úlud,</i> My tooth was decayed and caused me great pain.

<p><form>úlug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put a burden on s.o.'s head for him to carry it. <i>Iúlug na nang bukag kay adtu na ta,</i> Please put the basket on my head because we're going now.

<p><form>ul-ug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>feed nestlings</tr>.

<p><form>ulugnan</form> <xr>= <sc>UNLAN</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ULUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ulug-úlug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>flatter</tr> s.o. to make him feel good or to get s.t. out of him. <i>Akuy muulug-úlug níya arun ta kab-an ug túbig,</i> I'll flatter him so that he'll fetch water for us. <pos>n</pos> <tr>flattery</tr>. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> readily falling <pb n=1092>for sweet talk.

<p><form>uluk, úluk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>glans penis</tr>. <number>2</number> <form>&mdash; sa kasing</form> bottom of a top that resembles the glans. <form>uluk-uluk</form> <pos>n</pos> a rounded or knoblike extremity of s.t. <form>kasing nga inulúkan</form> <pos>n</pos> top with no nail but with glans-shaped bottom.

<p><form>ul-ul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2b3]</itype> <tr>bark</tr>. <i>Ul-úlun ka sa irù ug mudúul ka,</i> The dog will bark at you if you go near. <pos>n</pos> <tr>bark</tr>.

<p><form>ul-ul<sub>2</sub></form> a <number>1</number> throbbing <tr>pain</tr>. <i>Ul-ul kaáyu ang ákung samad,</i> My wound <tr>hurts</tr> very much. <number>2</number> heavy, uneasy feeling due to muscular fatigue. <i>Ul-ul kaáyu ang ákung láwas tungud sa kadaghan sa trabáhu,</i> My body is heavy from so much work. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become <tr>painful</tr>, heavy in feeling. <number>2</number> <itype>[b]</itype> have <tr>labor pains</tr>. <i>Dad-un na si Pína sa matirniti kay giul-ulan na<note> nà ?</note>,</i> Bring Pina to the hospital because she has labor pains. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> degree or intenseness of pulsating pain.

<p><form>ul-ul<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>masturbate</tr>, word play on <i>lùlù.</i>

<p><form>ulun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> lay one's head on s.t. <i>Dílì ku muulun ánang bukugun mung buktun,</i> I will not lay my head on <corr sic=that>those</corr> bony arms of yours. <form>unlan, ulunlan, ulúnan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pillow</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa hálas</form> k.o. <tr>vine</tr> of waste areas bearing red, shiny, rounded fruit, the size of a tennis ball, poisonous, smelly, and full of seeds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> use for, make into a <tr>pillow</tr>. <form>inunlan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>placenta</tr>.

<p><form>úlung</form> a for a measure to be <tr>very full</tr> or <tr>heaping</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; c1]</itype> measure s.t. out with a <tr>full</tr> or heaping measure. <form>-in-</form> <xr>= <sc>ÚLUNG</sc>, <pos>a</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>ulunglan</form> <xr>= <sc>UNLAN</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ULUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ulungnan</form> <xr>= <sc>UNLAN</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ULUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ulun-úlun</form> <pos>n</pos> not fully developed rice grains.

<p><form>úlup</form> <pos>a</pos> early morning at around <tr>sunrise</tr>. <i>Ulup silang muadtu sa simbahan,</i> They will go to church at sunrise. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> do early in the morning. <i>Muúlup ta sa lungsud ugmà,</i> We will go to town early tomorrow morning.

<p><form>ulus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>borrow</tr> s.t. <i>Aku ang nag-ulus sa ímung lápis,</i> I borrowed your pencil. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>lend</tr>. <i>Ayaw nag pausli,</i> Don't let anyone borrow that. <form>inuslan</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>borrowed</tr>. <form>inuslan nga batásan</form> <tr>put-on behavior</tr>. <i>Dílì malílung ang inuslan níyang batásan kay daghang nasáyud nga siya aryat,</i> Nobody is fooled by the way she puts on. Everybody knows she is a plain snob. <form>pinauslan</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>lent</tr>.

<p><form>Úlus</form> <xr>= <sc>ULHUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ulusíman</form> <xr>= <sc>ULASÍMAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ulut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> have a boundary in between. <i>Giutlan ang duha námù ka balay sa usa ka mutu,</i> Our houses are <tr>separated</tr> by a hill. <form>(&larr;)<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>outside edges</tr> or <tr>boundaries</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c]</itype> for pieces of land to be <tr>contiguous</tr>. <i>Mag-úlut tag yútà ug palitun nímu nang lutíha,</i> Our land will be contiguous if you buy that lot. <form>ulut-úlut</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>ÚLUT</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <tr>place between</tr> two things. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>ÚLUT</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[b1256]</itype> for a space to develop between two things. <form>utlánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>boundary</tr>. <i>Ákung gikural ang utlánan sa ámung yútà,</i> I fenced the boundary of our land. <i>Butangan nátug utlánan ang átung panag-amígu,</i> Let's set a <tr>limit</tr> to our friendship. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> be made into a boundary, limit. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> person whose land is contiguous to one's own.

<p><form>ulut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> stalk or stem of grasses, dry or fresh.

<p><form>úlut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac2]</itype> <tr>run after</tr>. <i>Muúlut sa mangági ang ílang irù,</i> Their dog runs after passers-by. <i>Ulúta ang trák,</i> Run after the truck. <i>Iúlut ning páyung sa nánay mu,</i> Run after your mother and give this umbrella to her.

<p><form>uluúlu</form> <xr>= <sc>ULUG-ÚLUG</sc>.</xr> <form>uluuluhan</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> susceptible to sweet talk. <number>2</number> tending to give sweet talk.

<p><form>uluy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>start</tr> doing an action or going into a state. <i>Miuluy nag kabugtù ang písì,</i> The rope started to snap. <i>Giuylan (giuluyan) ku siyag ulísi,</i> I raised my cane to whack him.

<p><form>ulyahut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> complain loudly. <i>Unsa pa may ímung giulyahutan ug nabayran ka na?</i> What are you <tr>griping</tr> about if you have already been paid? <pos>n</pos> loud complaints.

<p><form>ulyap</form> <xr>= <sc>UYLAP</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>u&mgrave;</form> <ix>pronounced</ix> [mm&glots;] or [&schwa;&schwa;&glots;]. particle expressing dissatisfaction or contempt. <i>U&mgrave;, mu rag mupalit nga nagtan-awtan-aw sa mga baligyà,</i> <tr>Humph</tr>, the way he is inspecting the things you'd think he was going to buy s.t. <i>U&mgrave;, ábi níya ug mahadluk ku,</i> Humph, he thinks I'm scared. <i>U&mgrave;, kusiun ta giyud ka sa ímung minalditu,</i> Humph, I have to pinch you, you are so mischievous.

<p><form>uma</form> <pos>n</pos> a piece of land on which crops or animals are raised. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>cultivate</tr> or <tr>till</tr> a piece of land. <i>Umahun ku ning yutáa,</i> I'll cultivate this piece of land. <i>Sa giumahan nátù kanhi,</i> On the land we cultivated in former times. <form>umhan, umahan, kaumahan, kaumhan</form> <pos>n</pos> cultivated piece of land. <form>mag-r-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>farmer</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> occupation of <tr>farming</tr>.

<p><form>umag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> for colors to run. <i>Giumagan ang putì níyang sinínà nga naípun sa dikulur,</i> His white shirt got stained because it was put together with the colored ones. <pos>a</pos> color that has run. <i>Kining mantsa umag sa ákung midiyas,</i> This stain is where my socks ran.

<pb n=1093>

<p><form>umágad</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>ÁGAD<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><form>umagak, umágak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mother hen</tr>.

<p><form>úmang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>hermit crab</tr>. <formx>&mdash; sus-an</formx> hermit crab in a shell having a barnacle, used as a medicine for mothers with a swelling breast. <number>2</number> <formx>kámang daw &mdash;</formx> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>KÁMANG</sc>, <i>v1a.</i></xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2N; b6]</itype> gather hermit crabs for bait. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> use, wear s.t. belonging to s.o. else.

<p><form>umapún</form> <xr>= <sc>AMAPÚLUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>umari ka</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>ARI<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><form>úmat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> go over a series of events or geneologies to recall them. <i>Miúmat siya sa íyang kaági sa gúbat,</i> He <tr>related</tr> his experiences during the war. <i>Manag-ágaw diay kami kay nagkaúmat man mi sa ámung mga kagíkan,</i> We are cousins, as it turned out, when we <tr>traced</tr> our ancestral tree.

<p><form>umaw</form> a having lost its fertility. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> for soil to lose fertility. <i>Magkaumaw ang uma nga pirming tamnan unyà way uabúnu,</i> Lands that are always planted without getting fertilized become barren.

<p><form>umay-úmay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> make funny imitations of how s.o. does s.t. <i>Nasukù si Tsiding kay giumay-úmay (giumay-umáyan) ni Kuring ang íyang sinultihan,</i> Cheding got sore because Coring <tr>mimicked</tr> her manner of talking. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of teasing by imitating.

<p><form>umbangul, umbángul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b3]</itype> <tr>howl</tr>, <tr>bellow</tr> loudly. <i>Nag-umbangul siya sa kasakit,</i> She bellowed with pain.

<p><form>umbaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> <tr>overlook</tr>, <tr>tower over</tr>. <i>Ang ílang balay nag-umbaw sa kasilingánan,</i> Their house towers over the neighborhood. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> look down from a height over the edge of s.t. <i>Nag-umbaw siya sa pangpang,</i> He was looking down over the edge of the cliff. <i>Umbáwa ang mga bátà sa búngun,</i> Look out of the window and see what the children are doing.

<p><form>umbihas, umbíhas</form> <xr>= <sc>AMBIHAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>úmid</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> wallow, roll in s.t. that sticks. <i>Iúmid (umíra) ang ságing sa asúkar,</i> Roll the bananas in sugar. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be needlessly implicated in s.t. bad. <i>Naúmid ku sa kasábà bisan ug wà kuy salà,</i> I was included in the scolding even though I hadn't done anything.

<p><form>umidu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for s.t. designed to burn to be slightly moist. <i>Ang libintadur nga muumidu (maumidu) dì na mubutu,</i> A firecracker that gets moist won't explode. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1456]</itype> for a wound or sore that appears healed on the surface to fester or generate pus underneath. <i>Giabríhan pag-usab ang íyang upirasiyun kay nag-umidu sa ilawum,</i> Her operation was reopened because it was festering inside. <number>2a</number> for an emotion to fester in one's heart (literary). <i>Pagdumut nga nag-umidu sa dughan,</i> Hatred that <tr>rankles</tr> in the breast. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> moist and not burning well. <number>2</number> <tr>festering</tr>.

<p><form>umígas</form> <xr>= <sc>HULMÍGAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>umil</form> <pos>a</pos> soft, having lost its crispness. <i>Umil na kaáyu ning pinipíga,</i> The rice crunch has gotten all soggy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become soft, no longer crunchy. (&larr;) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> for flat things to stick together from being moist. <i>Muúmil ang mga playwud kun basà,</i> The plywood sheets will stick together if they get wet.

<p><form>umintádu</form> <pos>a</pos> having <tr>risen</tr> in amount. <i>Umintádu ang mga palalítun run,</i> Prices of goods are high these days. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> <tr>rise</tr> in degree. <i>Maumintádu ang hilánat mahápun,</i> The fever <tr>goes up</tr> in the afternoon.

<p><form>umintu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; bc]</itype> <number>1</number> become <tr>greater</tr> in degree or number, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Ang mga kumirsiyanti miumintu sa mga prisyu sa mga palítun,</i> The merchants <tr>raised</tr> the prices of goods. <i>Nagkaumintu ang gidaghanun sa mga sakyanan sa syudad,</i> There are getting to be <tr>more</tr> and more cars in the city. <number>2</number> <tr>improve</tr>, <tr>progress</tr>. <i>Muumintu (maumintu) ang inyung pagkabutang ug mutrabáhu mu,</i> Your situation will improve if you work. <form>&mdash; sa kunhud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become <tr>worse</tr>, <tr>go down</tr>. <i>Nag-umintu mi sa kunhud tungud sa kagastadur,</i> We are getting to be worse and worse off because we keep spending money. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> amount s.t. has increased. <i>Gitagáan ug umintu sa swildu si Pidru,</i> Pedro was given a <tr>raise</tr>. <pos>n</pos> one's children added to a growing brood. <i>Pila na ruy átung umintu?</i> How many children do you have now? <number>2</number> <tr>progress</tr>, <tr>improvement</tr> of s.t. <i>Walà giyuy umintu ang syudad,</i> The city hasn't shown any improvement.

<p><form>umnis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> <tr>skip</tr>, <tr>miss</tr> s.t. <i>Sa kaapíki sa mga buluhatun sa panimalay naumnis na lang ang ákung paniudtu,</i> I was so busy with the housework that I missed my dinner.

<p><form>umpas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; b28]</itype> <tr>fall away</tr>, <tr>crumble</tr> down. <i>Kusug nga ulan nga nakaumpas (nakapaumpas) sa kimba,</i> A strong rain that <tr>crumbled away</tr> the embankment.

<p><form>umpaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> be <tr>outclassed</tr> or <tr>outstripped</tr> in comparison. <i>Walay makaumpaw sa ímung binúang,</i> No one can match your foolishness. <i>Awtu nga bísan kanus-a walà hiumpawi,</i> A car that has never been outclassed.

<p><form>umpaw<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A123P; b4(1)]</itype> <tr>come to</tr> after having fainted. <i>Didtu na sa uspital maumpawi ang nakuyapan,</i> The man who fainted came to in the hospital. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; b4(1)]</itype> for <pb n=1094>one's anger to wear off. <i>Maumpaw ang íyang kasukù ug ímung amuy-amúyun,</i> His anger will vanish if you play up to him.

<p><form>umpù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>grandparent</tr> or a grandparent's sibling or cousin of the same generation. <number>2</number> term of address for a relation of the grandparents' generation.

<p><form>umpul</form> <pos>a</pos> cut <tr>short</tr>. <i>Umpul kaáyu ang mga sinínà sa mga batan-un karun,</i> Young people wear very short dresses nowadays. <form>sáyang &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. shirred <tr>skirt</tr> with no tail, worn now only by old women. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> be, become short. <i>Ayaw kaáyug umpúla (iumpul) pagputul ang ímung buhuk,</i> Don't cut your hair too short.

<p><form>-um-r-</form> <number>1</number> prefix added to most verb roots which refer to an action to form nouns which mean &lsquo;one who is <tr>about to</tr> [do]&rsquo;. <i>Umuulì na ku,</i> I am about to go home. <i>Pumipirma na untà siya sa kuntrátu,</i> He was just about to sign the contract. <number>1a</number> added to words referring to weather conditions. <i>Umuulan tingáli run dà,</i> It looks like it is going to rain. <number>2</number> prefixes added to a few verbal roots to form nouns referring to the agent who does [so-and-so]. <i>Sumasákay,</i> Passengers. <i>Pumupúyù,</i> Inhabitants.

<p><form>úmud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A6; c]</itype> push the face or s.t. analogous down, bury the face or fall with the face into s.t. <i>Naúmud siya sa lápuk,</i> She fell face first into the mud. <i>Unlan nga íyang giumúran sa paghílak,</i> The pillow she buried her face into when she cried. <i>Ákù lang iúmud ang agipu sa abu arun mapáwung,</i> I'll sniffle the firebrand out by burying it in the ashes. <form>&mdash; ang náwung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> bury one's face in work, preoccupation, hobby, and the like. <i>Ug dì ku iúmud (umúrun) ang ákung nawung sa trabáhu wà miy makáun,</i> If I don't bury my face in work we won't have anything to eat. <form>hipa-, hapa-, pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> fall face first. <i>Napaúmud (nahipaúmud) siyas kanal pagkadalispang níya,</i> He fell face first into the ditch when he slipped.

<p><form>umug</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>damp</tr>, <tr>moist</tr>. <i>Umug kaáyu ang ímung sinínà sa singut,</i> Your dress is <tr>wet</tr> with perspiration. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b2c1]</itype> become moist. <i>Nadáut ang kapi kay naumgan,</i> The coffee spoiled because it got moisture into it.

<p><form>úmuk pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>sleep late</tr> or lounge around in bed past waking hours. <i>Paumúka lang siyag kat[=ú]g kay Duminggu man run,</i> Allow her to <tr>sleep in</tr> because it's Sunday.

<p><form>úmul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> roll s.t. into a ball. <i>Umúla ang karni pára sa bulabúla,</i> Roll the meat into balls to make meat balls. <number>1a</number> <tr>mold</tr> into other shapes. <number>2</number> mold the personality and mind. <i>Mga iskuylahan nga nag-úmul sa mga batan-un,</i> Schools that mold the youth. <pos>n</pos> s.t. formed into balls or molds. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> school as the molder of the youth. <form>-in-</form> <xr>= <sc>ÚMUL</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>um-um</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> put s.t. partly or wholly into the mouth or between the lips. <i>Muum-um nà siya dáyun sa íyang kwáku inigmata,</i> He immediately puts his pipe into his mouth when he wakes up. <number>2</number> <form>&mdash; ug kalibútan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> for a woman to have a prolapsed uterus. <i>Nagbakaang ang babáyi kay nag-umum man ug kalibútan,</i> The woman is walking with her legs far apart because she has a prolapsed uterus.

<p><form>umung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> pile up harvested rice together with the stalks.

<p><form>umu-um</form> <xr>= <sc>ALUM-UM</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>umuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bodily strength</tr>. <i>Nawad-an si Samsun sa umuy dihang giputul ni Dilayla ang íyang buhuk,</i> Samson lost his <tr>strength</tr> when Delilah cut his hair. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> have the strength to do s.t. <i>Dì na giyud ku makaumuy paglakaw,</i> I have no more strength to go out. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> get strength. <i>Giumuyan na ang ákung buktun,</i> My arm has gathered strength again. <form>paumuy-umuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> keep the body still without motion. <i>Paumuy-umuy lang, makat[=ú]g ka lagi,</i> Just <tr>lie still</tr> and relax and you'll fall asleep.

<p><form>*un</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>MARTS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>-un<sub>1</sub></form> direct passive verb affix, future. (<ix>past:</ix> <bx>gi-</bx> <ix>subjunctive:</ix> <bx>-a</bx>. <ix>Potential forms: past:</ix> <bx>na-</bx>; <ix>future and subjunctive:</ix> <bx>ma-</bx>.) <i>Palitun ku ang bábuy,</i> I will buy the pig. <i>Gipalit ku ang bábuy,</i> I bought the pig. <i>Walà ku palita ang bábuy,</i> I didn't buy the pig. <i>Dì ku mapalit ang bábuy,</i> I cannot buy the pig. <i>Napalit ku ang bábuy,</i> I managed to buy the pig. <i>Wà ku mapalit ang bábuy,</i> I didn't get to buy the pig. <number>1</number> do directly to. <i>Lutúun ku ang kík,</i> I will bake the cake. <i>Kuháun ku kanà,</i> I will go get it. <i>Patyun níla,</i> They will kill it. <number>1a</number> <ix>with verbs of motion:</ix> go to get. <i>Sak-un ku ang butung,</i> I will climb up to get some coconuts. <i>Balíkun ka námù,</i> We will come back to get you. <number>1b</number> <ix>with adjectives, nouns, or roots referring to a state:</ix> make s.t. [adj.], [noun]; or bring into [state]. <i>Pulahun ku ang ákung ngábil,</i> I will make my lips red. <i>Hubgun ku siya sa mga sáad,</i> I will make her drunk with promises. <i>Ulipúnun ang Pilipínas sa Ispanya,</i> Spain will enslave the Philippines. <i>Karsunísun ku ning panaptun,</i> I will make pants out of the cloth. <i>Hutdun ku ang kwarta,</i> I will use up the money. <i>Upatun ang kík,</i> The cake will be cut into four pieces. <number>1c</number> <ix>with adjectives referring to manner:</ix> do it in [such-and-such] a manner. <i>Ayúhun ku pagsilhig ang sawug,</i> I will sweep <pb n=1095>the floor carefully. <i>Kalitun ku paglabni ang íyang kutsilyu,</i> I will grab his knife away suddenly. <number>1c1</number> <ix>with words referring to time:</ix> [do] at [such-and-such a time]. <i>Ugmáun na lang nà nákù,</i> I will just do that tomorrow. <i>Binulanun ku sílag swildu,</i> I will pay them by the month. <number>1d</number> with verbs referring to an action two things can do with each other (usually with a long penult), have the two [do] to each other. <i>Sagúlun ku ang itlug ug harína,</i> I will mix the eggs and the flour. <i>Abútun ku ang duha ka tumuy,</i> I will make the two ends meet. <number>1d1</number> have s.o. do [so-and-so] with one. <i>Sabútun ku ang draybir,</i> I will come to an agreement with the driver. <i>Awáyun ku si Pidru,</i> I will fight Pedro. <number>1e</number> <ix>with nouns referring to names or titles:</ix> call s.o. by [such-and-such] a name. <i>Lulúhun ku ang tigúwang,</i> I will call the old man Grandfather. <number>1e1</number> say [so-and-so] to. <i>Litsíhun ku giyud siya,</i> I'll cuss at him and say <ix>litsi</ix>. <number>1f</number> <ix>with nouns referring to things that can be used as an instrument:</ix> strike with [so-and-so]. <i>Bakyáun ku siya,</i> I will hit him with a wooden slipper. <number>1g</number> <ix>with verbs referring to fighting, competing, and the like:</ix> accomplish s.t. by doing. <i>Kun dílì mahímung sultíhun ang átung gikasungían, átù na lang awáyun,</i> If we can't settle our differences by talking, we'll fight it out. <number>2</number> <ix>with words referring to a sickness or feeling:</ix> get [such-and-such] a sickness, feel [so-and-so]. <i>Gitulug siyag maáyu,</i> He is very sleepy. <i>Giátay ang manuk,</i> The chickens got chicken cholera. <number>3</number> <form>háiy, unsay</form> [noun]<form>-un</form>, there is no [noun]! (Lit. What is there to make or call a [noun].) <i>&lsquo;Tagái kug singku.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Unsay kwartáhun!&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Let me have a nickel.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Where am I supposed to get money?&rsquo; <i>Gipangítà ku si Tinyung sa dapit nga íyang gibarugan ganíha. Háin pay Tinyúngun,</i> I looked for Tenyong in the place he had been standing. Tenyong was nowhere. (Lit. Where could there be s.t. to be called Tenyong?).

<p><form>-un<sub>2</sub></form> <number>1</number> suffix added to adjectives and nouns to form adjectives which mean &lsquo;of [such-and-such] a kind&rsquo;. Usually, forms with this suffix have final stress. <i>Yagpisun siyag láwas,</i> He has a thinnish body. <i>Dugúun (duguun) nga hitabù,</i> A bloody event. <i>Baratuhung panaptun,</i> Cheap sort of cloth. <number>2</number> added to numbers to form nouns meaning &lsquo;ones worth [so-and-so] much&rsquo;. <i>Pisusun (pisúsun) nga bayhána,</i> A cheap woman (costing only a peso). <i>Bayintihun,</i> Costing twenty.

<p><form>-un(&rarr;)</form> alternant of <ix>-unun</ix>, used with some of the bases which occur with <ix>-unun</ix>, but not all of them. <i>Dúna pa kuy hatagun nímu,</i> I still have s.t. to give you.

<p><form>úna</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ahead</tr>, <tr>earlier</tr>. <i>Ákung turnu kay úna kaáyu ku nímu,</i> It's my turn because I was here well <tr>before</tr> you. <number>2</number> the one that is <tr>first</tr> in position. <i>Ang Únang Gínang,</i> The First Lady. <number>2a</number> <form>sa &mdash;</form> <tr>in former times</tr>. <i>Sa úna way sugà,</i> In former times there was no electricity. <form>mga -ng táwu</form> the people of former times. <number>2b</number> <tr>first</tr>, not second. <form>&mdash; sa tanan</form> <tr>above all</tr>. <form>sa &mdash; nga lugar</form> <tr>in the first place</tr>. <i>Dì ka katagáan. Sa únang lugar pilyu ka,</i> You can't get any. In the first place, you're naughty. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> do s.t. the <tr>first</tr> thing, or ahead of s.o. else. <i>Muúna ku ug tindug. Sunud lang,</i> I will stand up first. Just follow suit. <i>Unáhun ku ni ug lútù,</i> I will cook this first. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A123S; b8]</itype> beat s.o. to s.t. <i>Ákù ning syáha. Akuy nakauna áni,</i> This is my chair. I got it first. <i>Hiunhan siyag mata sa adlaw. Alas syíti nang mimata,</i> He woke up late (lit. the sun got up before him). It was already seven o'clock. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> pay an amount in advance. <i>Muúna ku nímug diyis,</i> I will <tr>advance</tr> you ten. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2S; b(1)]</itype> be at the head, go ahead of others. <i>Muúna ku nímu kay nagdalì ku,</i> I will go home before you because I am in a hurry. <i>Nag-una sila sa parid,</i> They were at the head of the parade. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13N; b(1)]</itype> do s.t. to s.o. first. <i>Kinsa may nag-úna ninyung duha?</i> Which of you started it? <number>4</number> <itype>[A23N; b(1)]</itype> flirt with a boy aggressively. <i>Gipaangkan hinúun si Mirli kay mau may miúna (nangúna) sa laláki,</i> Merle got pregnant because she flirted too much with the boy. <form>&mdash; sin utra</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>alternate</tr>, occurring one after the other. <i>Úna sin utra ang lalákig babáyi,</i> The boys and the girls are put in alternate position (boy, girl, boy, girl). <form>(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>ÚNA</sc>, <i>n1; v1, 1a, 1b, 2.</i></xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; b]</itype> give unwanted advice. <i>Muuna mu nákù? Ulahi ra mu kaáyu sa dúyan,</i> What are you giving me advice for when you are way younger than me? <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1c]</itype> for a woman to have premarital relations. <i>Dì maáyu nga mupaúna sa láki,</i> It's not good for a woman to have relations with a man before marriage. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> let s.o. do s.t. to one first. <i>Sa sumbagay dì giyud siya paúna,</i> He won't let his opponent get the first blow in a fight. <form>pa-(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>PAÚNA</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr> <form>unauna</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> do s.t. ahead of others when it is not proper or usual. <i>Dì ka makaunaunag lingkud kay wà pa mulingkud ang pinasidunggan,</i> You cannot sit down first because the honoree has not taken his seat yet. <i>Unaunaha nig lung-ag,</i> Cook this ahead in a hurry. <form>pasi-, pasi-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> say s.t. by way <pb n=1096>of introduction, before s.o. else. <number>2</number> say or convey s.t. <tr>in advance</tr>. <i>Mupasiuna lang ku nímu nga dì ku makaanhi ugmà,</i> I'll tell you in advance that I can't come here tomorrow. <i>Ipasiuna ku lang ni nímung kwartáha,</i> I'm just giving you this money in advance. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. <tr>preliminary</tr> or a <tr>preface</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>advance notice</tr>. <form>unáhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> place up ahead. <number>2</number> <tr>further</tr>. <i>Ang íla unáhan ra kaáyus taytáyan,</i> Their place is a considerable distance up beyond the bridge. <form>pangunáhan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> be the leader in a novena. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. placed in front of s.t. else. <i>Pangunáhang ligid,</i> Front tires. <number>2</number> one who is in the limelight. <i>Pangunáhang papil,</i> Starring role. <form>kinaunahan, kinaunáhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>the very first</tr>. maunaunahun, unaunahun <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> one who provokes trouble. <i>Kanúnay siyang makakitag áway kay unaunahun man,</i> He always finds himself in a fight because he is a trouble-maker. <number>2</number> forward with women.

<p><form>unà</form> <pos>n</pos> juice of the salted fish.<i> Pakapini kug unà nga isúbak sa útan,</i> Give me additional salted-fish juice for my vegetable stew. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B3(1); b6(1)]</itype> for salted-fish preserves to give out juice. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> have juice to eat with the staple. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> put salted-fish juice on. <i>Giunaan níyag daghan ang útan,</i> She put lots of salted-fish juice on the vegetable stew.&dagger;

<p><form>únà</form> <xr>= <sc>ÚSÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>unanut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P]</itype> do s.t. with <tr>difficulty</tr> or with <tr>great effort</tr>. <i>Nag-unanut ku sa ákung mga sabdyiks rung tuíga,</i> I am having difficulty with my subjects this year. <i>Nag-unanut ku pagbira sa pyánu,</i> It was a great <tr>effort</tr> to move the piano.

<p><form>unap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> peel off the thin outer layer of a dried, young nipa leaf for smoking.

<p><form>unas</form> <pos>n</pos> dry banana leaf. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> remove the dried banana leaves. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> <xr>= <sc>ÚNAS</sc>, <pos>v</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>unásis</form> <pos>a</pos> very rich old man. <i>Unásis kaáyu ang íyang nabána,</i> She married an <tr>Onassis</tr>.

<p><form>unat</form> <xr>= <sc>ÍNAT</sc>.</xr>&dagger;

<p><form>unaw</form> <pos>n</pos> cassava or <tr>buri flour</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> extract cassava or buri flour.

<p><form>unawup</form> (from <ix>alup</ix>) <pos>a</pos> for light or vision to be <tr>dim</tr>. <i>Unawup kaáyu ang síga sa sugà,</i> The light of the lamp is very dim. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> get dim. <i>Muunáwup (maunáwup) ang ákung panan-aw,</i> My eyesight becomes <tr>blurred</tr> sometimes.

<p><form>unay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>mainland</tr>. <i>Ang tagaisla adtu magkabù sa unay,</i> The islanders fetch water from the mainland. <number>2</number> a deeply embedded <tr>sliver</tr> or foreign body. <number>3</number> s.t. solidly attached to or forming a solid or contiguous part of s.t. <i>Dílì matangtang ning putháwa kay unay sa íhi,</i> This piece of iron can not be removed because it forms a solid part of the axle. <form>&mdash; sa láwas</form> <xr>= <sc>TAPUT LÁWAS</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>LÁWAS</sc>.</xr> <number>4</number> instantly accessible. <i>Sa nagtrabáhu pa ku sa panadiríya unay ra ku sa pán,</i> When I was working in the bakery, I always had bread instantly accessible. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> go stay with a member of the family that is s.w. else. <i>Muunay ku sa mga bátà sa syudad sa ílang pag-iskuyla,</i> I will go live with the children in the city while they attend school there. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> do some harm to a member of one's own family or group. <i>Ang íya rang anak nag-unay ug káwat sa ílang karabaw,</i> His own son stole the carabao from them. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> commit <tr>suicide</tr>. <i>Nag-unay siya kay disispirádu,</i> He killed himself because he was despondent in love. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> be harmed by one's own trick, weapon. <i>Mirísi. Naunay ka sa ímung tinuntu,</i> It serves you right. Your foolishness <tr>backfired</tr> on you, and you got it instead. <number>4</number> <itype>[ac]</itype> do s.t. to s.t. one is wearing without taking it off. <i>Giunay lang nákug sursi ang gísì sa ákung púlu,</i> I sewed up the tear in my shirt without taking it off. <number>5</number> <itype>[AN; bN]</itype> do s.t. personally, not delegating it to s.o. else. <i>Aku giyuy mangunay (muunay, mangúnay) íni kay mga tapulan mu,</i> I guess I'll have to do this myself because you are so lazy. <i>Unayi nag trabáhu kay kuti nà,</i> Work on that personally because it is an intricate job. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. fixed or attached to s.t. <i>Sa mamilúka únay ang sinínà sa karsúnis,</i> In a child's one-piece suit the pants and the shirt are together in one piece. <form>batu nga &mdash;</form> <tr>bedrock</tr>. <number>2</number> fight among friends or relatives. <i>Sa únay ang amahan hingpatyan,</i> The father was killed in the family fight. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C3; c1]</itype> be <tr>fixed</tr>, <tr>attached</tr> as part of one another. <i>Nag-únay ang púnu ug radiyu kay gibutang ang duha sa usa ka kabinit,</i> The radio and phonograph are a <tr>single unit</tr> because they were put in one cabinet. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ac3]</itype> for friends or kin to do s.t. to each other they shouldn't. <i>Nag-únay ang managsúun maung gibáliw,</i> The brother and sister committed incest. That's why they were cursed. <i>Ang mismu níyang amahan ang gikaúnay níya sa pulitika,</i> He ran against his own father in the elections. <form>unay-únay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> put on special wearing apparel for ordinary situations. <i>Ayawg iunay-únay ang bag-u mung sinínà,</i> Don't go wearing your new dress around the house. <pos>n</pos> clothing for ordinary use. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> rolled tobacco leaf for smoking. <pos>v</pos> 1 <itype>[A]</itype> smoke rolled tobacco leaf. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> roll tobacco leaves for smokes. <form>ti-(&larr;)</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>TIÚNAY</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=1097>

<p><form>undag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>sink</tr>, <tr>settle</tr> down to the bottom of a liquid medium. <i>Lawum ang giundágan sa barkung nalúnud,</i> The ship sank in deep waters.

<p><form>undak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B3(1)4; b6]</itype> <tr>jounce</tr> in riding. <i>Miundak ning trák tungud sa batsi,</i> This bus is jouncing because of the potholes. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>stamp</tr> the feet, walk with heavy footfalls. <i>Ayaw undáka (iundak) ímung tiil kay náay táwu sa sílung,</i> Don't stamp your feet when you walk because there are people downstairs. <form>pina- ang tíngug</form> speaking in a rough, curt way.

<p><form>undan</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>aware</tr> of what is happening around one. <pos>n</pos> <tr>awareness</tr>. <i>Wà siyay undan nga gidala sa huspital,</i> He was unconscious when he was brought to the hospital. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; b28]</itype> <tr>know</tr>, be aware of what is going on. <i>Wà pa ku makaundan paghalin námù sa Mindanaw,</i> I was not old enough to know what was going on when we moved to Mindanao. <i>Wà ku makaundan nga gikúut ang ákung kwarta,</i> I did not notice that s.o. had picked my pocket. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> regain <tr>consciousness</tr>. <number>1b</number> come to <tr>understand</tr> fully s.t. about which one had misapprehensions. <i>Hiundanan (naundanan) na níya ang íyang sayup,</i> He has just realized his mistakes. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b8]</itype> grow up under the conditions, environment of. <i>Nag-undan siya sa pagkaharúhay,</i> She grew up in great comfort. <form>&mdash; sa buut</form> <xr>= <sc>UNDAN</sc>.</xr> see also <xr><sc>UNUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>undang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab1]</itype> <tr>stop</tr> doing s.t., come to a stop. <i>Naundang ang ámung pagpangáun sa pag-abut níla,</i> Our meal came to a halt when they arrived. <i>Giundángan námug dáru ang íyang uma,</i> We had stopped plowing his farm. <i>Giundángan na siya sa íyang dugù,</i> Her menstruation has stopped. <form>walay &mdash;</form> <tr>unending</tr>, <tr>incessant</tr>. <form>undang-undang</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>intermittent</tr>, on and off. <i>Undang-undang nga kasakit sa tampihak,</i> Intermittent migraine. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b5]</itype> be intermittent, <tr>periodic</tr>, or on and off. <i>Giundang-undang (giundang-undángan) pagpaági sa túbig sa agwas karun,</i> We only have water periodically these days. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> food served at the end of the work. <form>-in-an nga swildu</form> <tr>separation pay</tr>.

<p><form>undaundà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c16]</itype> for a process to be broken by short intervals, not going on smoothly. <i>Mag-undaundà siyang musulti mu rag maghunàhúnà ug unsay isunud,</i> He speaks <tr>haltingly</tr> as if he was thinking of what to say next. <i>Pirmíha pagtulud. Ayawg undaundáa (iundaundà),</i> Push continuously. Don't keep stopping now and then, <pos>a</pos> going on haltingly, not smoothly continuous.

<p><form>undáyag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> step backwards, dodging to avoid the blows of an attacking opponent. <i>Muundáyag siya kun dasdásun apan síging nagpika,</i> He steps out of the way when he is attacked, but continues to deliver punches.

<p><form>undayun, undáyun</form> (from <ix>dáyun</ix>) <pos>a</pos> space which is <tr>contiguous</tr> or <tr>continuous</tr> with s.t. <i>Ang kumidur undáyun sa sála,</i> The dining room is a <tr>continuation</tr> of the living room. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> <tr>continue</tr>, <tr>go on</tr> doing s.t. <i>Mipaundáyun siyag lakaw bísan ákung gitawag,</i> She continued on walking away even as I called her. <i>Wà siya makapaundáyun ug iskuyla kay nasakit,</i> He was not able to continue his studies because he got sick. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>go along with</tr> s.o.'s decision, wishes. <i>Magpaundáyun kami sa ímung hukum,</i> We will go along with your decision. <i>Ayaw paundayúni sa tanan níyang gustu,</i> Do not give him everything he wants.

<p><form>undù</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>dù</bx>. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> address of endearment for a boy. <number>2</number> familiar term of address to a man the same age or younger than the speaker. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> call or address s.o. this way.

<p><form>unduk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> be <tr>piled</tr> high. <i>Muunduk ang labhanan ug dílì amnun paglaba,</i> The laundry will <tr>pile up</tr> if you don't take care of it as it comes up. <pos>n</pos> <tr>pile</tr>, <tr>heap</tr> of s.t. <i>Ang unduk sa basúra,</i> The heap of garbage.

<p><form>undul</form> <pos>a</pos> for plants to have lost their crowns or leaves at the top. <i>Mais nga undul kaáyu human agii sa dúlun,</i> Corn that had its tops eaten away by the locusts. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB; a2]</itype> for plants to lose their crowns, cause them to do so.

<p><form>unduy</form> <xr>= <sc>UNDÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>undyan</form> <xr>= <sc>UNYÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>[=ú]ng</form> <xr>= <sc>ÚLUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ungà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23P; b]</itype> stop sucking on s.t.; stop suckling. <i>Dì muungà ug supsup sa dugù ang limátuk ug dì mabusug,</i> A leech won't stop sucking blood until it gets full. <form>ungaúngà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> loosen s.t. by working it <tr>back and forth</tr>. <i>Nag-ungaúngà ku sa halígi arun húmuk ibtun,</i> I'm pushing the post back and forth so that it will be easy to pull it up.

<p><form>ungà<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>INGÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ungab<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1b7]</itype> <tr>bite</tr> a big chunk off. <i>Ug ikaw muungab, mahurut ni,</i> If you take a bite of it, nothing will be left. <i>Ang plíti muungab ug dakù sa ákung swildu,</i> The fare takes a large chunk out of my salary. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> bite. <number>2</number> action of biting. <i>Usa ka ungab mahurut nà dáyun,</i> That would all be gone in a bite. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> the area from which a large chunk has been bitten.

<pb n=1098>

<p><form>ungab<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b36]</itype> <tr>cry</tr> aloud. Nakamata ku kay nag-ungab siya, I woke up because he cried so loud.

<p><form>úngad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> <tr>dig</tr> out with the snout or s.t. analogous. <i>Dì na muúngad (mangúngad) ang bábuy ug gawungan,</i> The pig can no longer dig up the soil if a ring is attached to its snout. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23; c]</itype> <tr>bury</tr> one's face in. <i>Miungad siya sa dughan sa íyang minahal ug mihílak,</i> She buried her face on her boy friend's<note>boyfriend's</note><note>in other pages, this is also two words. P2</note> bosom and cried. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> bury oneself in what one is doing. <i>Matigayun giyud ang íyang uma kay muúngad siyas trabáhu,</i> His farm will do well because he applies himself assiduously. <number>4</number> <itype>[A12S3]</itype> stay s.w. for one's subsistence. <i>Náa ra mag-ungad sa mga ginikánan ang mga anak nga nangaminyù,</i> The married children are living with their parents. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> fall down on one's face. <i>Napandul siya ug napaúngad siyas lápuk,</i> He tripped and fell face first into the mud. <form>inungáran</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> soil that has been all dug up by a pig. <number>2</number> <tr>earnings</tr>, s.t. obtained for a work done.

<p><form>ungal, úngal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make a loud bellowing cry. <i>Miúngal (miungal) ang higanti pagkaigù sa agtang,</i> The giant bellowed when he got hit on the forehead.

<p><form>ungas</form> <pos>n</pos> bad scratch. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; b6(1)]</itype> scratch s.t. badly. <i>Siyay miungas sa ákung nawung,</i> She scratched my face.

<p><form>ungat-úngat</form> <pos>n</pos> the joint between the upper and lower jaw and the muscles and jawbone in the vicinity. <i>Gikápuy ang ákung ungat-úngat ug kináun sa inánag,</i> My jaws were tired from eating the broiled corn.

<p><form>ungaug</form> <xr>= <sc>ALUNGAUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ungaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> be on the brink of death. <i>Nag-ungaw na siya sa kamatáyun,</i> She is on the brink of death. <number>2</number> be at the brink of some calamity. <i>Mag-ungaw na gánì ang ákung kwarta sa kahurutun, mukáun na lang ku ug buwad,</i> When my money is nearly gone I resort to eating dried fish.

<p><form>ungdan</form> <xr>= <sc>UNDAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>unggà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>break</tr> limbs, anything projecting off. <i>Unggáun (iunggà) ku ning úlu sa munyíka,</i> I'll break the head of the doll off. <i>Naunggà ang pakù sa ayruplánu pagkahúlug niíni,</i> The wing of the airplane broke off when it fell. <number>2</number> [B12; a 12] for a <ix>sungkà</ix> player to lose all his pieces to his opponent. <i>Dì abtag diyis minútus makaunggà ku nímu,</i> In less than ten minutes I'll have all your pieces. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> being broken off. <i>Unggà nag kawu nang tasáa,</i> That cup doesn't have a handle any more. <number>2</number> having lost all one's pieces in <ix>sungkà.</ix> <form>unggaunggà</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>ANANANGGAL</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a3]</itype> be <tr>detachable</tr>.

<p><form>unggal</form> <xr>= <sc>UNGGÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>unggu</form> <xr>= <sc>PAMALÁYI</sc>.</xr> <xr>see <sc>BAYI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ungguwintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ointment</tr>.

<p><form>ungguy</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>monkey</tr>. <form>&mdash; nga nahapunan</form> <tr>crestfallen</tr> of countenance. <i>Naunsa ka man nga mu ra ka man ug ungguy nga nahapunan, pri?</i> What happened to you? You look crestfallen (like a monkey overtaken by sunset). <form>dalunggan sa &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>LAYAT<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr> <form>ungguy-ungguy</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>card game</tr> where the players try to match pairs by drawing from each other's hands. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> play this game.

<p><form>ungkad, ungkag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3PB12; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>scatter</tr>, be, become <tr>scattered</tr> or <tr>disarrayed</tr>. <i>Kinsay nag-ungkag sa mga papil?</i> Who scattered the papers all over the place? <i>Naungkag ang mga táwu dihang miuwan,</i> The people ran in all directions when it started to rain. <number>2</number> <tr>stir</tr> or <tr>disturb</tr> the peace or calmness of. <i>Ang dautang balità mauy miungkag sa mga lungsuránun,</i> The bad news stirred up the townspeople. <number>2a</number> <tr>break up</tr> a home or a peaceful or friendly relationship. <i>Maungkag ang inyung pagpuyù tungud sa ímung pagbisyu,</i> Your home life will be broken up because of your indulgence in vice. <number>2b</number> <tr>disturb</tr> one's sleep. <i>Siyay miungkag sa ákung paghinánuk,</i> She disturbed my sleep.

<p><form>ungkat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>revive</tr>, bring back to one's consciousness s.t. that has long been forgotten. <i>Ákung ungkátun ang tanang nahitabù arun mahibaw-an ang kamatuúran,</i> I'll go over everything that happened so that the truth will come out.

<p><form>unglan</form> <xr>= <sc>UNLAN</sc>.</xr> <xr>see <sc>ULUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>unglù</form> <pos>n</pos> a person who is <tr>possessed</tr> of a supernatural force, which attacks from time to time causing him to change his form and go out, often to harm others, preying on their blood, livers, et al. The power which possesses the <i>unglù</i> is passed to him by <ix>salában</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> become an <i>unglù.</i> <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be <tr>addicted</tr> to a despicable vice. <i>Naúngù siya sa madyung,</i> He has become addicted to mahjong. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> for a person who is an <i>unglù</i> to get possessed and do his malicious acts.

<p><form>ungnan</form> <xr>= <sc>UNLAN</sc>.</xr> <xr>see <sc>ULUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>Úngù<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>UNGLÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>Úngù<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>WAKWAK<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>úngud</form> <pos>a</pos> giving serious and undisturbed <tr>attention</tr> to work or activity. <i>Úngud siya sa trabáhu,</i> He is diligent in his work. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> do s.t. seriously and with <tr>diligence</tr>. <i>Mag-úngud mu sa pagtuun arun mu makapasar,</i> You must be diligent in your studies so that you <pb n=1099>can pass. <i>Iúngud ang ímung panahun sa ímung nigusyu,</i> <tr>Devote</tr> your time to your business.

<p><form>ungul</form> <pos>n</pos> stage of maturity of a coconut where the meat is getting hard but not completely mature. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B25; b6]</itype> for the coconut to reach this stage.

<p><form>úngul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b3]</itype> object angrily upon being asked for s.t. or told to do s.t. because the person who did so does not have the right (slang). <i>Ug miúngul pa siya pagpangáyù nákug dilihinsiya gúbut untà,</i> Had he objected when I asked for protection money, there would have been trouble. <pos>n</pos> angry complaint. <i>Way úngul ang butanti nga ámung gitirurismu,</i> The voter we terrorized didn't dare complain.

<p><form>ung-ung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> appear partly in an opening or hole. <i>Tawga dáyun ang dukt&ucaron;r ug mag-ung-ung na ang bátà,</i> Call the doctor immediately when the child appears in the vaginal opening. <i>Ayaw iung-ung ang ímung úlu sa pultahan kay mahadluk sila,</i> Don't pop your head out of the door or they'll be scared. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the <i>buwà</i><sub>1</sub> at an early stage of development. <number>2</number> supernatural beings who appear to people showing only their human head above the ground in odd places. They frighten but are harmless.

<p><form>ungus-ungus, ungus-úngus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> <tr>sniffle</tr> or <tr>whine</tr>. <i>Naghilak ka man tingáli, kay nag-ungus-ungus ka man,</i> You must have been crying because you are sniffling. <i>Nag-ungus-ungus ang irù,</i> The dog is whining.

<p><form>úngut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB2S]</itype> get <tr>stuck</tr> and not be able to move forward, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Miúngut (naúngut) ang dáru sa dakung batu,</i> The plow got stuck on a big boulder. <i>Siyay nag-úngut (nagpaúngut) sa kambiyu,</i> He caused the gears to <tr>jam</tr>. <i>Lawum nga lápuk ang giungútan sa trák,</i> The truck got stuck deep in the mud. <number>1a</number> <form>&mdash; ang bàbà</form>. <form>1a1</form> get <tr>lockjaw</tr>. <form>1a2</form> be <tr>at a loss for words</tr>. <i>Miúngut ang íyang bàbà sa dihang gisukut siya,</i> She didn't know what to say when she was questioned. <number>2</number> <itype>[B23S6; b3]</itype> become <tr>stopped</tr>, <tr>detained</tr>. <i>Miúngut ang ákung papílis sa imbasi,</i> My papers got <tr>stuck</tr> in the embassy. <number>3</number> be <tr>puzzled</tr>, <tr>stuck</tr> so that one can't proceed. <i>Muúngut (maúngut) giyud ku áning prublimáha,</i> I'll be <tr>stumped</tr> by this problem. <number>4</number> <itype>[B2S3(1)6; b(1)]</itype> for s.t. long to pierce into s.t. <i>Nag-ungut ang kwáku sa bàbà sa tigúwang,</i> There was a pipe <tr>stuck</tr> in the old man's mouth. <i>Wà makaúngut ang panà sa káhuy,</i> The arrow didn't <tr>stick</tr> into the tree. <number>4a</number> be <tr>fixed</tr>, <tr>glued</tr> s.w. <i>Miúngut ang íyang mata sa dughan sa dalága,</i> His eyes were <tr>glued</tr> to the young woman's breasts. <number>5</number> <xr>= <sc>ÚNGUD</sc>, <pos>v</pos>.</xr> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> being stuck on tight. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>ÚNGUD</sc>, <pos>a</pos>.</xr> <form>pina-</form> <pos>n</pos> action that is <tr>prolonged</tr>, done without letting go. <i>Ang íyang hinagkan pinaúngut,</i> He kissed her with a prolonged kiss.

<p><form>unguy<sub>1</sub></form> (word play on <ix>bungul</ix>) <pos>a</pos> deaf (humorous). <i>Kusga pagsulti kay unguy nang gikaisturya nímu,</i> Speak loudly because you are talking to a deaf man.

<p><form>*unguy<sub>2</sub></form> <form>unguy-únguy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b(1)]</itype> <tr>malinger</tr>. <i>Mag-unguy-únguy (magpaunguy-únguy) dáyun nang batáa basta náay súgù,</i> That child pretends to be sick as soon as there is work to be done. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> unable to endure work. <i>Unguyan kaáyu sa trabáhu nang tawhána kay tapulan man gud,</i> That man can't endure work because he is <tr>lazy</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be so one cannot endure work. <form>unguy-unguyan</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>malingerer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b]</itype> be, become a malingerer.

<p><form>unibirsidad</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>university</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB126; a2]</itype> found a university, become a university.

<p><form>unidu</form> <xr>= <sc>UMIDU</sc>, <i>2, 2a.</i></xr>

<p><form>unidúru</form> <xr>= <sc>INUDÚRU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>unipurmi</form> <xr>= <sc>YUNIPURMI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>unkuwartu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>one-fourth</tr>. <i>Unkuwartu ra nga karni ang ákung palitun,</i> I'll only buy a <tr>quarter</tr> (kilogram) of meat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; a12]</itype> amount to a quarter. <i>Unkuwartúha lang pagpalit ang asúkar,</i> Just buy a quarter of a kilo of sugar.

<p><form>unlan</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ULUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>unlud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB23; c1]</itype> <tr>sink</tr> into s.t. so as to be submerged. <i>Dì muunlud (maunlud) ang sakayan nga kinatígan,</i> A boat with outriggers won't sink. <i>Unlúrun (iunlud) ta ka,</i> I'll pull you under the water. <number>1a</number> for s.t. solid to sink into the earth or land to sink. <i>Nahíwì ang balay kay nagkaunlud ang halígi,</i> The house is crooked because the post is sinking. <number>2</number> <itype>[APB2; c1]</itype> for a business to <tr>go to pot</tr>, cause it to do so. <i>Muunlud ang ímung nigusyu ug dì ikaw ang mangunay,</i> Your business will go to pot if you don't manage it yourself. <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> lead <tr>sinker</tr> of a fishing net or line.

<p><form>unminútu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>one minute</tr>. <i>Unminútu ra ang ákung pahúway,</i> I rested for only one minute. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> do s.t. <tr>for a minute</tr>. <i>Muunminútu ra ku pagpakigsulti nímu,</i> I'll talk to you for only one minute. <i>Wà pa ka makaunminútu ug sulti,</i> You haven't talked for a minute. <number>2</number> <itype>[B56]</itype> be about a minute. <i>Miunminútu (naunminútu) tingáli tung ákung pagkalípung,</i> I was dizzy for about a minute.

<p><form>unmumintu</form> <number>1</number> <tr>wait a moment</tr>, excuse me a second. <i>Unmumintu, maglipstik na lang ku,</i> <tr>Just a second</tr>. I'll just put my lipstick <pb n=1100>on. <i>Unmumintu diay. Kinsa tuy ímung ngálan?</i> Just a minute. What did you say your name was? <number>2</number> <tr>wait a minute</tr>, be silent for a minute. <form>ispíra &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>UNMUMINTU</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr>

<p><form>unra</form> <xr>= <sc>RILIP</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>unras</form> <pos>n</pos> honors for the dead, a special ceremony at a funeral where the priest accompanies the body from the house to the church, and from there to the cemetery. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> perform the <ix>unras</ix>. <form>&mdash; bihilya</form> <pos>n</pos> this ceremony in which the body remains in the church for some time.

<p><form>unsa</form> <ix>interrogative</ix> <number>1</number> <tr>what</tr>? <i>Unsay ímung gibúhat?</i> What are you doing? <i>Unsa man nà?</i> What is that? <i>Unsay úras?</i> What time is it? <i>Unsay átù?</i> What would you like? <i>Unsa man diay? Ug dì swildúhan mubíyà giyud,</i> What do you expect? If you don't pay, of course she'll quit. <i>Báhin sa unsa?</i> What is it about? <number>1a</number> <formx>bisan (bisag) &mdash;</formx> <tr>whatever</tr>, <tr>anything at all</tr>. <i>Bisan unsay ihátag, dawáta,</i> Whatever they give you, accept it. <i>Bisag unsa mahal run,</i> <tr>Everything</tr> is expensive nowadays. <number>1b</number> <formx>&mdash; nga <r>[time]</r>-a</formx> at what [time]? <i>Unsang urása?</i> At what time? <number>1c</number> <formx>&mdash; ka-<r>[<i>adj.</i>]</r>?</formx> how [adj.] was it? <i>Unsa kadakù ang ílang balay?</i> How big is their house? <i>Tíaw mu ba kun unsa kalisud,</i> Imagine how difficult it is. <number>1d</number> <formx>-y ákù?</formx> what do I care? <i>Unsay ákù ug muláyas ka? Na hala,</i> What do I care if you run away? Go right ahead. <i>Unsay ákù kaníya?</i> What do I care about her? <number>1e</number> <formx>-y ímu <r>[<i>dat.</i>]</r></formx> what do you see in [dat.]? <number>1f</number> <formx>-y ngálan gud</formx> what in heaven's name? <i>Unsay ngálan gud diay? Minyù?</i> What in heaven's name do you mean? He's married? <number>2</number> <tr>how about it?</tr> <i>Unsa, muadtu ba tag dílì?</i> How about it? Shall we go or not? <number>2a</number> say, how is it now? <i>Unsa, human na ba, wà pa,</i> Say, is it done or not? <number>2b</number> <formx>&mdash; na</formx> how are things now? <i>Unsa na? Nadáwat ka na?</i> How about it? Did you get your job? <i>&lsquo;Unsa na?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Mau gihápun,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;<tr>How are things?</tr>&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Oh, just as usual.&rsquo; <number>2c</number> <formx>&mdash; na kahà</formx> how much more so if. <i>Ug dagmálan ka na níya run, unsa na kahag maminyù mu?</i> If he is mean to you now, how will it be when you're married? <number>3</number> <tr>what do you mean?</tr> <tr>what are you talking about?</tr> <i>Unsay barátu? Mahal uy!</i> What do you mean cheap? It's expensive. <i>Unsang kwartáha! Nagastu na,</i> What money are you talking about? It's all gone. <number>3a</number> <tr>what's the matter with?</tr> <i>Unsa ka bang sultían, mu ra ka mag bungul,</i> What's the matter with you that when I talk to you you act deaf? <number>4</number> <ix>at the end of a phrase:</ix> it is so, <tr>is it not?</tr> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>sa</bx>. <i>Maáyu, unsa (sa)?</i> It was nice, wasn't it? <number>5</number> <formx>ug &mdash; pa kadtu, dihà</formx> <tr>and so forth</tr>. <i>Mga bínu, tubà, sirbísa, ug unsa pa kadtu (dihà),</i> Wine, toddy, beer, and <tr>what have you</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; a1]</itype> do what? <i>Muunsa kag hanaan ka níya?</i> What will you do if he aims at you? <i>Nag-unsa man mu samtang wà ku dinhi?</i> What did you do while I wasn't here? <i>Giunsa man ninyu ang bátang naghilak man?</i> What did you do to the child to make him cry? <number>1a</number> <itype>[a1c]</itype> how does one do. <i>Unsáun ku pagpatay sa (ang) irù?</i> How can I kill the dog? <i>Iunsa man nà nákù pagtáud?</i> How shall I attach it? <number>1a1</number> <formx>bisan &mdash;</formx> no matter what was, is done to it. <i>Bisag giunsa (unsáun) nákù pagbira dílì maibut,</i> No matter how I pulled (pull) it, it didn't (won't) come out. <number>1b</number> <formx>unsáun man nga</formx> <tr>what could I do?</tr> <i>Unsáun man ug dì magpatúu, dì hilatiguhan,</i> <tr>I couldn't help it</tr>. If he doesn't obey I have to whip him. <number>1c</number> <formx>dílì ingun sa pag-</formx> it is not to make s.o. feel bad. <i>Dílì ni ingun sa pag-unsa nímu, piru tinúud giyud nà,</i> I'm not saying this to hurt you, but it is true. <number>1d</number> <formx>bisag unsáun</formx> <pos>n</pos> name given to the followers of Osme&ntilde;a, who stick with him through his attempts to capture the presidency (sticking to him, whatever he does). <number>2</number> <itype>[B16]</itype> what does it become, happen to it. <i>Maunsa man ang átung láwas ug patay na ta?</i> What happens to our bodies when we die? <i>Nag-unsa man ang patay?</i> What was the position of the body? <i>Makaunsa (makapaunsa) kanang tambála?</i> What can that medicine do? <number>2a</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> what happened to...? <i>Naunsa ka? Nabúang ka ba?</i> What's the matter with you? Are you crazy? <number>2b</number> <formx>ma- ba</formx> <tr>who cares</tr>. <i>Maunsa ba ug dì mahinayun,</i> <tr>Who gives a darn</tr> if it doesn't go through? <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> do <tr>harm</tr>. <i>Dì mangunsa ning irúa,</i> This dog won't do anything. <i>Nangunsa man tu? Dì walà?</i> What did he do to you anyway? Nothing, didn't he? <form>unsáay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> what happens to. <i>Maunsáay átung nigusyug muritíra ka?</i> What will become of our business if you pull out? <i>Walà giyud makaunsáay ang bagyu sa ámù,</i> The storm didn't do a thing to our house. <form>ka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> what will happen to. <i>Ug magkaunsa gánì ri, makapangasáwa giyud ka,</i> Whatever happens to her, you will have to marry her. <form>kina-, kinaunsáay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> what it will become. <i>Ug magkinaunsa, nía giyud ku,</i> Whatever happens, I'll always be here. <form>mag-</form> <tr>how are they related?</tr> <i>Mag-unsa man nà sila? Magsúun ba?</i> How are they related? Are they brothers? <form>ig-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>what relationship</tr>. <i>Ig-unsa ka nákù?</i> <tr>What relation</tr> are you to me? <form>walay unsaunsa</form> no more anything. <pb n=1101><i>Ug mamaláyi ka run, largu ang kasal, wà nay unsaunsa,</i> After you have asked for the hand, you can get married without any further ceremonies.

<p><form>unsas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ounce</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> measure by the ounce.

<p><form>unsi</form> <ix>numeral</ix> <tr>eleven</tr>. <i>Unsi ka buuk bátà,</i> Eleven children. <i>Unsi písus,</i> Eleven pesos. <pos>v</pos> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>TRIS</sc>.</xr> <form>unsiunsi</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> do s.t. on a <tr>ten-to-one</tr> basis. <i>Unsiunsíhan nátug hákut ang mais,</i> We will carry the corn to market on a <tr>ten-to-one basis</tr> (for every ten you carry, you get one for yourself). <number>1a</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> pay on a ten-to-one basis (instead of some other way). <i>Ug átung unsiunsíhun ang swildu, iguígù giyud,</i> If we give them a tenth share, that is fair enough. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> beat s.o. by turns. <i>Ang dinakpan giunsiunsíhan sa mga sikríta,</i> The plainclothesmen took turns beating the suspect.

<p><form>unsingálan</form> (from <ix>unsay ngálan</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <tr>what</tr>? <i>Unsingálan man nà?</i> What is that? <i>Unsingálan gud ning kagulyánga gud?</i> What's all this ruckus about anyway?

<p><form>unsiyálan</form> <xr>= <sc>UNSINGÁLAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>unsuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; b4]</itype> be, become sick after exposing oneself to the cold or taking a bath after having sexual intercourse. <i>Ang pagkalígù human mukáyat makapaunsuy (makaunsuy),</i> Taking a bath after having sexual intercourse can get you sick.

<p><form>untà</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>tà</bx>. <number>1</number> with requests or suggestions &lsquo;should, <tr>would like to</tr>&rsquo;. <i>Muhulam untà ku ug kwarta nímu,</i> I would like to borrow some money from you. <number>1a</number> <tr>may</tr> [so-and-so] happen. <i>Mahúlug tà ka,</i> I <tr>hope</tr> you fall! <i>Dílì untà siya masaklit sa kamatáyun,</i> May death not take him away. <i>Dì tà ka magbinúang,</i> I hope you don't do anything foolish. <formx>hináut &mdash;</formx> I <tr>hope</tr>. <i>Hináut untà nga dílì ka maghubug,</i> I hope you do not get drunk. <number>2</number> [so-and-so] was going to be the case, but it isn't; [so-and-so] might have happened, but it did not. <i>Mugíkan na untà siya apan mibagyu,</i> He was about to leave but there was a storm. <formx>maáyu &mdash;</formx> it would be (have been) better. <i>Maáyu untà ug madala nímu rung hápun,</i> It would be nice if you could bring it this afternoon. <i>Nindut tà ug nadala pa nímu,</i> It would have been nice if you had brought it. <number>2a</number> <ix>in the apodosis of conditions contrary to fact:</ix> then [so-and-so] would have been the case. <i>Maáyung wà makagikan ang sakayan, kayg kagikan pa, malúnud untà,</i> Thank God the boat didn't leave, because if it had, it would have sunk. <i>Walà untà ku muanhig wà pa ku imbitaha,</i> I wouldn't have come unless I had been invited. <i>Ug aku pa, mahuman na tà run,</i> I could have gotten it done, if I were to have been the one to do it. <i>Dílì aku, kayg aku pa, nahuman na tà run,</i> It wasn't me, because if it were, it would have been done now. <i>Ug ugmà pa giyud ang kasal naghíkay tà run,</i> If the wedding were really going to be tomorrow, he would be preparing now. <i>Ug aku pay kaslun magkapulíkì tà ku run, piru siya hayáhay lang,</i> If it were me getting married, I'd be going crazy; but he's just taking it easy. <number>2b</number> [so-and-so] should not be the case. <i>Ngánung mutúlù man ning bangáa nga wà man untay sulud?</i> Why does this jar leak when it is supposed to be empty? <i>Háin man siyang nía man tà tu run?</i> Where is he since he was supposed to be here? <number>2c</number> <formx>&mdash; kay</formx> because of [so-and-so], [such-and-such] should have been done. <i>Untà kay gawíun nímu samtang wà siya dinhi, nananghid kang dáan,</i> Since you wanted to use it while he was gone, you should have asked before he left.

<p><form>untu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> one of the four top front teeth. <pos>v</pos> |b4] have one's upper <tr>incisors</tr>. <i>Lima pa ka búlan ning batáa apan giuntuhan na,</i> The baby is only five months old but she already has upper teeth.

<p><form>untu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> bear down hard as in delivery or defecation.

<p><form>untul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AP34; b6]</itype> <tr>bounce</tr>, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Maáyung muuntul ang gáhing búla,</i> Hard balls bounce well. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>rebound</tr>, fail to register or to take a firm hold on. <i>Miuntul ang ákung gitun-an, dì na masulud sa ákung úlu,</i> The things I studied won't register in my head. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23; b4]</itype> for checks to bounce. <i>Miuntul ang tsíki nga ákung gipailísan sa bangku,</i> The check that I cashed in the bank bounced. <number>4</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> be taken <tr>aback</tr>, stop in one's tracks due to surprise. <i>Miuntul (nauntul) ku pagkakità ku sa anínu,</i> I was <tr>taken aback</tr> when I saw the shadow. <number>4a</number> <itype>[A23P; b3]</itype> have second thoughts about buying s.t. <i>Sa maung prisyu muuntul giyud ang pumapálit,</i> At that price the buyers will surely have second thoughts. <pos>n</pos> amount of bounce. <form>untul-untul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4; b(1)]</itype> <tr>jounce</tr>, <tr>bounce</tr> up and down. <i>Miuntul-untul ang sakayan sa dagkung balud,</i> The boat was bounced around in the big waves. <i>Muuntul-untul mulakaw ang tagabúkid bísan ug pátag na,</i> Mountaineers bounce as they walk, even in the lowland. <form>-um- nga humay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. upland <tr>rice</tr> bearing fine, white grains that are hard to husk when pounded.

<p><form>untup</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>cut close</tr> near the base. <i>Untup kaáyung pagputul sa dagámi,</i> The cornstalks were cut very close to the base. <number>2</number> <tr>curt</tr>, <tr>concise</tr>. <pb n=1102><i>Untup kaáyu siya ug tubag,</i> His answers are very <tr>brief</tr>. <number>3</number> <tr>just</tr> the exact magnitude, amount. <i>Untup kaáyu ang bugas nga lung-águn pára paniudtu,</i> The rice is <tr>just enough</tr> for dinner. <number>3a</number> <tr>exactly</tr> at a certain time. <i>Untup kaáyu nga alas syíti ang ímung pag-abut,</i> You arrived exactly at seven. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> cut s.t. close to the base. <i>Nagpangpang hinúun nang ímung tingkuy kay giuntup man pagkatupi,</i> The nape of your neck looks as if there was a cliff above it because the hair was cut short there, but not above it. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> spin a top by throwing it straight down hard. <i>Giuntúpan níya ang kasing sa kuntra ug nabuak kini,</i> He smashed his top down on top of his opponent's and broke it. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> be, become <tr>short</tr>, <tr>curt</tr>. <i>Mauntup ang ímung tubag ug wà kay láing ikasulti,</i> Your answer will be short if you have nothing else to say. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be just exact or enough for. <i>Ug mauntup ra ning ákung kwarta pára pamilíti wà na kuy ikapaínit,</i> If my money is just enough for my fare, then I won't have any more to buy snacks. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A2; b6c1]</itype> arrive on time.

<p><form>untuy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> big, porcelain or enamel-coated, round <tr>plate</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> use this sort of plate.

<p><form>untuy<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> be cuckolded and unaware of it. <i>Giuntuy lang intáwun ang inusinting bána sa marúnung níyang asáwa,</i> The wife was making a fool out of her trusting husband.

<p><form>untuy<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>UNDÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>únu</form> <tr>one</tr> (used only in counting). <i>Dì pa ka mulíhuk? Únu, dus, ...</i> You're not going to do it? O.K. One, two<corr>,</corr> ... <pos>a</pos> the <tr>best</tr> there is, <tr>second to none</tr>. <i>Únu siyang musáyaw,</i> He is the best dancer. <form>&mdash; lus dús</form> for there to be a <tr>fifty-fifty chance</tr>. <i>Únu lus dús lag mabúhì ba ang naligsan,</i> It's a fifty-fifty chance that the victim will survive. <form>numiru &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>number one</tr>, <tr>tops</tr>. <i>Numiru únung palahúbug,</i> Number one drunkard. <i>Numiru únung mananagat,</i> The best fisherman. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> give s.o. a first warning. <i>Ákù ta na kang giunúhan, ha,</i> Watch out. This is your first warning. <form>&mdash; ug igù, syát</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> hit in one shot. <i>Unúhun kug igù kanang langgam sa káhuy,</i> I will hit that bird in the tree with only one shot. <form>walay &mdash;</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> <tr>you can't win</tr>, have no way to win people's approval, for whichever way it is done, it will be wrong in their eyes. <i>Wà giyud tay pagaunúhan (giunúhan) kay ug magdaginut tag gastu nganlan tag tihik, ug kusug pud tang mugastu ingnun tag gastadur,</i> You can't win. If you're careful with your money they call you cheap. If you spend your money they call you a spendthrift.

<p><form>unud</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>flesh</tr>. <i>Unud sa báka,</i> Cow's flesh. <i>Unud sa imbaw,</i> The flesh of the clam. <i>Unud sa mangga,</i> The flesh of the mango. <form>&mdash; sa ímung, íyang &mdash;</form> one's <tr>offspring</tr> (lit. flesh of one's flesh). <form>baligyà sa &mdash;</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> practice prostitution (lit. sell one's flesh). <form>kalípay sa &mdash;</form> <tr>sexual pleasure</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>content</tr>, integral part within s.t. <i>Liking way unud,</i> A cigar with no tobacco in it. <i>Impanádang gamay ug unud,</i> A meat pie with very little meat in it. <number>2a</number> <tr>content</tr>, <tr>meaning</tr>. <i>Pangatarúngan nga way unud,</i> Empty reasoning. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B23N; b6]</itype> put on flesh, become <tr>fleshy</tr>. <i>Nangunud na ang kamúti. Makálut na,</i> The sweet potatoes have developed nice and fat. You can dig them up now. <i>Giunuran na sad ang íyang láwas,</i> He has gotten flesh back on his body. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> give content or filler to s.t. <i>Dì ku muunud ug barut nga tabákù,</i> I do not use a poor k.o. tobacco in my pipe. <i>Ilagà kunu ang giunud sa syúpaw,</i> S.o. said they used rat meat as the filling for the Chinese sandwich. <form>undan</form> <pos>a</pos> having flesh. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>UNDAN</sc>.</xr> <form>undánun, maundánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fleshy</tr>, <tr>muscular</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>pithy</tr>, full of substance or meaning. <i>Undánun kaáyu ang ímung sulti,</i> What you said is full of meaning. <form>kaunuran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>flesh</tr>, <tr>muscles</tr> collectively. <i>Nangúrug ang ákung kaunuran sa kalágut,</i> My flesh trembled in anger. <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>filler</tr>, <tr>filling</tr>. <i>Balahíbung gagmay ang paunud sa unlan,</i> Pillows are stuffed with fine feathers. <pos>v</pos> (A; c] use as filler. <form>-nun</form> <pos>a</pos> pertaining to the flesh. <form>-nung tingúhà</form> <tr>carnal desire</tr>.

<p><form>unugan</form> <pos>n</pos> place where wild animals or birds habitually stay or go. <i>Ang bábuy ihálas didtu lang níla atángi sa unugan,</i> They lay in wait for wild pigs at the place they habitually pass. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> make a place into a <tr>lair</tr>.

<p><form>*unuk-unuk</form> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; bc]</itype> keep silent and <tr>idle</tr>. <i>Dílì giyud mahuman nang ímung trabáhu kay imu man lang nang gipaunuk-unukan,</i> You'll never get done with your work if you just remain idle with it. <i>Ipaunuk-unuk lang nang ímung labad sa úlu. Maáyu ra lagi nà,</i> Just <tr>take it easy</tr> with your headache and you will get better.

<p><form>unuk-únuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b5]</itype> <tr>beset</tr>, bother persistently at a particularly inconvenient time. <i>Naatrasáwu na man gánì ku sa upisína, miunuk-únuk sab ning ulan pagbundak,</i> I am already late to the office as it is, and here the rain is tying me up. <i>Gipapha siyas trabáhu ug giunuk-únuk pag sakit,</i> He was fired from his job, and that is when he had to get <pb n=1103>sick of all times. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> characterized with annoying persistence.

<p><form>unum</form> <ix>numeral</ix> <tr>six</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>TULU</sc>.</xr> <form>kan-uman</form> <tr>sixty</tr>.

<p><form>-unun</form> suffix forming nouns similar in meaning to the direct passives. <number>1</number> <ix>added to bases which occur with direct passive verbal affixes:</ix> the thing to be [so-and-so]-ed, that is [so-and-so]-ed. <i>Ang pangasaw-unun,</i> The bride-to-be. <i>Mahal ang mga palitúnun run,</i> Things are expensive these days. <i>Kan-unun,</i> Things to eat. <number>2</number> added to roots which do not normally take the direct passive. <i>Labhunun,</i> Things to be washed. <i>May hatagunun pa diay ku nímu,</i> Oh, I still have s.t. to give you.

<p><form>un-un<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> meat or fish stewed in vinegar. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> cook meat or fish in vinegar. <form>-in-, -in-an</form> <xr>= <sc>UN-UN<sub>1</sub></sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>un-un<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b8]</itype> <number>1</number> for solids to settle, but not in a liquid. <i>Muun-un ang harína ug maúyug ang sudlanan,</i> The flour will settle if you shake the container. <i>Nagkaun-un ang túri kay húmuk ang yútang gitukúran,</i> The tower is sinking because it is built on soft ground. <number>2</number> for s.t. in the body to move downward. <i>Ug magmabdus, dílì mangalsag bug-at kay muun-un ang bátà,</i> A pregnant woman shouldn't lift heavy things because the baby will descend. <pos>n</pos> fine particles of milled or pounded rice, buri, or cassava flour.

<p><form>un-ún<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>shrub</tr> of waste spaces producing a dark red, juicy, edible, berry, about 1 cm. in diameter and furnishing firewood.

<p><form>un-ún<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>UN-UN<sub>2</sub></sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>únung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC2; b6(1)]</itype> stick to s.o. loyally, through thick and thin. <i>Muúnung ku nímu sa mga kalisdánan ug kaharúhay,</i> I'll stick to you through thick and thin. <i>Akù siyang giunúngan pagbilar,</i> I stuck the wake out with him. <number>2</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> involve or <tr>implicate</tr> s.o. in a misdeed. <i>Iúnung ku níya sa íyang mga salà,</i> He wants to implicate me in his offenses. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> stay with s.o. to take care of him. <i>Muúnung kus mga bátà samtang nag-iskuyla sa syudad,</i> I am going to the city to set up house for the children while they attend school there. <number>4</number> <itype>[b5]</itype> die with a fetus in the womb or in giving birth. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fetus in the womb of a mother or animal that died. <number>2</number> mother or animal that died while pregnant. <i>Nadiskubrihan námung únung diay ang giíhaw,</i> We discovered that the animal we slaughtered was pregnant. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>ÚNUNG</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <tr>mind</tr> what s.o. says or does. <i>Dì ku mag-unung sa kasábà ni Nánay kay ági man lang nà,</i> I don't mind Mother's scolding because it won't last. <i>Kamu ray alkansi ug ungnun ninyu ang mga tabìtábì,</i> You only hurt yourselves if you mind idle talk. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>UNUNG</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr> <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> devotedly sticking to s.o. through thick and thin.

<p><form>unur</form> <pos>n</pos> one's <tr>honor</tr>, <tr>reputation</tr>. <i>Unur sa pamilya,</i> The honor of the family.

<p><form>únur</form> <xr>= <sc>ÁNUR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>unurabli</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>honorable</tr>, <tr>decent</tr>. <i>Unurabling pagkatáwu. Mutúman giyug sáad,</i> An honorable man that keeps his word.<i> Pangítà ug trabáhu nga bísag gamay rag swildu basta unurabli,</i> Look for a job, even if it does not pay well, as long as it is decent.

<p><form>unurári</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>honorary title</tr>. <i>Si Míyur Búris gihímung unurári upisyal sa intirskulastik mit,</i> Mayor Borres was made the <tr>honorary officer</tr> for the interscholastic meet. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; c1]</itype> be conferred an honorary title.

<p><form>unuraryu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>honorarium</tr>.

<p><form>unus</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>squall</tr>, sudden burst of heavy wind. <form>&mdash; sa kinabúhì</form> rigors of life. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a4b4]</itype> for there to be a strong gust of wind. <i>Nag-unus nang dáan paglarga sa barkung natundag,</i> There were already <tr>squalls</tr> when the boat that sank left the harbor. <i>Giunus (giunusan) mi sa taliwálà sa lawud,</i> We were caught by a squall in the middle of the sea.

<p><form>únus</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>TRIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>unus-únus</form> <pos>a</pos> done <tr>alternately</tr>, not together. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do <tr>one after another</tr>. <i>Mag-unus-únus tag ihid,</i> Let's sneak out <tr>one at a time</tr>.

<p><form>unut</form> <xr>= <sc>NUNUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>únut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C2]</itype> for people or animals of the opposite sex to engage in horseplay with sexual overtones. <i>Ang irù nga mangúwag kanúnayng mag-únut,</i> Dogs in heat are constantly engaging in horseplay. <number>2</number> <itype>[C]</itype> for two women to claw at each other and pull each other's hair. <i>Nagkaúnut ang duha ka babáyi tungud sa pangabubhu,</i> The two women are clawing each other because of jealousy.

<p><form>unyà</form> <ix>short forms:</ix> <bx>unyà, nyà</bx>. <number>1</number> at a <tr>later</tr> time. <i>Mukáun ku unyà,</i> I will eat later. <i>Unyà ra nà nákù buhátun,</i> I will do it later. <form>&mdash; nga</form> [word referring to time] this [day, month, etc.] coming up. <i>Unyang hápun,</i> This afternoon (coming). <i>Unyang alas dus,</i> At two o'clock (this coming afternoon). <form>&mdash; sa <r>[day of week, month, year]</r></form> next [so-and-so]. <i>Unyà sa Martis,</i> Next Tuesday. <i>Unyà sa sunud túig,</i> Next year. <number>1a</number> <formx>matag karun ug &mdash;</formx> <tr>every now and then</tr>. <i>Matag karun ug unyà mulìlì siya sa bintánà,</i> He gets up every <tr>now and then</tr> to take a peep out of the window. <number>2</number> <tr>furthermore</tr>, in addition. <i>Dúm kaáyu tu, unyà way búwang nakítà,</i> It was very dark. And the moon was not <pb n=1104>out. <number>2a</number> <tr>then</tr>, the next thing that happens, happened. <i>Mitan-aw siya nákù, unyà midágan,</i> He looked at me, then he ran. <number>2b</number> <tr>also</tr>, the next thing in the conversation. <i>Namisíta mi nímu. Unyà baligyáan ka námù ug tíkit sa bayli,</i> We came to visit you. And also we would like to sell you a ticket to the dance. <number>2c</number> <tr>so</tr>? (urging speaker to continue). <i>Unyà, naunsa na man tung amahan?</i> So, what became of the father? <number>2d</number> <tr>nevertheless</tr>. <i>Gidid-an siya sa dukt&ucaron;r. Unyà, muinum siya gihápun,</i> The doctor forbade him to drink. But nevertheless he still drinks anyway. <number>3</number> <ix>particle giving a warning:</ix> <tr>lest</tr>. <i>Hílak nyà arun latiguhun ka nákù,</i> Cry and I will whip you. <number>4</number> <formx><r>[<i>verb base, noun, adj.</i>]</r> &mdash;</formx> it is [so-and-so], <tr>my foot</tr>. <i>Pangadyì unyà. Bisag mitan-awg sini,</i> He's attending prayers, my foot! He went to the show. <i>Bag-u unyà. Bísag sa tyimpu pa nang mampur,</i> New, my foot! It's older than the hills. <i>Báka unyà, bisag irù,</i> What do you mean beef? This is dog meat. <pos>n</pos> when you get to doing it (coitus) (humorous). <i>Kinahanglang mutúu ka sa ímung asáwa, kay ag unyà,</i> You have to do what your wife tells you because you are going to get you-know-what from her. <form>unyaunyà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>put off</tr> doing s.t. to a later time. <i>Dì ku muunyaunyà ug unsay isúgù nákù,</i> I won't put off what I am told to do.

<p><form>unyas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>plectrum</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>diamonds</tr> in playing cards (which resemble a plectrum). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> use or make a plectrum.

<p><form>unyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>union</tr> or <tr>organization</tr>. <i>Unyun sa pamúu,</i> <tr>Labor union</tr>. <pos>v</pos> 1 <itype>[C; c1]</itype> form a union. <i>Wà maunyun ang mga trabahadur,</i> The laborers were not united. <number>2</number> <itype>[C3; c]</itype> <tr>agree</tr>, <tr>be in accord</tr>. <i>Unyúnan na lang nátù ang íyang sugyut,</i> Let's agree to his suggestion. <i>Iunyun námù ang ámung mga búhat sa ámung gipamúlung,</i> We will act in <tr>accordance</tr> with what we said.

<p><form>unyur</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>*MARTS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>up<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>off work</tr>, not on duty. <i>Up na ku,</i> I'm <tr>off duty</tr> now. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B236; c1]</itype> be off duty. <i>Muup (maup) ku sa alas singku,</i> I'll be off at five o'clock.

<p><form>up<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> switch s.t. off, be switched off. <i>Kinsay nag-&ucaron;p sa bintiladur?</i> Who switched the electric fan off? <i>Awtumátik ning punúha. Muup (maup) ra nig íya,</i> This phonograph is automatic. It <tr>switches off</tr> by itself. <pos>a</pos> <tr>turned off</tr>.

<p><form>úpa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ANC23; b26]</itype> for fowl to serve. <i>Dì makaúpa ang ugis kay daug sa usa,</i> The white cock cannot cover because it is afraid of the other one. <form>inupáhan</form> <pos>n</pos> the chick that results from a particular mating. <i>King mga pisúa inupáhan ni sa ugis,</i> These chicks are the offspring of the white cock.

<p><form>úpà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> chew food for s.o. else, esp. for a child to eat. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> spit s.t. out. <i>Giupáan ku sa núkus sa íyang átà,</i> The squid squirted its ink out at me. <i>Akung giúpà ang midisína kay pait kaáyu,</i> I spat out the medicine because it was very bitter. <pos>n</pos> pulp left after sucking the juice of s.t. chewed. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> chewed food for s.o. else to eat.

<p><form>upak</form> <pos>n</pos> a piece or part of s.t. in cake or bar form. <i>Usa ka upak kámay,</i> A cake of sugar. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; a1]</itype> cut s.t. into bars or pieces; get broken. <i>Upaka únà ang mahariyal únà ibaligyà,</i> Cut the candy into cakes before you sell it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> break or cut off a piece for s.o. <i>Giupakan nákù siyag duha ka báhin sa tsukulit,</i> I broke off two pieces of the chocolate bar for him.

<p><form>úpak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bark</tr> of trees. <i>Ang úpak maáyung isugnud,</i> Bark of trees make good fuel. <i>Usa ka úpak tungug,</i> A strip of mangrove bark. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> gather, take the bark off of trees. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB2; a2]</itype> <tr>peel</tr> off, get peeled off. <i>Ínit sa adlaw ang nakaúpak sa íyang pánit,</i> His skin peeled in the heat of the sun. <i>Nagkaupak ang hapin sa diksiyunaryu,</i> The cover of the dictionary is working its way off.

<p><form>úpal</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. soft, fine-weave cloth.

<p><form>upas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> lose flavor from being left uncovered. <i>Muupas (maupas) ang sigarilyu ug byáan nga abyirtu,</i> The cigarettes lose their flavor if you leave them around open. <number>2</number> lose fertility. <i>Muupas ang yútà ug dílì abunúhan,</i> The land will lose its fertility if you don't fertilize it. <pos>a</pos> lacking in flavor or potency.

<p><form>úpas</form> <pos>n</pos> banana leaf stalk.

<p><form>upat</form> <ix>numeral</ix> <tr>four</tr>. <i>Upat ka buuk bátà,</i> Four children. <pos>v</pos> <xr>see <sc>TULU</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; ug (ang) mata</form> <pos>a</pos> having glasses (four-eyed) (humorous). <form>&mdash; ang tiil</form> for a wife to have clandestine relations with another man (humorous). <i>Inig talikud sa bána sa trabáhu, upat dáyuy tiil sa asáwa,</i> When the husband leaves for work his wife meets her lover (lit. gets four legs). <form>ika-</form> <tr>fourth</tr>. <form>kap-atan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>forty</tr>. <form>maka-, ka-</form> <tr>four times</tr>. <form>tag-, tagup-at</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> four apiece. <number>2</number> odds of four to three in betting. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC2; c]</itype> give four to three odds in betting. <i>Gitagupátan ang ámung manuk,</i> Our cock was given odds of four to three. <form>tinagup-at</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> do by fours.

<p><form>upaup</form> <xr>= &dagger;<sc>ALUPAUP</sc>.</xr> <xr>see <sc>ÁLUP</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p><form>upaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bald</tr>, lacking hair on the head. <number>2</number> bald, devoid of vegetation. <i>Upaw nga mga búkid,</i> <tr>Deforested</tr> mountains. <number>3</number> <tr>infertile</tr>. <pb n=1105><i>Upaw nang dáan ang yútà sa Marigundun,</i> The land in Marigondon has always been infertile. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> grow bald. <i>Naupaw ka sa hilabihang pininsar,</i> You have grown bald from worrying too much. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> be, become denuded of forest. <number>3</number> become <tr>barren</tr>, infertile. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make s.o. bald or s.t. barren. <i>Giupáwan ku siya kay gikutu,</i> I cut off her hair bald because she had lice. <form>bísan pag mangaúpaw</form> <tr>come what may</tr>, <tr>by hook or by crook</tr> (lit. even if I go bald trying). <i>Bísan pag mangaúpaw magdátù giyud ku ug mag-idad kug kwarinta,</i> By hook or by crook I'll become rich by the time I'm forty.

<p><form>upaw<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> block a shot in basketball. <i>Luksu inigsiyát arun dì ka upawan,</i> Jump when you shoot so that your shot won't be blocked. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> prove much better than s.t., putting it to shame. <i>I, bag-u ka mag kutsi. Upawan mag akúa,</i> My, you've got a new car! It puts mine to shame.

<p><form>upay, úpay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>heal</tr> a wound or sore. <i>Nagkaupay na ang ákung mga núka,</i> My scabies are healing. <number>2</number> <tr>relieve</tr> emotionally. <i>Ang ímung mga tambag mauy nakaupay (nakapaupay) sa ákung mga kaguul,</i> Your advice has relieved my worries. <form>ka-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>relief</tr>, <tr>healing</tr>. <form>ka-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> healing as a resultant state. <i>Walay kaupayun sa ákung mga kagul-ánan,</i> There is no relief for my sorrows. <pos>a</pos> at the verge of being healed.

<p><form>up bit</form> <pos>n</pos> off-beat, k.o. fast <tr>dance</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do the off-beat.

<p><form>uphag</form> a <number>1</number> <tr>uninteresting</tr>. <i>Nagpanghuy-ab ku nga nagtan-aw sa uphag kaáyu nga sini,</i> I was yawning looking at the <tr>boring</tr> movie. <number>2</number> having a dry, not cared-for look. <i>Uphag kaáyu ang ákung buhuk kay way hisù,</i> My hair looks <tr>drab</tr> and not groomed because I didn't put oil in it. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B156]</itype> be uninteresting. <i>Wà nay manan-aw sa dráma nga nag-uphag,</i> Nobody likes to see a stage play that is boring. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become drab and not well-groomed.

<p><form>uphak</form> <xr>= <sc>HUP-AK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>úpin</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>open</tr>, <tr>frank</tr>. <i>Amígung úpin kaáyu nga dílì maúlawng mutug-ans íyang kagíkan,</i> A very open person who doesn't feel embarrassed telling about his origins. <number>2</number> <tr>outspoken</tr>. <i>Úpin kaáyu siyang musaway sa administrasiyun,</i> He is very open in his criticisms of the administration. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>KLÚS</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; kard</form> <xr>= <sc>TINDÍDA</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>TIND&Icaron;R</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>upiniyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>opinion</tr>, <tr>judgment</tr>. <i>Pamináwun ta ang upiniyun sa usag-usa,</i> Let's listen to each person's opinion.

<p><form>úpin tsik</form> <pos>n</pos> in chess, a situation where one's king or queen is open to checkmate.

<p><form>upira<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> perform an operation. <i>Upirahan ta ang ímung hubag,</i> We'll have to <tr>operate</tr> your boil. <form>-siyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>operation</tr>.

<p><form>upira<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>opera</tr>. <form>-tik(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> having an <tr>operatic</tr> quality, with plenty of tremolo (humorous).

<p><form>upirarya</form> <pos>n</pos> a dressmaker's helper who usually does the finishing touches, e.g. sewing on buttons. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> work as a dressmaker's helper.

<p><form>upiraryu</form> <pos>n</pos> a barber or tailor who works in s.o. else's shop on a piecework basis. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; c1]</itype> be, become an employee of this sort. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> work as a barber or tailor in s.o. else's shop.

<p><form>upirisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>operation</tr> to achieve some object. <i>Upirisyun sa pagsíkup sa numiru únung huk,</i> Operation to capture the number one Huk. <number>2</number> surgical operation. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> for an industrial enterprise to be in operation.

<p><form>upirit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>operate</tr> a machine or device. <i>Dakug swildu ang makamaung muupirit ug buldúsir,</i> One who knows how to operate a bulldozer is highly paid. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>UPIRISYUN</sc>, <pos>v</pos>.</xr> <form>-ur(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> one who operates or takes charge of machinery. <i>Upirítur sa buldúsir,</i> Bulldozer <tr>operator</tr>. <number>2</number> one who owns a transportation line. <i>Upirítur sa Atlas taksi,</i> The owner of the Atlas taxi. <number>3</number> radio or telegraph operator. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> work as the operator of machinery. <number>2</number> be, become a radio or telegraph operator.

<p><form>upiríta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>operetta</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6c1]</itype> have or stage an operetta.

<p><form>upirturyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>offertory</tr> in the mass. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> say the offertory.

<p><form>úpis</form> <xr>= <sc>LÚPIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>upisína</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>office</tr>. <number>2</number> office, <tr>work day</tr>. <i>May upisína ba tas Lúnis?</i> Do we have office on Monday? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23; b(1)]</itype> go to the office, be in the office. <i>Muupisína ku ug píkas adlaw lang,</i> I'll be in the office only half day. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>hold office</tr>. <i>Mag-upisína ta maskig pista upisiyal,</i> We will hold office though it will be a holiday. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make an office s.w.

<p><form>upisir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>officer</tr> of an organization or in the armed forces. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; c1]</itype> be, become an officer.

<p><form>upisiyal</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>official</tr>, a person holding an office or position of authority. <i>Upisiyal sa militar,</i> Military officer. <number>1a</number> any of the chess pieces other than the pawns. <number>2</number> official, coming from the proper authority. <form>pista &mdash;</form> <tr>public holiday</tr>, officially declared. <form>kandidátu &mdash;</form> <tr>official candidate</tr> endorsed by the party. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B16; c1]</itype> be, become, make into an official. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; b6c1]</itype> be, become official. <i>Maupisyal na gánì ang ímung apuwintmint,</i> <pb n=1106>Once your appointment becomes official. <form>-is(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>UPISIYAL</sc>, <i>n1</i> (plural).</xr>

<p><form>upisiyun</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>UPISYU</sc>, <i>n1 2.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>APISIYUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>upisyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>occupation</tr>. <i>Wà kuy láing upisyu run, panahì ra,</i> I have no other job other than sewing at this time. <number>2</number> s.t. to keep oneself busy with. <i>Wà ka bay láing upisyu gawas sa pagpamantay?</i> Don't you have anything better to do than nose into other people's business? <number>3</number> religious office, set of prayers one has vowed to recite. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> make s.t. one's line of work. <number>2</number> occupy oneself with. <number>2a</number> always do. <i>Nag-upisyu lang kug trabáhu. Wà na giyuy lingawlíngaw,</i> All I do is work. I never have fun.

<p><form>upluk</form> a <number>1</number> lacking in ability, not up to what would normally be expected of one. <i>Upluk kaáyu sa klási,</i> Very slow to understand in class. <i>Upluk duktúra,</i> A <tr>half-baked</tr> doctor. <number>1a</number> <tr>foolish</tr>, <tr>stupid</tr>. <number>2</number> fond of playing tricks, pranking with a straight face. <i>Upluk kaáyu siya ug dì ka pahiulian sa íyang tistis,</i> He is very fond of playing jokes with a straight face, and he never lets on that he has played a joke. <number>3</number> fond of asking for things, but not willing to give when one has s.t. and is asked. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become half-baked, <tr>dull</tr>, or <tr>stupid</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b5]</itype> <tr>cheat</tr> s.o. out of s.t. by hoodwinking him. <i>Uplúka (uplúki) lang sa kwarta apan ayawg pangasaw-a,</i> Just cheat her out of her money. Don't marry her.

<p><form>uprisar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> offer for sale. <i>Dúnay nag-uprisar ug sáma niíni nga barátu ra,</i> Somebody offered s.t. like this for sale cheaper. <i>Giuprisar ang ílang balay ug yútà,</i> They put their house and lot up for sale.

<p><form>uprisir</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>offer</tr>. <i>Dì ku muuprisir nímu ug pagkáun nga dì maáyung pagkalútù,</i> I won't offer you food that is not well cooked. <i>Giuprisihan ku níyag trabáhu,</i> He offered me a job. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; a]</itype> <tr>force</tr>, <tr>compel</tr> s.o. to do s.t. <i>Kawad-un ang nakauprisir (nakapauprisir) níya pagpangútang,</i> Poverty forced him to take things on credit. <i>Uprisira siya pagpabáyad,</i> Force him to pay.

<p><form>ups</form> expression uttered on exerting great effort, esp. in lifting weight.

<p><form>uptikal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>optical store</tr>.

<p><form>uptiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>optometrist</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>optician</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> be, become an optometrist or optician. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> take up optometry.

<p><form>úpu</form> <xr>= <sc>KALABÁSANG PUTÌ</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>KALABÁSÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>upù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>duck</tr>, <tr>dodge</tr> to avoid a blow or hide. <i>Ug wà siya makaupù maigù giyud ang íyang náwung,</i> Had he not dodged, he would have gotten it in the face. <i>Wà níya iupù ang íyang úlu mau nga napangkà,</i> He did not lower his head so he bumped it.

<p><form>upud</form> <ix>as a predicate modifier:</ix> <xr>= <sc>USAB</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> go, <tr>bring with</tr>. <i>Nag-úpud sila sa sini,</i> They went to the movies together. <i>Unsa pa may updun mu?</i> What are you going with me for? <i>Giupdan ku siya sa pagsúgat sa barku,</i> I <tr>accompanied</tr> her to meet the boat. <i>Iupud nà siya ninyu panúruy,</i> Take him with you when you go out. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do s.t. <tr>again</tr>, <tr>repeat</tr> doing s.t. <i>Dúna giyuy nag-upud sa ákung búhat unyà nasayup ra ba hinúun,</i> S.o. did my work again, and has spoiled it instead. <i>Dì maáyuug updun (iupud) nang buháta,</i> Don't repeat what you did. <pos>n</pos> <tr>companion</tr>. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>UPUD</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>upung</form> <pos>n</pos> bunch of stems or stalks, enough to grasp in the two hands. <i>Pila ka upung ang ímung naáni?</i> How many bunches have you harvested? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> get a bunch of stalks, put in a bunch. <i>Upunga ang humay,</i> Tie the rice into bunches. <form>-in-, upung-upung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> be all one of the same height. <number>1</number> for children to be so close they are almost of the same height. <i>Mag-upung-upung (mag-inupung) ang inyung anak ug dílì mu magkuntrul,</i> Your children will be so close they'll be almost the same height if you don't practice birth control. <number>2</number> for a crowd to be so great one can't distinguish the different heights. <i>Nag-inupung ang mga táwu sa plása,</i> There was a sea of people in the plaza.

<p><form>upunir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>oppose</tr>, contend forcefully against. <i>Nag-upunir gihápun sila sa ímung paági kay walà sila kagustu,</i> They are still opposing your procedure because they don't like it. <i>Ayaw ug upunihi ang ákung risulusiyun,</i> Don't oppose my resolution.

<p><form>up-up</form> <xr>= <sc>ALUP-UP</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ÁLUP</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p><form>upurtunista</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>opportunistic</tr>. <i>Upurtunista kaáyung tawhána, mubalhinbalhin ug partídu,</i> You are an <tr>opportunist</tr>, changing parties whenever it suits your purpose. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become opportunistic.

<p><form>upus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. long used up until only a <tr>stub</tr> is left. <i>Upus sa kandílà,</i> <tr>Stump</tr> of a candle. <number>2</number> cigarette or cigar stub. <i>Nagpatákà lag butang sa íyang upus,</i> She just puts her cigar stub anywhere. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> wear s.t. down. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> for one's years or patience to be used up. <i>Naupus na ang ákung paílub,</i> My patience has come to an end. <i>Nagkaupus na ang íyang kinabúhì,</i> His life is slowly coming to an end.

<p><form>upusisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>opposition</tr>, <tr>resistance</tr>. <i>Way upusisiyun kanang balaúra,</i> There is no opposition to that bill. <number>2</number> <tr>opposition party</tr> in Congress. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be in, join the opposition.

<pb n=1107>

<p><form>upuy-upuy, upuy-úpuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P]</itype> behave meekly or timidly before s.o., usually from fear or lack of self-confidence. <i>Miupuy-upuy pagsulud ang suluguun sa lawak sa íyang agálun,</i> The maid entered her master's room timidly. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> keep to oneself. <i>Nagpaupuy-upuy lang siyas suuk ug wà muapil sa kukabildu,</i> He kept to himself in the corner and did not participate in the conversation.

<p><form>upyu</form> <xr>= <sc>AMPIYUN<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>urabang</form> <xr>= <sc>UYABANG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>uradur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>orator</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a2]</itype> be, become an orator.

<p><form>urakan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hurricane</tr>, name reserved for strong typhoons. <i>Ang urakan sa 1912,</i> The Great Hurricane of 1912.

<p><form>urakulu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>oracle</tr>, <tr>prophet</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>prophecy</tr>. <i>Nagnúud ang urakulu,</i> The prophecy came true.

<p><form>úral</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>oral</tr>. <i>Púru úral ang ámung iksámin,</i> We had all oral exams. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> communicate orally. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> eat alone without anything to go with it (humorous). <i>Maáyung klásis kan-un, maúral,</i> A good variety of rice that is good even if eaten all by itself. <i>Urálun ta na lang ning sinugbang isdà kay walà na may kan-un,</i> Let's just eat the broiled fish alone because there's no more rice. <number>2</number> do s.t. relying on one's memory or knowledge without any other aid. <i>Bilib ku nímug makaúral kag úlì niíning makináha,</i> I would really be impressed if you could put the machine together without referring to the manual. <number>3</number> eat with the bare hands s.t. that should be eaten with silverware. <i>Urála na lang nà ninyung pagkáun kay kápuy ipanghúgas unyà,</i> Just eat with your fingers to save washing the silverware.

<p><form>uran</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put s.t. on for daily wear. <i>Nag-uran kug dáan kay mamanday ku,</i> I am wearing old clothes because I'll do some carpentry work. <pos>n</pos> s.t. worn casually. <i>Ang sinínà níyas balay mau puy uran sa uma,</i> The clothes he wears around the house is what he wears in the fields. <form>uran-úran</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; c6]</itype> <number>1</number> wear s.t. in a casual way. <number>2</number> use s.t. in a situation it is too good for. <i>Anúgun sa ímung dagway nga giuran-úran nímug suruyg isdà,</i> You have a lovely face. What a pity to waste it on peddling fish! <form>ig-l-/r-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> clothes usually worn for a certain job.

<p><form>urang-utan, urang-utang</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>orang-utan</tr>.

<p><form>uran-uran</form> <tr>for some time</tr>; <tr>for quite a time</tr>. <i>Uran-uran giyud námung paábut nímu,</i> We have been waiting for you for some time.

<p><form>úra pru núbis</form> <ix>phrase of the litany:</ix> pray for us.

<p><form>uráray</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> be situated in a low place or elevation. <i>Lungsud nga nag-uráray sa tiilans búkid,</i> A town nestled at the foot of a mountain. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> draw oneself close to, <tr>snuggle</tr> close to. <i>Mipauráray siya sa ákung buktun úsà matúlug,</i> He <tr>nestled</tr> in my arms before going to sleep.

<p><form>uraryu</form> <pos>n</pos> hand of a clock or watch. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> attach the hands of a clock or watch.

<p><form>úras</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>hour</tr>. <i>Pila ka úras ang byáhi?</i> How many hours does the trip take? <number>2</number> <tr>time of day</tr>. <i>Unsay úras?</i> What <tr>time</tr> is it? <i>Unsang urása siyang miabut,</i> What time did he arrive? <number>3</number> time that s.t. is done. <i>Alas utsu ang úras sa ámung panihápun,</i> Our supper time is at eight o'clock. <number>3a</number> time that s.t. inevitable will finally happen. <i>Haduul na ang úras sa masakitun,</i> The sick man's hour is close at hand. <i>Úras na tingáli nímu kay nagsakit man ang ímung tiyan,</i> It must be the time now (for you to have your baby) because your stomach hurts. <number>3b</number> point at which s.t. happened. <i>Nag-uwan sa úras sa ílang pag-abut,</i> It was raining at the time of their arrival. <i>Way mitábang nákù sa úras sa ákung kalisud,</i> No one helped me when I was in trouble. <number>3c</number> <form>dì &mdash;</form> for s.t. to happen at an unsuitable time. <i>Tingálig manganak ka ug dì úras ning ímung pagkahúlug,</i> You'll probably give birth prematurely because you fell. <number>4</number> a period or time available for doing s.t. <i>Wà kuy úras nga itan-aw ug sini,</i> I don't have time to go to movies. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>time</tr>, mark the time. <i>Akuy muúras sa íyang pag-abut,</i> I'll mark down the time of his arrival. <number>2</number> <itype>[B256; b(1)]</itype> be an hour, <tr>take an hour</tr>. <i>Giurásan ang ákung pagtrabáhu sa ímung kálù,</i> It took me one hour to make your hat. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>clock</tr>, <tr>watch</tr>. <form>-in-</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>by the hour</tr>. <i>Inuras ang ímung trabáhu,</i> You work by the hour.

<p><form>urasanta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Holy Hour devotion</tr>, a one-hour devotion offered to the Sacred Heart of Jesus led by a priest and said once a month in church. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> offer a Holy Hour devotion. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> attend or offer a Holy Hour devotion.

<p><form>urasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> special set prayers in the liturgy. <number>1a</number> a magical formula in Latin or pseudo-Latin which has curative or other magical powers, esp. as <i>sumpà.</i> It is applied by reciting or by putting written representations on or near whatever it is supposed to affect. The <ix>urasiyun</ix> is effective only in the hands of the owner. <number>2</number> the <tr>angelus prayer</tr> said by the family in the evening, and sometimes at dawn. <number>3</number> <tr>twilight</tr> (lit. the time when the angelus is said). <number>3a</number> the bell announcing the <pb n=1108>angelus. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> pray the <ix>urasiyun</ix> in the liturgy or the angelus. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> treat with a magic formula. <i>Giurasiyunan níya ang irù. Wà kapaghut,</i> He uttered a magical formula at the dog and it couldn't bark. <number>3</number> <itype>[B1256; b4]</itype> for evening to fall. <i>Naurasiyun na lang. Walà pa giyud muabut ang gisúgù,</i> It got to be evening and the boy we sent on an errand still hadn't arrived. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> one who possesses an <ix>urasiyun</ix>, <i>1a.</i>

<p><form>uray<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. sickness of supernatural origin which causes women to abort, giving birth to an octopus or other sea creature (actually a misshapen fetus). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12SP; b4]</itype> become the victim of <ix>uray</ix>. <i>Malagmit urayan ka ug pakabuntagan nímu ang ímung panti,</i> You're likely to become a victim of <ix>uray</ix> if you don't take your panties in<note>on?</note>.

<p><form>uray<sub>2</sub>, úray</form> title of respect for a related woman older than the speaker, esp. an elder sister, aunt, or cousin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> address s.o. <ix>úray</ix>.

<p><form>urbanidad</form> <form>way &mdash;</form> <tr>unrefined</tr>, unversed in urban ways. <i>Way urbanidad. Dì ka kamaung mangáyug katahúran,</i> You are a boor. You don't know to greet people.

<p><form>urbanisar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become <tr>civilized</tr>, <tr>polished</tr> in one's ways. <i>Ang mga tulunghaan makaurbanisar (makapaurbanisar) sa táwu,</i> Schools teach people refinement and civilization.

<p><form>urdín</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>religious order</tr>.

<p><form>urdin</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>order</tr> given by a higher authority. <i>Kinahanglan buhátun mu karun dáyun. Urdin kanà,</i> You must do it immediately. That's an order. <number>2</number> order, <tr>command</tr>. <i>Urdin diaristu,</i> <tr>Warrant of arrest</tr>. <i>Urdin sa pagpangusísa,</i> <tr>Search warrant</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> issue an order. <number>2</number> command s.o. to do s.t. <form>-ansa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ordinance</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> enact into an ordinance. <form>urdinansahun</form> <pos>n</pos> things to be made into an ordinance.

<p><form>urdinar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b26]</itype> <tr>ordain</tr> into priesthood. <form>urdinasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ordination</tr>.

<p><form>urdinaryu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>ordinary</tr>, not especial. <i>Urdinaryu kaáyu ang ílang mga butang sa báy,</i> They just have ordinary things in their house. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> use s.t. that should be special for ordinary wear. <i>Dì ku muurdinaryu ug mahalun nga sinínà,</i> I won't use expensive clothes for ordinary wear. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become ordinary. <i>Sa nadúgay na, naurdinaryu na lang ang taas nga buhuk,</i> After some time it became an ordinary thing to have long hair.

<p><form>urdir</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>command</tr>, give an order. <i>Kinsay nag-urdir ninyu sa pag-atras?</i> Who commanded you to retreat? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> order s.t. in a restaurant or cafe, <i>Unsa may inyung urdírun?</i> What will you <tr>order</tr>? <pos>n</pos> 1 <tr>order</tr>, <tr>command</tr>. <number>2</number> item ordered in a restaurant or cafe. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> buy by mail order. <i>Magpaurdir ku ug bisiklíta pára nímu,</i> I will buy you a bicycle by mail order. <form>máni &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>money order</tr> or <tr>telegraphic transfer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> send a money order or telegraphic transfer. <form>mid tu &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>made-to-order</tr>.

<p><form>urgan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>electric organ</tr>, of the kind used by combos. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> play the electric organ.

<p><form>urgandi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>organdy</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> wear, make into organdy cloth.

<p><form>urganisar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>organize</tr>, bring s.t. into being. <i>Nag-urganisar pa siya sa Lihiyun ni Maríya,</i> She is organizing a Legion of Mary unit. <form>urganisasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>organization</tr>.

<p><form>urganista</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>URGANU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>urgansa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>embossed cloth</tr>.

<p><form>urganu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>organ</tr>, a large musical instrument. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b(1)]</itype> have, be accompanied by an organ. <form>urganista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>organist</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> be, become an organist.

<p><form>urhinti</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>urgent</tr>, calling for immediate attention. <i>Urhinti ba kaáyu ang túyù mu kaníya?</i> Do you have a very urgent purpose in visiting her?

<p><form>urig</form> <pos>n</pos> intense <tr>sexual desire</tr> of a person or an animal, esp. women (euphemism for <ix>ulag</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be in a highly-sexed mood. <i>Nagkaurig na nang bayhána human makasuway,</i> That woman became <tr>lustful</tr> after she had experienced sex once.

<p><form>urihinal</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>original</tr>, <tr>first copy</tr> of several struck at the same time. <i>Ang urihinal nga kupya mauy ímung tagúan,</i> You keep the original copy for yourself. <number>2</number> an original of a work of art. <number>3</number> <tr>script</tr>, copy of one's lines in a drama.

<p><form>*urímaw</form> (colloquial) <form>paN-</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>URÍMUS</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>PANGURÍMUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>urímus</form> word used in the novena asking the congregation to pray the final prayer. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> say the concluding prayer. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256N]</itype> be <tr>done in</tr>, <tr>killed</tr> (get so people will be saying <i>'urímus'</i> for one). <i>Ug matumbahan kas káhuy maurímus ka,</i> If that tree falls on you, you will be <tr>done for</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> do oneself irreparable harm which sometimes results in death. <i>Hala, ínum arun mangurímus ka,</i> Go ahead, drink, so you can do yourself in.

<p><form>úrins</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>orange</tr> fruit or tree. <number>2</number> orange in color. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B125]</itype> become orange in color. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear s.t. orange in color. <form>&mdash; dyús</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>orange juice</tr>.

<p><form>urinúla</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chamber pot</tr> or <tr>bedpan</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> use a chamber pot.

<pb n=1109>

<p><form>urit</form> <xr>= <sc>HALA</sc>.</xr> <i>Urit! Adtu na mi,</i> <tr>All right</tr>! We are going now. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>cease</tr> doing s.t. and <tr>call it a day</tr>. <i>Muurit kug sayu kay nagláin ang ákung láwas,</i> I think I'll call it a day as I'm not feeling well.

<p><form>urkid</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>orchid</tr>. <form>maripúsa &mdash;</form> butterfly orchid: <bio>Phalaenopsis amabilis</bio>. <form>taygir &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> variety of orchid with spotted leaves and petals. <form>&mdash; tri</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>orchid tree</tr>, ornamental tree, the flowers of which resemble orchids. Various species have various colors: <bio>Bauhinia spp</bio>. <form>walingwaling &mdash;</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>WALINGWALING</sc>.</xr> <form>wayitdab &mdash;</form> white dove orchid: <bio>Dendrobium crumenatum</bio>.

<p><form>urkilyas</form> <xr>= <sc>TRINSAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>urkista, urkistra</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>orchestra</tr>, the main floor of a movie house. <number>2</number> a group of musicians usually playing string instruments.

<p><form>urkiyu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>honest-to-goodness</tr>, <tr>genuine</tr>. <i>Ang urkiyu nga sugarul dílì mupusta ug sinintabus,</i> An honest-to-goodness gambler does not bet nickles and dimes. <i>Kining kapíha urkiyu, dílì puyay,</i> This is genuine coffee not ersatz.

<p><form>urlun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>orlon</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> wear orlon.

<p><form>urna</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>glass case</tr> where a religious image or s.t. precious is kept. <number>2</number> <tr>ballot box</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> place or encase s.t. of religious importance in a glass case.

<p><form>ursa</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for dough to rise. <number>2</number> <itype>[A123P; b4]</itype> for a disease that breaks out in s.t. to come out. <i>Ang tubà makaursa (makapaursa) sa dálap,</i> Palm toddy can make measles appear and hasten development. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> do s.t. with a great amount of force. <i>Iursa ang inyung tanang kusug arun nà ninyu maalsa,</i> Exert all your strength so you can lift that up. <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>leaven</tr>. <i>Tubà usáhay ang paursa sa bingka,</i> Palm toddy is sometimes used to make the rice cake rise. <number>2</number> medicine used to make a disease appear and hasten development.

<p><form>*urti</form> <form>walay &mdash;</form> without restraint, without stopping. <i>Way urti ang hukasay ning salídang bumba,</i> This dirty movie has love scenes without end. <i>Ayawg panagána. Way urti ang káun dinhi,</i> Don't hesitate. No one holds back on their food around here. <form>urtiurti walay &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>WALAY URTI</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> do s.t. with restraint (usually in negative sentences).

<p><form>urtikarya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hives</tr>. <i>Tambal kini sa sakit sa pánit ug sa urtikarya,</i> This is a treatment for skin diseases and hives. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a12]</itype> have an attack of hives.

<p><form>úru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gold</tr>. <form>&mdash;, pláta, mála</form> gold, silver, bad luck: a formula for determining whether a household will have good or bad luck. As one climbs the stairs the formula is recited one word for each step. If one reaches the top with <ix>úru</ix>, the house will have exceptionally good luck; with <ix>pláta</ix>, fairly good luck; with <ix>mála</ix>, bad luck. <form>&mdash; tsína</form> <tr>24-carat gold</tr>. <form>búda di-</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>BÚDA</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> cover teeth with gold capping. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> be in gold.

<p><form>urud</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>pregnant</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be, become pregnant.

<p><form>urug, úrug</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fashion</tr>, <tr>style</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> go into style, <tr>vogue</tr>. <i>Naúrug na run sa pagpalupad ug tabánug,</i> Kite-flying is the latest <tr>fad</tr>.

<p><form>urug-úrug</form> <xr>= <sc>ULUG-ÚLUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>úruk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> for a top to spin fast so as to stay exactly vertical. <i>Dì kaúruk ang kasing ug hínay ang túyuk,</i> A top is not immobile when it spins slow.

<p><form>úrul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> take all the hair or leaves off. <i>Akuy muúrul sa ímung buhuk,</i> I'll <tr>shave</tr> your hair. <i>Urúlun sa kanding ang mga dáhun sa tanum ug anhà nà nímu ihigut,</i> The goat will eat all the leaves of your plants if you tie it there.

<p><form>úrum</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>nightmare</tr>, dream where one is extremely frightened but cannot move or shout. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> have a nightmare. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> prone to having nightmares. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> get prone to having nightmares.

<p><form>úrung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2S6; c1]</itype> <tr>stop</tr>, cause one to do so. <i>Nag-urung ang puntírus rilu,</i> The watch hand is not moving. <i>Iúrung (urúngun) nákù ang ákung pagtabakù,</i> I'll <tr>quit</tr> smoking. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> be <tr>idle</tr>, <tr>unemployed</tr>. <i>Mag-úrung lang únà siya rung tuíga kay wà may bakanti pára sa maistra,</i> She will be <tr>out of work</tr> this year because there are no vacancies for teachers. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> suspend or dismiss from work. <i>Paurúngun kas trabáhu ug sad-an ka,</i> You will be dismissed from work if you are guilty. <form>urung-úrung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> do s.t. <tr>on and off</tr>.

<p><form>úrung<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>ÚRUM</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>Urúpa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Europe</tr>. <form>ilagà sa &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>guinea pig</tr>.

<p><form>úrus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S3P]</itype> <tr>sizzle</tr>. <i>Muúrus ang unud ug isugba sa káyu,</i> Meat sizzles if you broil it over fire. <number>2</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> sizzle with sexual urges. <i>Giurúsan nang bayúta kay nanghíkap,</i> This fairy is sizzling for sex again. He grabbed me. <pos>n</pos> sound of <tr>sizzling</tr>. <form>urus-urus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> be <tr>intense</tr>, as if sizzling. <i>Kapugngan pa ang bahà kay sa gugmang gaurus-urus,</i> It is easier to control a flood than a sizzling love.

<p><form>úrus<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> suit of the Spanish cards in the shape of a gold coin. <number>2</number> suit of circles in mahjong. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> draw an <ix>úrus</ix> card or mahjong piece.

<p><form>uruy</form> <number>1</number> particle with a statement that disabuses <pb n=1110>the interlocutor of his misconceptions, softening the blunting effect of the contradiction. <i>&lsquo;Wà pa mahuman ang trabáhu?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Human na uruy!&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;They didn't finish the work?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Yes, they did.&rsquo; <i>Búhì pa uruy siya,</i> He is still alive. (You believe he died, but he is still alive.) <number>2</number> expressing <tr>contempt</tr> for s.t. the interlocutor did. <i>Hilakhílak uruy, mau rag dílì siyay nakaingun áning tanang kasámuk,</i> Crying indeed! As if she were not the cause of all these troubles. <i>Gibaratúhan ka uruy ánà mu ra ug ikay mubáyad!</i> Oh indeed. You think it is cheap. Well, you can say that when you pay the bill. <number>3</number> <formx><r>[<ix>noun</ix>]</r>-a ba &mdash;</formx> what do you mean [noun], when all there is is ... <i>Bisitáha ba uruy, si Pidru ra diay,</i> What visitor! It is only Pedro. <number>4</number> <form>ngánu ba &mdash;</form> so what if ... <i>Ngánu ba uruy ug dílì siya muanhi. Dì magsakit ang ákung tiyan,</i> So what if he doesn't come. I'm not going to get a stomachache from it. <number>5</number> <form>ada &mdash;</form> particle expressing resignation to s.t. bad and indicating the speaker doesn't care. <i>Ada uruy. Mabúhì man gihápun ta áning trabahúa,</i> Oh, anyway, I can still make a living with this work (even though I might like to have s.t. better). <number>5a</number> expressing contempt in dismissing s.t. as inconsequential. <form>uruy-úruy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2; a3]</itype> be gentle with one another, instead of treating each other with the usual gruffness. <i>Mag-uruy-úruy ta kay wà na tay ginikánan,</i> Let us go easy on each other because we don't have parents any more. <i>Bisag bantúgan siya makig-uruy-úruy siya sa ingun nátù,</i> Though he is famous, he goes easy on people like us.

<p><form>*úruy</form> <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> liquor made by distilling the juice from the nipa or coconut palm bud.

<p><form>ús</form> <xr>= <sc>ULUS</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ULHUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>usa<sub>1</sub></form> <ix>numeral</ix> <tr>one</tr>. <number>1</number> <form>&mdash; ka a</form> one. <i>Sa usa ka púlung siyay nidaug,</i> In short, he won. <number>b</number> a certain (unnamed) one. <i>May usa ka hárì nga taas kaáyu ug búngut,</i> There was once a king who had a very long beard. <formx>&mdash; niánà ka <r>[<ix>word referring to time</ix>]</r></formx> one [time]. <i>Usa niánà ka adlaw, miadtu siya sa hárì,</i> One day, he went to the king. <number>2</number> <form>&mdash; nga</form> the other one of the two or more. <i>Anhi ka áning manúka pusta? Adtu kus usa,</i> Will you bet on this cock? I will bet on the other one. <i>Adtu líkù sa usang iskína,</i> Turn into the next corner. <number>2a</number> the other day, week, month, year that passed. <i>Dinhi siya sa usang adlaw,</i> He was here the other day. <number>3</number> <form>ísig (isig) &mdash;</form> each, each one. <i>Ísig (isig) usa ninyu mubáyad nákù ug singku písus,</i> Each (each one) of you will pay me five pesos. <number>4</number> <form>&mdash; ug &mdash;</form> each and every one. <i>Usag usa ninyu magdala sa íyang galamitun,</i> Each and every one of you must bring his own tools. <number>5a</number> <form>&mdash; usab, sad, upud</form> [so-and-so] is another one who will [do]. <i>Usa sad siya sa mungadtu,</i> He is also a member of the group going there. <number>5b</number> <form>&mdash; ka pa</form> you're another one who does [such-and-such a bad thing]. <i>Usa ka pang danghag,</i> You're another careless fellow. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> be, become <tr>resolved</tr> or <tr>decided</tr>. <i>Ug mausa pa untà ang ákung hunàhúnà pagbíyà kaníya!</i> If only I could make up my mind to leave her! <number>2</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> do s.t. with one hand where both hands are usually used. <i>Gaan ra ning aswátun, usaan ra nákù ni,</i> This is easy to pick up. I'll do it with one hand. <i>Sumbagay ta, usaan ta ka,</i> Let's have a fight. I'll beat you with one hand. <number>3</number> <form>walay ma-</form> <tr>no one</tr>, not a single soul. <i>Walay mausang mitábang kanákù,</i> Not a single person helped me. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C; a12]</itype> group things together in one. <i>Mag-úsa lang ta dinhis kwartu,</i> Let's just stay together in the room. <i>Usáhun ta na lang ni arun usa ray sudlan,</i> Let's just put this together so we use only one container. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> <xr>= <sc>USA</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr> <form>hi-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126C3]</itype> be, become <tr>united</tr> or <tr>unanimous</tr>. <i>Naghiúsa sila sa pagpapuyra sa suluguun,</i> They were unanimous in wanting to have the servant fired. <i>Nahiúsa ang ílang hukum human makabatì sa tinúud,</i> Their decision became unanimous after they heard the truth. <form>usaúsa</form> <pos>n</pos> get-together party. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> have a get-together party. <form>usáhay</form> <tr>sometimes</tr>, <tr>occasionally</tr>. <i>Usáhay dì ku makadungug,</i> Sometimes I cannot hear. <form>binagsa</form> <xr>= <sc>TINAGSA</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr> <form>inusára</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> be by oneself, <tr>alone</tr>. <i>Ug manglákaw sila mag-inusára lang ku áning baláya,</i> If they leave, I will be alone in this house. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> do s.t. alone by oneself. <i>Ákung inusaráhun lag dáru,</i> I will do the plowing alone. <form>inusaranhun</form> <pos>a</pos> characterized by being all by oneself. <i>Kinabúhing inusaranhun,</i> A life all alone by oneself. <form>maka-, ka-, kas-a</form> <tr>once</tr>. <i>Kausa (kas-a) miadtu siya sa balay,</i> He came to the house once. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> do s.t. to s.t. all at one time. <i>Maáyu untà ug makas-a nig lútù,</i> It would be nice if these could be cooked all at one time. <form>kag-usà</form>, <form>makag-usà</form>, <form>tag-usà</form> <xr>= <sc>TALAGSA</sc>.</xr> <form>kahiusáhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> state of being <tr>united</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>marriage</tr>. <i>Karung adláwa mau ang kahiusáhan níla ni Idyun ug ni Bilma,</i> The wedding of Edion and Vilma will take place today. <form>ulusáhun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>wondrous</tr>, <tr>unique</tr> or <tr>peculiar</tr>. <i>Adtu nímu makítà sa sú ang mga mananap nga ulusáhun ug mga hitsúra,</i> You will see strange and peculiar animals in the zoo. <i>Si Samsun sa karáang panahun mauy usa ka táwu nga may ulusáhung <pb n=1111>kusug,</i> Samson of ancient times was a man of <tr>extraordinary</tr> strength. <form>tagsa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> one apiece. <i>Tagáan ta mug tagsa,</i> I'll give you each one. <form>tagsa ray púlung</form> of few words. <i>Kun muingung dílì, hustu ra, dílì giyud. Tagsa ray púlung niánang tawhána,</i> If he says no it is no, period. He is a man of few words. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>TALAGSA</sc>.</xr> <form>tagsatagsa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> do s.t. <tr>one by one</tr>. <i>Magtagsatagsa na lang tag pamaúlì,</i> Let us now go home one by one. <form>igtagsa</form> <pos>n</pos> one's <tr>first cousin</tr>. <form>magtagsa</form> <pos>n</pos> being first cousins. <form>talagsa</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>seldom</tr>. <i>Talagsa ka ra man mamisíta nákù,</i> You seldom visit me. <form>talagsay búngut</form> it will be a long time before [so-and-so] happens. <i>Talagsa lay búngut ug makigsulti ku níya,</i> Don't expect me to talk to him for a long, long time. <form>panalagsa</form> <pos>a</pos> being at great intervals. <i>Unyà mihagtuk sa atup nga sín ang panalagsang ulan,</i> Then a few <tr>scattered</tr> raindrops rattled on the tin roof. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> do s.t. once in a while, at <tr>infrequent</tr> intervals. <i>Panalagsai akug dúaw,</i> Come visit me once in a while. <form>talagsaun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>rare</tr>, <tr>few</tr>. <i>Talagsaun ra ang asáwa nga makaagwanta sa íyang pagkabána,</i> Few wives could bear the sort of husband he makes. <i>Ang 1904 nga salapì talagsaun kaáyu,</i> The 1904 fifty-centavo coin is very rare. <number>2</number> <tr>extraordinary</tr>. <i>Talagsaun kaáyu ang íyang kaanyag,</i> Her beauty is <tr>remarkable</tr>. <form>&mdash; ra pud</form> <ix>phrase said in reaction to s.t. unbelievable:</ix> &lsquo;that's unheard of!&rsquo; <i>&lsquo;Mukanta na run nà siya.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Talagsaun ra pud.&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Now he's going to sing for us.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;The hell I will!&rsquo; <form>tinagsa</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> do one at a time. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC; b]</itype> do the <ix>tinagsa</ix> dance. <pos>a</pos> done one at a time. <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>folk dance</tr> in pairs, wherein the man tries to court an elusive woman, following her with courtship movements wherever she goes.

<p><form>usa<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>doe</tr>.

<p><form>úsà</form> <ix>short forms:</ix> <bx>sà, usà</bx>. <number>1</number> <tr>before</tr> [do]ing. <i>Úsà ka mulakaw hipúsa ang ímung kwartu,</i> Before you go out, fix your room. <number>2</number> do [so-and-so] <tr>beforehand</tr>. <i>Mag-ílis úsà ku sa dì pa ta manglákaw,</i> I'll change my clothes first before we go out. <number>3</number> <tr>for now</tr>, for the time being. <i>Ibutang úsà diri,</i> Put it down here for the moment. <i>Ayaw úsag lakaw,</i> Don't go for the while. <form>&mdash; pa</form> <number>3a</number> <tr>wait a minute</tr>. <i>Úsà pa gánì,</i> Wait a minute, will you?<i> Úsà pa kay ákung tawgun,</i> Just a second, because I'm going to call him. <number>3b</number> just a second, to change the subject. <i>Úsà pa diay, kinsa tu ka?</i> By the way, who did you say you were? <number>4</number> <form>&mdash; ka</form> you just wait. <i>Gihilabtan giyud nímu nang ákung búhat dà. Úsà ka giyud run,</i> You touched my work, did you? Well you just wait what's going to happen now.

<p><form>usab</form> <ix>short forms:</ix> <bx>sab</bx> <ix>and</ix> <bx>sad</bx>. <number>1</number> <tr>also</tr>, <tr>in addition</tr>, <tr>as well</tr>, (after negatives) <tr>either</tr>. <i>Gipatay usab ang mga bátà,</i> They killed the children, too. <i>Ikaw sab, utru ka,</i> You, too. You're another one of the same ilk. <i>Dílì sab ku muadtu,</i> I will not go either. <i>Sa nagtubù siya, nagkadakù sab ang íyang káun,</i> As he grew, his food consumption grew as well. <number>1a</number> <tr>in turn</tr>. <i>Ug ikíha ku níya, ikíha ku sab siya,</i> If he sues me, I'll sue him in turn. <number>1b</number> <form>na &mdash;</form> <form>1b1</form> <tr>again</tr>. Nag-ulan na sab, It's raining again. <form>1b2</form> in turn. Human sa unus, ang ulan na say mibundak, After the squall, the rain came pouring down. <number>1c</number> [so-and-so] is in conformity with [such-and-such]. <i>Ug mahalun ang ímung kuhaun, dakù sab ug instulmin,</i> If you buy an expensive kind, you'll have to pay large installments, too. <form>syáru &mdash;</form> under the circumstances it is unbelievable. <i>Syáru sag wà ka kahunàhunà,</i> It's impossible that you didn't even think of it. <form>mau ra &mdash; hinúun</form> <xr>= <sc>MAU RA PUD NÚUN</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>HINÚUN</sc>, <i>6.</i></xr> <i>1d</i> <form>dílì lang &mdash; kay ...</form> not only is [so-and-so] true. <i>Dílì lang sad kay muinum siya, súgal pud,</i> Not only does he drink, he also gambles. <number>1e</number> [<ix>exclamation</ix>] <form>&mdash;</form> My! [so-and-so] is the case, isn't it though. <i>Sus! Kapubrisíta sad intáwun níya!</i> My! What a pitiful child, don't you think? <i>Kagwápu ba sad!</i> How beautiful it is, though! <number>2</number> but then, when [so-and-so] happened, happens. <i>Apan pag-abut sab nákù didtu, wà nag manuk,</i> But then when I arrived, the chicken was gone. <i>Dì ku muinum. Apan ug muinum sad ku, tingbánay dyud,</i> I don't drink. But when I do, I really drink. <number>3</number> do [so-and-so] when one should not. <i>Bída sad nímu uy! Gitug-an man nímu!</i> Oh you! You went and told. <i>Si Máma sad! Mauy ímung isulti pirmi,</i> Oh, Mother! That's what you always say! <number>4</number> [<i>adj.</i>] &mdash; <tr>somewhat</tr> [adj.]. <i>Mahímù man sad,</i> It is <tr>quite</tr> possible. <i>Gwápa man sad,</i> She is quite pretty. <i>Udtu na sad ming migíkan,</i> It was already quite late when we left. <number>5</number> <form>man &mdash;</form> anyway, [so-and-so] is OK because. <i>Ihátag na lang. Daut man sad,</i> Might as well give it away because it's no good anyway. <i>Sahug dì siya mangasáwa. Maáyu man sag siya ray nagkarsúnis,</i> Who cares if he doesn't marry me? Anyway there is lots of fish in the ocean. <i>Ngánu man sad?</i> Anyway, who cares? <number>6</number> <ix>with imperatives:</ix> particle giving a pleading tone. <i>Sígi <pb n=1112>sad uy,</i> Oh, come on! Do it. <i>Iuban sad ku, magbinut-an lagi ku,</i> Please take me. I'll be a good girl. <number>7</number> [<ix>interrogative</ix>] <form>man &mdash;</form> just out of curiosity, who, when, why, how much, etc. <i>Tagpíla man sad ni?</i> By the way, just out of curiosity, how much is this? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2C; c]</itype> do s.t. again. <i>Mag-úsab pa ta ug dúlà?</i> Will we still play with each other again? <i>Usbun kug bása, památì,</i> I will read it again. Listen. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>modify</tr>, <tr>redo</tr>. <i>Usba ring ákung karsúnis,</i> <tr>Alter</tr> these pants of mine. <i>Ang inhinyíru mauy muusab sa plánu,</i> The engineer will <tr>revise</tr> the plans. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>change</tr>, <tr>substitute</tr> with s.t. else. <i>Dì ku muusab sa ákung hukum,</i> I will not change my decision. <form>ka-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> changes that have taken place. <i>Way kausában dinhi sa syudad,</i> The city hasn't changed. <form>usbunun</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. to be altered.

<p><form>usad</form> <xr>= <sc>USAB</sc>, 1&ndash;7 (but not as <pos>v</pos>).</xr>

<p><form>usáhay</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>USA<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><form>usámud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126P; b6]</itype> <tr>stumble</tr> or <tr>fall</tr> forward flat on one's face. <i>Nausámud (napausámud) siya sa pagdágan,</i> He stumbled and fell flat on his face when he ran.

<p><form>úsap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2SN; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>chew</tr>, <tr>grind</tr> with the molars. <i>Usápun sa mga bábuy ang mga sáhà sa ságing ug dì nà kuralun,</i> The pig will chew up the banana shoots if you don't fence the plantation. <number>2</number> <tr>chew up</tr>, <tr>crush</tr> between two moving parts like with the molars. <i>Lindug sa tubu nga giúsap sa ligsanan,</i> Cane stalks that were crushed by the rollers.

<p><form>usar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>use</tr>, make of. <i>Dì siya muusar ug butang sa láing táwu,</i> He does not use other people's things. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>wear</tr> s.t. <i>Dì ku muusar ug lipstik,</i> I don't use lipstick. <i>Íya pa ning usarun (iusar) sinináa sa panarbáhu,</i> He'll still wear this shirt to work. <form>usádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>used up</tr>, <tr>worn-out</tr>. <i>Magpalit kug bag-ung sapátus. Usádu na kaáyu ning ákù,</i> I've got to buy a new pair of shoes. My old ones are all used up now. <number>2</number> a woman that has had sexual experience. <i>Usádu na kaáyug dagway nang bayhána,</i> That woman looks like she has already been used. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> get used up.

<p><form>usbaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> <tr>improve</tr>, <tr>prosper</tr>. <i>Ang íyang pagpaningkámut nakausbaw (nakapausbaw) níya gíkan sa kakabus,</i> He rose from poverty through hard work. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB2; c1]</itype> <tr>rise</tr> in degree or quantity. <i>Ang manidy&icaron;r mauy nag-usbaw sa íyang swildu,</i> The manager gave him a <tr>raise</tr>. <i>Miusbaw ang kadagátan sa Miditiranyan,</i> The Mediterranean Sea rose. <i>Ang traktur makausbaw (makapausbaw) sa áni,</i> A tractor can increase the rice production. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>prosperous</tr>. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>improvements</tr> or <tr>progress</tr>. <form>tingusbáwan</form> <pos>n</pos> improvements, either planned or accomplished. <i>Untà íyang panalangínan ang átung mga tingusbáwan,</i> May He bless the things we plan to accomplish. <i>Kining taytáyana usa sa mga tingusbáwan sa íyang pagkagubirnadur,</i> This bridge is one of the improvements he brought about while he was governor.

<p><form>usbung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> topmost part of plants or trees, <i>Usbung sa kasagbutan,</i> Topmost part of the shrubs. <number>2</number> s.t. formed into a mound. <i>Usbung sa ánay,</i> Termite hill. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>rise</tr> up, <tr>soar</tr> up to a higher level. <i>Labihang nakausbung sa iruplánu nga dyít,</i> How the jet plane soared. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>USDUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>usdak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> let s.t. <tr>drop</tr> with a light thud. <i>Ayaw iusdak ang malíta kay náay mabuak sa sulud,</i> Don't drop the trunk like that because there is s.t. breakable inside. <number>1a</number> <itype>[C]</itype> <form>&mdash; ang tiil</form> <tr>walk</tr> with noisy footfalls. <i>Maglágut ku ug usdákan kug tiil,</i> I get angry if s.o. walks with heavy footfalls in my presence. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; b8]</itype> <tr>slip</tr> and <tr>fall</tr> down on one's buttocks. <i>Nausdak ku sa hagdanan,</i> I fell down the stairs. <pos>n</pos> sound of thumping. <form>-in-</form> <xr>= <sc>USDAK</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>usdu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>two</tr>, esp. <tr>two pesos</tr> (slang).

<p><form>usdu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> filled heaping high so as to form an elevation. <i>Usdu ra kaáyu ang sulud sa kartun dì na masira,</i> The contents of the box are piled so high that the box can no longer be closed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> be heaping high.

<p><form>usdug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>help</tr> s.o. lift s.t. to put it on his head. <i>Usdúgi siya sa táru,</i> Help him lift the can onto his head.

<p><form>usdung</form> <pos>a</pos> filled or piled to heaping. <i>Ang kan-un usdung kaáyu nga pagkabutang sa bandihádu,</i> The hominy is piled high on the platter. <pos>n</pos> moundlike top or heap. <i>Ang usdung sa nilabhan nga gisulud sa planggána túpung nákù,</i> The mound of clothes I put in the wash basin is as tall as I am. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> be heaping high. <i>Iusdung (usdúnga) pagtakus,</i> Make it heaping measures.

<p><form>usig, úsig</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>bark</tr>. Kinsay giúsig sa irù? Who is the dog barking at? <number>2</number> <itype>[A2S]</itype> <tr>cough</tr> (colloquial). <i>Sayu pa nà siyang miúsig,</i> He has been coughing since early morning. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>a</pos> given to barking. <form>-l-un</form> <pos>a</pos> prone to being barked at.

<p><form>úsik</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>waste</tr>. <i>Úsik kaáyung ilábay ning kan-úna!</i> What a waste to throw this food away. <i>Úsik, wà ku makapalit!</i> What a pity, I couldn't buy it. <pos>n</pos> name given to a variety of types of sorcery all of which cause grave illness. <number>1</number> k.o. <tr>sorcery</tr> similar to voodoo, in which s.t. is done to a representation of the victim, which in turn hurts the victim. <number>2</number> <pb n=1113>k.o. sorcery inserting insects into the victim. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a3b(1)]</itype> waste. <i>Dì ku mag-úsik ug panahun,</i> I won't waste my time. <i>Wà nákù usíki ang kwarta,</i> I did not spend the money uselessly. <number>1a</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> feel bad over the loss or waste of s.t. <i>Giusíkan ku sa mga kahigayúnang ímung gipalabay,</i> I regret all the opportunities you allowed to go by. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; a3]</itype> <tr>spill</tr> s.t. out of a container, thus wasting it. <i>Daghang kan-ung naúsik sa lamísa,</i> You spilled a lot of rice on the table. <number>2a</number> <form>&mdash; ang, ug dugù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a3b3]</itype> <tr>spill blood</tr>. <i>Kung kinahanglánun, usíkan nákug dugù ang pagpanalípud sa ákung yútang natawhan,</i> I will shed my blood in the defense of my native land if necessary. <number>3</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> be a victim of the sorcery <ix>úsik</ix>. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> things that spill or fall off onto s.t. <i>Kining mátang sa paggaling daghag usik,</i> This way of milling results in a lot of <tr>spillage</tr>. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>wasteful</tr>, <tr>extravagant</tr>. <i>Usikan kaáyu siya,</i> She is very wasteful. <pos>n</pos> <tr>sorcerer</tr> who can practice <ix>úsik</ix>. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having or entailing waste. <i>Mausíkun nga paági,</i> <tr>Wasteful</tr> procedure. <i>Anak nga mausíkun,</i> The <tr>Prodigal Son</tr>.

<p><form>usísa</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>ask</tr>, seek to be informed. <i>&lsquo;Unsa, nakagustu ka sa ímung trabáhu?&rsquo; miusísa nákù si Husi,</i> &lsquo;How do you like your work?&rsquo; Joe asked me. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>study</tr>, <tr>examine</tr> closely to <tr>analyze</tr>. <i>Nag-usísa ang piskal sa kásu sa pagpatay,</i> The fiscal is conducting an investigation on the homicide case. <i>Usisáhun nátù ug unsay nakapakunhud sa átung baligyà,</i> Let us study what made our sales drop. <number>3</number> analyze, <tr>test</tr> to determine s.t. <i>Nag-usísa silas yútà ug magkinahanglan bag abúnu,</i> They are testing the soil to see if it needs fertilizer. <pos>n</pos> <tr>investigation</tr>, <tr>inquiry</tr>. <form>mausisáhun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>questioning</tr>, <tr>inquisitive</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>scrutinizing</tr> with full attention to details.

<p><form>uska</form> <ix>short for</ix> <form>usa ka</form>. <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>USA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>uslub<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; c1]</itype> for earth to fall in, either collapsing or from a process of erosion. <i>Nauslub (miuslub) ang lugar nga gisigíhag ági sa túbig,</i> The place where the water constantly passes over has become depressed. <pos>n</pos> earth that has been eroded. <i>Dakù ang uslub sa pangpang nga gikan-an sa túbig,</i> The water ate a large amount of dirt from the cliff.

<p><form>uslub<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>dip</tr> or <tr>immerse</tr> into a liquid. <i>Iuslub sa dukt&ucaron;r ang bátà sa inadlaw nga túbig ug mutaas ang hilánat,</i> The doctor will dip the child in warm water when his fever rises. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> treat with <ix>uslub</ix>. <pos>n</pos> k.o. treatment by steam, esp. for stomach disorders derived from eating the wrong thing at <corr>the </corr>wrong time or in the wrong combination, where the substance that caused the disorder is boiled in a pot, and the patient is made to cover himself together with the pot in a blanket and inhale the vapors, following which he is wrapped in more blankets and made to sweat profusely.

<p><form>Usminya</form> <pos>n</pos> Sergio <tr>Osme</tr>ña, Sr., the second president of the Philippine Commonwealth, and a native of Cebu City. <form>pwinti &mdash;</form> a park in Cebu. <form>Usminyista</form> <pos>n</pos> political followers or supporters of Osmeña (or, now, his family).

<p><form>usmud</form> <xr>= <sc>USÁMUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>usngad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> for a pig to dig out or push hard with its snout. <i>Nayabu ang pasaw sa bábuy kay íya mang giusngad,</i> The pig pushed its feed hard with its snout and it spilled. <i>Nabuhùbuhù ang nátad nga giusngáran sa bábuy,</i> The front yard which the pig dug out with its snout is full of holes. <pos>n</pos> a boat having its top pointing at an angle above its body. <form>inusngaran</form> <pos>n</pos> diggings made by a pig with its snout.

<p><form>uspag</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dry</tr>, <tr>unkempt</tr> of skin or hair. <i>Uspag kaáyu ug pánit ang nagpuyù sa isla,</i> People living on islands have very dry skin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for hair or skin to be dry and unkempt.

<p><form>uspital</form> <xr>= <sc>HUSPITAL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ustiya, ustiyas, ustíyas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>host</tr>, the bread of the Eucharist. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a2]</itype> make the host.

<p><sc>úsu<sub>1</sub></sc> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>mode</tr>, <tr>fashion</tr>. <i>Bilbátum ang úsu karun,</i> Bell-bottoms are the mode these days. <number>2</number> <tr>fad</tr>, thing in <tr>rage</tr>. <i>Úsu kaáyu karun ang pangáwat ug manuk,</i> Chicken stealing has become the latest fad. <i>Úsu na man run nga ang bána mauy bílin sa báy,</i> It is now the <tr>practice</tr> for husbands to tend the house. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c16]</itype> be the fashion, thing in <tr>vogue</tr>. <i>Maúsu na sab ang tabánug,</i> The fad for flying kites will come back into vogue again. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> start a fad, initiate a movement. <i>Gipausúhan nímu ang ímung anak ug kalígù maduminggu. Na, mangítà na hinúun,</i> You started bringing your child to the beach on Sundays and now he expects it. <form>pina-</form> <pos>a</pos> according to the <tr>latest style</tr>. <i>Buhuk nga pinaúsu,</i> The latest style hairdo. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B456; a1]</itype> have, wear s.t. of the latest style.

<p><form>úsu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bear</tr>.

<p><form>usub</form> <xr>= <sc>USAB</sc>, <pos>v</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>úsuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> drive stakes into the ground. <i>Iúsuk ang sundang dihà sa yútà,</i> Stick the knife into the ground. <number>2</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> put stakes around. <i>Ákung usúkan ang mga tanum,</i> I'll put (drive) stakes around the plants. <number>3</number> slam s.o. or s.t. to the ground. <pos>n</pos> <tr>cigarette</tr> (slang). <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stake</tr>.

<p><form>úsuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for smoke to rush in a thick <pb n=1114>stream. <i>Miúsuk ang asu sa tambutsu,</i> The smoke gushed out of the exhaust pipe.

<p><form>úsung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> help s.o. lift and carry s.t. on his head or shoulders. <i>Akuy muúsung nímu sa sáku,</i> I'll help you lift the sack for you to carry on your shoulder.

<p><form>usúra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>usury</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be, become usury. <i>Mausúra nà ug dakù ang intiris,</i> It would be usury if you charge excessive interest. <form>usuríra</form> <xr>= <sc>USURÍRU</sc> (female).</xr> <form>usuríru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>usurer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become a usurer.

<p><form>us-us</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>slide down</tr> on s.t. holding on partially. <i>Mius-us ang mga bátà sa pasamánu,</i> The children slid down the stairs. <i>Makaus-us ka ug dalì sa plagpul kay dangug,</i> You can easily slide down the flagpole because it is slippery. <number>1a</number> <itype>[B2; b6(1)]</itype> for s.t. to <tr>slip down</tr> lower. <i>Nagkaus-us ang ímung tiyan. Hápit ka nang muanak,</i> Your stomach is slipping down. It won't be long now and you'll have your baby. <number>2</number> <itype>[APB; b7]</itype> for quantities to go down; cause them to do so. <i>Muus-us (maus-us) ang prisyu sa bugas ug daghan ang abut,</i> The price of rice will go down if there is a good harvest. <i>Tambal nga muus-us (mupaus-us) sa hilánat,</i> Medicine that will bring the fever down. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>reduce a sentence</tr>. <i>Ang huwis mius-us sa ímung sintinsiya,</i> The judge reduced your sentence. <form>&mdash; ang, sa kabúhì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> bring the <i>kabúhì</i> to just above the navel, where it is supposed to be. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>low</tr>, having slipped down. <i>Us-us kaáyu ang ímung karsúnis. Biraha sa táas,</i> Your pants have slipped too far down. Pull them up. <number>2</number> lowered in quantity, degree.

<p><form>usuus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <number>1</number> for s.t. hot to <tr>give off steam</tr>. <i>Nag-usuus pa nang kapi. Mapásù kag ímung imnun,</i> The coffee is still <tr>steaming</tr>. You'll burn yourself if you drink it. <number>2</number> for a pain to give a burning sensation.

<p><form>usúus</form> <xr>= <sc>ALASÚUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>uswa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>reprimand</tr> s.o. in a scolding way, harping on all his past faults. <i>Uswáhan ku siya inig-abut níya. Dúgay nga muulì,</i> I'll give him a good cussing-out when he comes home. He always comes home late. <form>uluswahan</form> <pos>n</pos> worthy of being reprimanded; a good reason for being reprimanded. <form>mauswáhun</form> <pos>a</pos> in a <tr>reprimanding</tr>, <tr>scolding</tr> way.

<p><form>uswag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>raise</tr>, move s.t. or oneself to a higher position. <i>Ug muuswag ka ug diyútay makahigdà ku sa ímung tiilan,</i> If you <tr>move up</tr> a little I can lie down beneath your feet. <i>Ákung iuswag ang atup ug mga diyis pulgádas,</i> I'll move the roofing up about ten inches. <number>1a</number> <itype>[B]</itype> rise in quantity. <i>Niuswag ang prisyu,</i> The price has gone up. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>go upstairs</tr>, into the house. <i>Muuswag ta kay tugnaw dinhi sa sílung,</i> Let's go into the house because it's cold down here. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> bring s.t. upstairs. <i>Iuswag (uswága) ang mga silya,</i> Carry the chairs upstairs. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> turn a light on. <i>Giuswágan níya ang sugà kay hínay ra kaáyu ang síga,</i> He turned the lampwick up some more because the light was too low. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>postpone</tr>, <tr>put off</tr> to a future date. <i>Dílì na mahímung uswágun ang kasal,</i> It is no longer possible to postpone the wedding. <number>5</number> <itype>[A23P; c1]</itype> <tr>improve</tr>, <tr>progress</tr>. <i>Muuswag ang inyung kahimtang ug makatrabahu ka na,</i> Your situation will improve once you have work. <pos>n</pos> <tr>improvement</tr>, rise in degree or quantity. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>progress</tr>, <tr>improvement</tr>. <form>ka-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> improvement finally attained. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>progressive</tr>. <i>Usa ka mauswágun kaáyung lungsud,</i> A very progressive town.

<p><form>usyus</form> <xr>= <sc>ASYUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>usyúsa</form> <xr>= <sc>ASYÚSA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>usyúsu</form> <xr>= <sc>ASYÚSU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>útak</form> <xr>= <sc>ÚTUK<sub>1</sub></sc>, <i>n1, 2</i> (slang).</xr>

<p><form>útan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vegetables</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> cook vegetables. <i>Maútan ang kamansi,</i> Seeded breadfruit can be eaten as a vegetable. <i>Ákung utánan ang prítung isdà,</i> I'll cook the fried fish with vegetables. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> for young corn plants to be eaten by fowl. <i>Diyútay ra ang mais manúbù ug utánun sa mga manuk,</i> Few of the corn plants will grow to maturity if the chickens eat at them. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> pick, <tr>gather vegetables</tr>. <form>-un(&rarr;), -l-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>uncooked vegetables</tr>.

<p><form>útang</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>debt</tr>. <i>May útang ku nímung duha ka adlawng trabáhu,</i> I owe you two days' work. <form>&mdash; buut</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>BUUT</sc>, <i>4.</i></xr> <form>&mdash; kabubut-un</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>KABUBUT-UN</sc></xr> <ix>under</ix> <xr><sc>BUUT</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> get s.t. on credit. <i>Miútang (nangútang) ku ug usa ka gantang bugas,</i> I bought a <corr sic="gan-">ganta</corr> of rice on credit. <i>Inyu ba diay nang utángun?</i> You mean you're not paying cash for it? <number>1a</number> <itype>[AN; a2]</itype> get a <tr>loan</tr>. <i>Kadtung muútang (mangútang) ug dakù kinahanglan may garantíya,</i> If you apply for a good-sized loan, you must have collateral. <number>1b</number> <form>&mdash; (sa hárì)</form> <itype>[a12]</itype> <tr>take a life</tr>. <i>Ay kug hadlúkag búnù kay utángun ta ka sa hárì (utángun ta ka),</i> Don't try to scare me with a talk of a fight because I will <tr>kill</tr> you. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3S; a3b6]</itype> owe s.o. a favor. <i>Siya ang nautángan mu sa ímung kinabúhì,</i> You owe your life to him. <form>utang-utang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> incur many small debts. <i>Gamay ra ang nahabilin sa swildu kay nakautang-utang ku,</i> I have little left from my salary because I incurred so many small debts. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> extend <tr>credit</tr>. <pb n=1115><number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> get in the last word in a dispute. <i>Dì siya mupaútang (magpaútang) ug sulti sa íyang bána,</i> She won't let her husband have the last word. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> one who owes one s.t. <form>hiN-(&rarr;), pala-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> always buying things on credit or asking for loans. <form>-unun</form> <pos>n</pos> goods for sale on credit.

<p><form>utang-útang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>slipmouth fish</tr>: <bio>Leiognathus sp</bio>.

<p><form>utap, útap</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. @<corr sic=cooky>cookie</corr> made of flaky pastry and formed into thin, tongue-like shapes, sold commercially. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make, have <ix>utap</ix>.

<p><form>utas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> faint due to a sickness, hunger. <i>Nautas na sad ang masakitun,</i> The sick man became unconscious again. <form>-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> prone to fainting spells. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get subject to fainting spells.

<p><form>útas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> do s.t. <tr>always</tr> or <tr>constantly</tr>. <i>Ug mag-útas lang mu ug tábì dinhà wà muy mahímù,</i> If you <tr>keep on</tr> talking like that, you'll never accomplish anything. <i>Dì ku makaútas ug bantay niánà kay may láin kung búhat nga giatiman,</i> I can not keep constant watch over it because I have other things to attend to.

<p><form>utaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>iron</tr>, <tr>press</tr>. <i>Wà níya utawa ang mga hábul,</i> She did not iron the sheets. <pos>n</pos> <tr>iron</tr>. <form>-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ironing board</tr>. <form>-an(&larr;) nga kinabáyù</form> <pos>n</pos> ironing board with legs. <form>-l-un(&larr;), -unun(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> things to iron. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pressed clothes</tr>. <form>tigpaN-, tig-l-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> person who does the ironing.

<p><form>utaw-útaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b(1)]</itype> <tr>float</tr> or move gently in the air or on the surface of a liquid. <i>Muutaw-útaw (mipautaw-útaw) lang ku kay kápuyng ilanguy,</i> I will just float because it is tiresome to swim. <i>Mga pangánud nga nag-utaw-útaw (nagpautaw-útaw) sa kahangínan,</i> Clouds that float gently in the wind.

<p><form>utay-utay, utay-útay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; c1]</itype> do s.t. <tr>little by little</tr>, have s.t. happen to it a little at a time. <i><corr sic=Utay-utaya>Utay-utáya</corr> lang pagbáyad,</i> Pay for it little at a time. <i>Utay-utáya paggámit ang sabun,</i> Use the soap little at a time.

<p><form>utbu</form> <xr>= <sc>ULBU</sc>, <i>n, v1, 1a, 2, 3.</i></xr>

<p><form>utbung</form> <pos>n</pos> tender stalks with leaf buds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> pick the tips of plants or their axillary <tr>shoots</tr> off. <i>Mitambuk ang mga dáhun sa tabákù nga giutbúngan na sa salingsing,</i> The leaves of the tobacco plants grew stout after their suckers were picked off.

<p><form>utik</form> <xr>= <sc>DUTÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>utika</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> phlegm of a person with <xr><sc>TB</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> @<xr><sc>TB</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a4]</itype> have <tr>tuberculosis</tr>. <i>Nag-utika (giutika) na lang nang tawhána sa íyang kaabusádu,</i> That man has got TB because he abused his health. <form>utikahun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tubercular</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become <tr>consumptive</tr>.

<p><form>util</form> <xr>= <sc>HUTIL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>útin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>penis</tr>. <form>pubri nga &mdash;</form> poor father as head of the family (humorous). <i>Walà giyud siya makatilaw ug mga maáyung pagkáun kay anak man siya sa pubring útin,</i> He never tasted good food because he is a son of a poor father (lit. poor penis). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> hit on the penis. <i>Ug utínun nímu siyag banyak makuyapan giyud,</i> If you hit him on the penis with a kick, he will surely faint. <form>utin-utin</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>parrot fish</tr>. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> having a penis.

<p><form>utingkad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> <tr>ransack</tr>, search thoroughly or examine every part. <i>Ákung utingkarun ning mga butang sa kaban arun makit-an tung lyabíha,</i> I'll search everything in this trunk so I can find the key.

<p><form>utingkag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>UTINGKAD</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; a3b6]</itype> for a home to be broken. <i>Ang pagkababayidur sa bána mauy nakautingkag (nakapautingkag) sa ílang kaugalíngun,</i> Her husband's fondness for women broke up their home.

<p><form>utingkay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> <tr>disarrange</tr> s.t., usually in searching for s.t. <i>Dì ku gustung inyung utingkáyun ang mga libru sa laybrari,</i> I don't want you to disarrange the books in the library. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> find, come across s.t. in ransacking or searching through. <i>Nakautingkay kug buláwan sa sulud sa kaban,</i> I came across a piece of gold in rummaging through the trunk. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> go into the details of s.t. to find out about it. <i>Sa kurti utingkáyun ang tanan nga nahitabù báhin sa kásu,</i> In court all facts surrounding the case will be examined in detail. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> find out by ransacking details. <i>Nautingkayan na hinúun ang makauúlaw níyang kagahápun,</i> They stumbled over the shameful details of her past.

<p><form>utitud</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tiny, biting red <tr>ant</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infested with this k.o. ant. <form>utiturun</form> <pos>a</pos> infested with red ants. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> get to be infested with red ants.

<p><form>utíut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>creak</tr>, <tr>squeak</tr>. <i>Miutíut ang sawug nga kawáyan,</i> The bamboo flooring creaked. <i>Wà makautíut ang ligid,</i> The wheel does not squeak any more. <pos>n</pos> <tr>creaking</tr>, <tr>squeaking</tr> noise.

<p><form>utlánan</form> see <sc>ULUT<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><form>utlub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> bite s.t. off with the front teeth or for machinery to do an analogous thing. <i>Muutlub lang ku ug gamay sa ímung kindi,</i> I'll just take a small bite of your candy. <i>Nautluban ang ákung tudlù sa galingan,</i> The mill took a small piece off of my finger. <form>paN- sa dílà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> bite one's tongue. <i>Nagpangutlub kus ákung dílà arun dílì makakatawa,</i> I bit my tongue to refrain from <pb n=1116>laughing. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. a part of which has been bitten off.

<p><form>utmil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>oatmeal</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> eat, raise s.o. on oatmeal. <i>Giutmil si Búbuy sa gamay pa siya,</i> Boboy was raised on oatmeal when he was small.

<p><form>utnga<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> emit a somewhat prolonged <tr>grunt</tr> as when one is lifting s.t. heavy or has suffered pain. <i>Miutnga siya sa pag-alsa sa usa ka sákung kupras,</i> He grunted when he lifted the sack of copra. <i>Nakautnga siya sa pagsuntuk sa íyang tiyan,</i> He grunted when he received the blow in the stomach.

<p><form>utnga<sub>2</sub>, utngà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> <tr>come off</tr>, <tr>let go</tr> of s.t. attached firmly to s.t. <i>Dì muutnga ang limátuk ug dì mabusug,</i> A leech won't let go until it is full. <i>Miutnga na ang lansang sa sawug,</i> The nail came out of the flooring.

<p><form>utra</form> <xr>= <sc>UTRU</sc>, <i>1</i> (female).</xr>

<p><form>utrabis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do s.t. a second time. <i>Muutrabis pa pagminyù ang byúda kay nagdalaga,</i> The widow must want to get married <tr>again</tr> because she is primping herself up. <i>Utrabis! Wà pa man ka mabúngì,</i> Do it again, why don't you. You didn't break anything the first time. <pos>n</pos> s.t. having been repeated. <i>Utrabis na nà níya sa pirst grid,</i> This is his second time around in the first grade.

<p><form>utru</form> <number>1</number> [so-and-so] is another one of those bad people. <i>Utru ka sab. Paríhas mung búang,</i> You're another one. You're both fools. <number>2</number> repeated action. <i>Utru gánì, ayg ingna ánà,</i> The next time don't do it like that. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> do s.t. <tr>again</tr>. <i>Dì ka na kautrug binúang nákù,</i> You can't fool me again. <i>Íya pa ning iutrug lútù,</i> She's going to cook it again.

<p><form>utsing</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; a2]</itype> have <tr>sexual intercourse</tr> (humorous).

<p><form>utsinta</form> <number>1</number> number <tr>eighty</tr>. <number>2</number> humorous euphemism for <ix>utsing ta</ix>, let's have intercourse. <pos>v</pos> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>DISIUTSU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>utsu</form> <ix>number</ix> <tr>eight</tr>, confined to phrases with words of Spanish origin. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>TRIS</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> for a bicycle tire to be deformed (lit. twisted into an eight).

<p><form>utud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; a]</itype> cut s.t. long in two or s.t. off of it. <i>Utdun níya ang pán álang ninyung duha,</i> She will break the bread for the two of you. <i>Giutdan níya ang hílu,</i> He cut a piece off the thread. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become short after s.t. has been cut off. <i>Nagkautud ang písì nga sígig kabugtù,</i> The rope is getting shorter and shorter because it keeps breaking. <pos>a</pos> short after a part has been cut off. <pos>n</pos> <tr>sibling</tr>. <form>(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>UTUD</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr> <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>blood relation</tr>.

<p><form>utug</form> <pos>a</pos> for a penis to be erect. <pos>n</pos> the erected penis. <i>Hikápa ang ákung utug,</i> Touch my <tr>hard-on</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b4]</itype> <number>1</number> get erect. <i>Sa sulti lang gánì nag-utug na ang íyang útin,</i> His penis <tr>erects</tr> even if he just listens to stories. <i>Giutgan ku,</i> I have an <tr>erection</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>tauten</tr> or <tr>erect</tr> like the penis. <i>Miutug ang pasul pagdágan sa isdà,</i> The fishline tautened when the fish lunged away. <form>pa-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>masturbate</tr>. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>masturbation</tr>. <number>2</number> s.t. that helps one have an erection. <form>ulutgan</form> <pos>a</pos> having a tendency to get erections. <form>pala-</form> <pos>n</pos> given to masturbation.

<p><form>utuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> cook land crabs with shredded coconut meat, spices, <corr sic=tumeric>turmeric</corr>, but no water.

<p><form>utuk<sub>2</sub>, útuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> a top that spins so fast and steadily that it appears motionless. <form>&mdash; ug kinúmù</form> <pos>a</pos> having the ability to deliver fast and furious blows. <i>Útuk kaáyug kinúmù nang banáha kay kanúnay lang gipahubag ang nawung sa asáwa,</i> He is a husband with a fast and steady fist. His wife's face is constantly swollen. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; b6]</itype> be fast and steady in spinning. <form>pa-ay</form> <pos>n</pos> contest to see whose top spins most steadily. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> hold such a contest.

<p><form>útuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>brain</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>intelligence</tr>, <tr>mental ability</tr>. <i>Gamíta ang ímung útuk,</i> Use your brain. <number>3</number> mastermind of evil doings. <number>4</number> <formx>&mdash; sa bukug</formx> <tr>marrow</tr>. <form>lísù sa &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>LÍSÙ SA BUUT</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>LÍSÙ</sc>.</xr> <form>singtánun ug &mdash;</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to get angry easily. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>brainy</tr>, <tr>intelligent</tr>. <form>-an(&rarr;), paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>intellect</tr>, <tr>mental ability</tr>.&dagger;

<p><form>utul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> [A: a] sever s.t. long. <i>Utla ang kawáyan sa makaduha,</i> Break the bamboo into two. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>cut down</tr>. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A; ab7]</itype> cut s.t. out of or off of s.t. <i>Ákung giutlan ug diyútay ang tiil sa lamísa,</i> I cut a small piece off the leg of the table. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>put an end to</tr> s.t. <i>Utlun ku ang inyung pagtagbùtagbù,</i> I'll put an end to your secret meetings. <i>Giutlan mig túbig,</i> Our water connection was <tr>cut off</tr>. <pos>a</pos> s.t. cut off from s.t. <i>Gisumpay ug bálik ang utul sa íyang tudlù,</i> They sewed his <tr>severed</tr> finger back on. <form>&mdash; sa adlaw</form> <tr>half day</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa píkas</form> a quarter. <form>(&larr;)<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; a]</itype> divide s.t. into two. <i>Utlun nátù ang ímung tsukulit,</i> We'll divide your chocolate between us. <form>(&larr;) ug tinái, kinabúhì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sibling</tr>. <i>Útul siya nákù ug tinái,</i> She is my <tr>sister</tr>. <form>ka-(&larr;), ig-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sibling</tr>. <form>utul-utul</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>broken</tr>, cut into pieces. <number>2</number> for stools to be hardened and small from constipation. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> be broken into tiny pieces. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for stools to get hard and small. <number>2a</number> <itype>[a4b4]</itype> suffer from <tr>constipation</tr>.

<p><form>útul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13B12; b5]</itype> lose the leaves, hair, feathers. <i>Kanding ang nag-útul sa kamunggay,</i> A goat stripped the kamunggay tree bare of its leaves. <i>Naútul ang úlu ni Tasyu,</i> <pb n=1117>Tacio's head became bald. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bald</tr>, stripped of most leaves.

<p><form>utung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> hold one's breath. <i>Miutung siyang misáwum,</i> He held his breath as he dived. <i>Miutung siya sa kasakit,</i> He couldn't breathe for the pain. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> bear down hard in delivering a child or defecating. <i>Miutung ku ug kusug sa pagpaguwà sa dakung tubul,</i> I bore down hard to get the hard stools out. <number>3</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> suffer, bear to the end. <i>Utungun (iutung) ku na lang ning gastu sa ákung anak sa pag-iskuyla,</i> I'll have to bear it until I can get my son through school. <pos>n</pos> ability to hold one's breath. <i>Taas siyag utung,</i> He is able to hold his breath for a long time. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be able to hold one's breath for a long time. <form>ka-un</form> <pos>a</pos> feel like bearing down.

<p><form>utut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fart</tr>, gas released from the stomach. <form>bitik sa &mdash;</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>BITIK</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; <r>[gen.]</r></form> <ix>expression of disbelief or denial:</ix> what [gen.] maintains is false! <i>Utut nímu! Ingun ka ug dì muanhi unyà nía ka man lagi,</i> You little liar! You said you were not coming, but here you are! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2N; c]</itype> <tr>break wind</tr>. <i>Muutut (mangutut) ka man lang bísag náay mga táwu!</i> Why do you break wind in front of people! (&larr;) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13P]</itype> break wind frequently. <i>Mag-útut ka giyug mukáun kag inánag,</i> You'll keep having to break wind if you eat broiled young corn. <form>pala-(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> one who keeps breaking wind.&dagger;

<p><form>ut-ut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB12; b5]</itype> lose all one's possessions through foolishness; cause one to do so. <i>Ang súgal ug babáyi mauy nakaut-ut (nakapaut-ut) níya,</i> Gambling and women has driven him to poverty. <i>Giut-útan siya ánang bayhána,</i> That woman milked him dry. <pos>a</pos> having lost all of one's possessions foolishly.

<p><form>ut-ut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> boil rice in a small pot. <i>Mag-ut-ut ku kay aku rang usa ra,</i> I'll cook rice in a small pot because it's only for me.

<p><form>ut-ut<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> for dogs to <tr>bark</tr>. <i>Muut-ut nang irúa ug náay táwu,</i> That dog barks when there are people around. <pos>n</pos> bark.

<p><form>ut-út</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ÚLUT<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>utwang</form> <xr>= <sc>HUTWANG<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>úu</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>u</bx>. <number>1</number> <tr>yes</tr>. <i>Ú, túa na ku,</i> Yes, I'm coming. <number>2</number> in narrations, rhetorical answer to an unasked question. <i>Misulud siya sa lángub, ú misulud dáyun siya,</i> He went into the cave, yes, he went right in. <form>aw &mdash;</form> <tr>of course</tr>, it is <tr>obviously</tr> so. <i>Aw ú, unyà ra ka mubáyad ug ihatud na nákù dinhi,</i> Of course, you only have to pay when I deliver it. <form>&mdash; walay tiil, íkug</form> expression inquiring as to the sincerity of one's intentions of doing s.t. (humorous). <i>&lsquo;Muari ka unyà sa balay?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Ú&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Ú way tiil?&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Will you come to the house later?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Yes.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Is that yes meaning no (lit. yes without legs)?&rsquo;

<p><form>úù</form> word said to induce young children to defecate. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> child's word for <tr>defecate</tr>.

<p><form>úun</form> <xr>= <sc>UN-ÚN<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>úwag</form> <xr>= <sc>ÚLAG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>uwag-úwag</form> (from <ix>úlag</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> animal ovaries. <number>2</number> the two pockets of fat which are found on the top of the tail of chickens, so called because they are believed to stimulate sex urges.

<p><form>uwahi</form> <xr>= <sc>ULAHI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>uwak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>crow</tr>. <form>mamutì (muputì) ang &mdash;</form> [so-and-so] is <tr>impossible</tr> (lit. the crow will turn white first). <i>Muputì pay uwak ug muhátag ku,</i> It will be <tr>a snowy day in May</tr> before I contribute any. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> the sound of the crow. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> say s.t. in <tr>protest</tr>, <tr>gripe</tr>. <i>Nag-úwak ang mga trabahadur sa kadúgay sa ílang swildu,</i> The laborers were <tr>complaining</tr> about how long it took them to get their pay. <form>kang-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> place where crows abound.&dagger;

<p><form>uwandis</form> (from <ix>ulandis</ix>) <pos>n</pos> k.o. light-skinned <tr>cooking banana</tr> which looks like the <i>sab-a,</i> not commercially grown.

<p><form>uwang-uwang</form> <xr>= <sc>SALING-UWANG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>uwápay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>parrot fish</tr>.

<p><form>uwaping</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. edible <tr>mushroom</tr> that grows on rotten abaca or banana stalks, with a thin pileus, brown on top, and a slender stalk. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> gather <ix>uwaping</ix>.

<p><form>uway</form> <pos>n</pos> general name for <tr>rattans</tr>. <form>&mdash; palásan</form> <pos>n</pos> large brittle species used for furniture making. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> cut rattan cane into strips. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> gather rattan. <form>maN-r-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rattan gatherer</tr>.

<p><form>úway</form> <pos>n</pos> address to aunts, female cousins of the parents' generation.

<p><form>uwídu</form> <pos>n</pos> music played by ear. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> <tr>play by ear</tr>.

<p><form>uwígik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b3]</itype> for pigs to squeal. <pos>n</pos> squealing of pigs.

<p><form>úwil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> give s.o. <tr>sweet-talk</tr> to get s.t. out of him (colloquial). <i>Ug akuy muúwil ánà, musugut nà,</i> If I sweet-talk him, he'll agree. <i>Giuwílan ni Pidru si Huwan sa pagpapalit ug sigarilyu,</i> Pedro sweet-talked Juan into buying cigarettes for him. <number>2</number> <tr>lubricate</tr>, put <tr>oil</tr> on. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>flattery</tr> (colloquial). <number>2</number> lubrication <tr>oil</tr>. <form>&mdash; ab wintirgrin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>oil of wintergreen</tr>.

<p><form>uy</form> <number>1</number> <ix>particle initial to the sentence:</ix> <number>1a</number> an impolite way of attracting attention. <i>Uy, Pituy, dalia nang ímung búhat,</i> Hey! Pete. Hurry up with that work! <number>1b</number> exclamation <pb n=1118>of surprise upon noticing s.t. <i>Uy Pilang! Ingun kug dì na ta magkítà,</i> <tr>Why</tr>, Pilang, I didn't think I'd ever see you again. <number>1c</number> exclamation of delight or worry. <i>Uy! Malípay ku ug buhátun mu nà,</i> <tr>My</tr>! Would I ever be happy if you did that! <number>2</number> particle final in the sentence. <number>2a</number> <ix>contradicting the interlocutor's opinion or an opinion he might form:</ix> don't think it's not like this.&mdash;it is. <i>Mahal uy! Tíaw muy tag-utsu ang usa!</i> It's expensive, for your information. Imagine! Eight pesos apiece! <formx>dílì ku &mdash;</formx> I don't want to, don't think I do. <i>&lsquo;Paghúbù.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Dílì ku uy!&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Get undressed!&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;No, I won't.&rsquo; <number>2b</number> <ix>with imperatives:</ix> go on now, do it. <i>Sábà uy. Hibatian tang Pápa,</i> Keep quiet <tr>now</tr>. Daddy might hear us. <i>Ayaw úsà ug lakaw uy. Maniudtu pa gánì ta,</i> Hey! Don't go yet. We are going to have lunch yet. <number>2c</number> particle indicating surprise upon discovering s.t. <i>Sus, Mam, maáyu giyud ka kaáyu uy!</i> <tr>Goodness</tr>, Ma'am. You sure are good. <number>2d</number> particle expressing annoyance. <i>Sus nis Iduk uy! Nakulbaan kug maáyu,</i> <tr>My goodness</tr>, Edok. You sure gave me a scare. <form>ada &mdash;</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ADA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>úy</form> <xr>= <sc>ULUY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>uyab<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> girl or <tr>boy friend</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ANC; a2]</itype> be sweethearts, get for a <tr>sweetheart</tr>, make into a sweetheart. <i>Mag-úyab na sila kay sígi sa sini,</i> They must be sweethearts because they keep going to the show together. <i>Byúda ang íyang giuyab,</i> He made a widow his <tr>fianc</tr>ée.

<p><form>uyab<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> let fighting cocks clash for a short time for practice. <i>Iuyab ang mga hiniktan,</i> Let the fighting cocks clash for practice. <pos>n</pos> cockfight for practice. <i>Way uyab kining manúka,</i> This cock has no practice in fighting.

<p><form>úyab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>rinse</tr> with clean water. <i>Íya nang giuyában ang linabhan,</i> She has rinsed the laundry.

<p><form>uyabad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b3]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>bawl</tr>, <tr>cry out</tr> loudly. <i>Nag-uyabad ang bátà kay nangáyù ug dulsi,</i> This child is bawling because it is asking for candy. <number>2</number> grumble to oneself. <i>Unsa may ímung giuyabaran nga dakù ka mag báhin?</i> What are you <tr>griping</tr> about when you have a big share?

<p><form>uyabang</form> <pos>n</pos> fry of river shrimps. <i>Ang uyabang mga pínung ulang,</i> The young of river shrimps are tiny.

<p><form>úyag</form> <number>1</number> <tr>so</tr> that [such-and-such] a thing happen. <i>Uban lang úyab kapalitan kag sapátus,</i> Just come with me so I can buy you some shoes. <number>2</number> <tr>instead</tr> of doing [so-and-so] as one should have, he did s.t. else (and s.t. bad happened). <i>Úyag pa bítawng paiskuyláhun siya, nyà wà giyud magtuun. Dan, wà núuy titulu,</i> He was supposed to go to school, but he didn't. So, he doesn't have a degree. <number>3</number> [so-and-so] was going to happen (or not going to) but you did s.t. to ruin matters. <i>Úyag nat[=ú]g untà tung bátà, ímu pa giyung gipúkaw,</i> The child was doing fine asleep but you had to go and wake him up. <i>Úyag wà tà tu kahibáwu sa ákung sikrítu, ímu núung gibuku,</i> He would not have known about the secret, but you had to go and tell him.

<p><form>uyágak</form> <xr>= <sc>IYÁGAK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>uyakut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> mind talk not worth heeding. <i>Makunsimisiyun ka lang ug mag-uyakut ka sa mga sulting dugmuk,</i> You'll only worry yourself to death if you mind that idle talk. <number>2</number> mind business, work which is not worth it, does not give a profit. <i>Dílì ku mag-uyakut ug nigusyung dì makabúhì,</i> I won't kill myself for a business that doesn't even allow me to earn a living.

<p><form>uyámut</form> <form><r>[<i>adj.</i>]</r> &mdash;</form> quite [adj.] I should say, rather [adj.]. <i>Daghan uyámut silag kwarta,</i> They had a rather goodly amount of money. <i>Lahì uyámut ang íyang kinaíya kay sa íyang igsúun,</i> She has a quite different personality from her sister. <i>Pubring uyámut,</i> Quite poor, I would say. <i>Ngil-ad uyámut nga dì na ka muatúbang sa ímung nautángan ug kabubut-un,</i> It is rather unseemly, I should say, that you turn your back on s.o. you should be grateful to. <pos>a</pos> <tr>miserable</tr>, extremely <tr>poor</tr>. <i>Uyámut kaáyu ming mga iskwátir,</i> We squatters are miserably poor. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be extremely poor. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> extreme <tr>poverty</tr>.

<p><form>úyang</form> <tr>title</tr> for one's grandmother or a grandparent's sister or a female cousin of the grandparent's generation. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <number>1</number> voc. of <ix>uyang</ix>. <number>2</number> <tr>address of respect</tr> for old women not related. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>address</tr> s.o. as <ix>uyang</ix>.

<p><form>uyap</form> <pos>n</pos> tiny salt-water <tr>shrimps</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> catch, gather tiny shrimps.

<p><form>uyas</form> <pos>a</pos> past its usefulness or productiveness. <i>Ang apuhan námù uyas na,</i> Our grandparents are already very old. <i>Uyas ang yútà sa bakilid,</i> The soil on the slope is <tr>infertile</tr>. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become <tr>unproductive</tr>. <i>Muúyas (maúyas) ang dágat kun kanúnay dinamitáhan,</i> The sea will become bare if they constantly fish with dynamite.<i> Nagkauyas ang mga lubi,</i> The coconut trees are becoming unproductive.

<p><form>úyat<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> hang on s.t. to bend it downward. <i>Nabálì ang sanga kay íyang giuyátan,</i> The branch broke because he hung on it with all his weight.

<pb n=1119>

<p><form>úyat<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> take hold of s.t. or <tr>hold</tr> s.t. lifting it. <i>Siyay nag-úyat sa kápa sa rayna,</i> She held the queen's cape. <i>Nakaúyat siya sa alambri sa kuryinti,</i> He accidentally took hold of the electric wire.

<p><form>uyat-úyat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>tease</tr> s.o. or <tr>annoy</tr> him by persistent, irritating actions or remarks. <i>Ákù siyang uyat-uyátun nga dì na muulì ang íyang Máma,</i> I'll tease her by saying her mother isn't coming back any more.

<p><form>uyauya</form> <pos>a</pos> good enough amount to do for modest use or consumption. <i>Gamay kaáyung tindahána apan uyauya usab ang hálin, iguígù giyung makasapal sa gastu,</i> This store is very small, but it has a goodly sale, enough to cover the expenses.

<p><form>uyit</form> <xr>= <sc>IWIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>uylab</form> <xr>= <sc>UYLAP</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>uylap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>flare up</tr>, burst into flames. <i>Dalì kaáyung miuylap ang kaláyu,</i> The fire quickly flared up. <number>1a</number> for a light to <tr>flicker</tr>. <i>Salipdi ang sugà arun dì muuylap ang síga,</i> Cover the lamp so that its light won't flicker. <number>2</number> for pain to <tr>pulsate</tr>. <i>Nag-uylap ang kangutngut sa ákung hubag,</i> I have a pulsating pain in my boil.

<p><form>uyuan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>uncle</tr>: parent's brother or male cousin of the parent's generation. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> have an uncle. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> respect as one's uncle. <i>Kun nanguyuan ka kanákù, patúu sa ákung tambag,</i> If you respect me as your uncle, heed my advice.

<p><form>úyug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2S; a1]</itype> <tr>shake</tr> back and forth in any direction with quick motions, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Miúyug ang balay paglínug,</i> The house shook in the earthquake. <i>Uyúga siya ug kusug arun mumata,</i> Shake him hard to wake him up. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> mature coconut, at the stage when the water sounds if it is shaken. <form>(&rarr;) ug útuk</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>feeble-minded</tr>. <i>Uyug tingáli ug útuk kay dì makasabut dáyun,</i> He must be feeble-minded because he cannot understand right away. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B25; b6]</itype> for a coconut to reach maturity. <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ceremony</tr> and party upon blessing a house or inaugurating a building. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> hold a house <tr>blessing</tr>.

<p><form>uy-ug</form> <xr>= <sc>ÚYUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>úyuk</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. in the <tr>center</tr>. <tr>middle</tr> part: <number>1</number> middle part of the place where the fire is built in the stove. <number>2</number> <tr>bone marrow</tr>. <number>2a</number> young <tr>palm frond</tr>, esp. coconut. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>ALÚYUK</sc>.</xr> <number>3a</number> the whorl on the fingers made by the prints. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> place where the <ix>úyuk</ix> is located. <form>kina-an(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>KINAALUYUKAN</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ALÚYUK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>úyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. <tr>long</tr>, <tr>parallel</tr> to, <tr>alongside</tr>. <i>Mga balay nga úyun sa karsáda,</i> Houses built along the road. <number>2</number> in <tr>accordance</tr>, <tr>conformance</tr> with. <i>Úyun sa átung gikasabútan,</i> In accordance with our agreement. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> put long things parallel to s.t. or each other, be put parallel. <i>Mag-úyun tag higdà arun ta muarang dinhi,</i> Let us lie down beside each other so that we can both fit on this place. <i>Wà magkaúyun ang mga bughà,</i> The pieces of firewood weren't placed parallel to each other. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A2; b6c1]</itype> stay, place oneself parallel to s.t. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2C3; bc3]</itype> <tr>agree</tr>, <tr>go along</tr> with s.t. <i>Dì ku muúyun sa inyung plánu,</i> I won't agree to your plan. <i>Sumálà sa gikauyúnan,</i> According to the agreement we came to. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>ÚYUN</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr> <form>(&rarr;) ug bàbà</form> female genitalia (humorous). <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>ÚYUN</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr> <form>uyun-úyun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b(1)]</itype> agree with, go along with half-heartedly. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> do s.t. <tr>lengthwise</tr>. <i>Ipaúyun paghíwà ang patátas,</i> Cut the potatoes lengthwise. <pos>n</pos> done lengthwise. <form>pahi-, pasi-</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>ÚYUN</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>adjust</tr> oneself to s.t. or adjust s.t. so others can agree to it. <i>Pasiúyun na lang ku sa pagkáun dinhi, kay way láin,</i> I'll just adjust myself to the food here, because there is nothing else. <i>Gamay ra ákung gibutang síli kay ákung ipahiúyun sa tanan,</i> I put in very little chili pepper so everybody could eat what I was fixing. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>agreement</tr> reached. <i>Ang kauyúnan sa míting,</i> The agreement reached in the meeting.

<p><form>úyung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>title</tr> for one's grandfather or a grandparent's brother or a male cousin of his generation. <pos>v</pos> 1 <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> become <tr>old</tr>. <i>Miúyung (naúyung) lag kalit ang íyang nawung sukad mamatay ang íyang asáwa,</i> His face suddenly aged when his wife died. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> become a grandfather.


<pb n=1120>
<div1>
<head>W</head>

<p><form>wá<sub>1</sub></form> expression of mild <tr>disappointment</tr> uttered when s.o. fails to do what one wanted him to do. <i>Wá, kaláin dì man diay maná sa sini!</i> Gosh, why aren't you taking me to the movies with you! <i>Wá, kini ray ímung ihátag!</i> Gosh! Is this all you're giving me?

<p><form>wá<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>WALA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>wâ</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>WALÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>wáay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> raise a weapon preparatory to striking. <i>Giwaáyan níya sa bunal ang irù,</i> He raised the club at the dog.

<p><form><corr>*</corr>wáay<sub>2</sub></form> <form>&mdash; gid</form> <xr>= <sc>WARAY GID</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <sc>WARAY<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><form>wábul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B5; b6]</itype> <tr>shake</tr>, <tr>wobble</tr>, move in an irregular and jerky movement. <i>Kusug kaáyung muwábul ning awtúha básig náay dipirinsiya niíni,</i> This car wobbles a lot. S.t. must be wrong with it. <pos>a</pos> shaking, wobbling. <pos>n</pos> wobbling motion.

<p><form>wadwad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> break the soil, as in tilling. <i>Unsay itanum niánang dapíta nga inyung giwadwáran (giwadwad)?</i> What are you going to plant in the area you have plowed? <number>1a</number> for a pig to dig around in s.t. with its snout. <i>Giwadwad sa bábuy ang linadlad,</i> The pig dug around on the clothes put out to bleach. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> take s.t. out of a container to display it. <i>Ákung iwadwad (wadwárun) ang ákung mga butang arun nímu makit-an ug nía ba dinhi ang ímung gipangítà,</i> I'll take my things out so you can see if what you are looking for is here. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> <tr>work hard</tr> (slang). <i>Kinahanglang muwadwad ug maáyu ang draybir arung kabawì sa ábang,</i> A passenger jeepney driver has to work like hell to make enough to recover his rent.

<p><form>wagas</form> <pos>n</pos> pure <tr>gold</tr>, not worked into jewelry. <pos>a</pos> <tr>pure</tr>, <tr>unmixed</tr> (literary). <i>Wagas nga kamatuúran,</i> The pure, unvarnished truth.

<p><form>wagat</form> <pos>a</pos> for root crops to be watery and somewhat lumpy to eat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for root crops to become watery and lumpy. <i>Muwagat (mawagat) ang pálaw ug linghud pa,</i> <ix>Palaw</ix> is watery and lumpy when it is cooked too young.

<p><form>wagtang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>lose</tr> s.t. <i>Diin man ka. Nawagtang ka man,</i> Where were you? You disappeared! <i>Ayaw giyud nag wagtánga ang ímung bulpin!</i> Don't lose your ball-point pen! <number>2</number> <itype>[AP; a]</itype> drive away, make s.t. vanish. <i>Álak ray makawagtang sa ákung kaguul,</i> Only liquor can drive away my sorrows.

<p><form>wagut</form> <pos>n</pos> fibrous, inedible portion of jackfruit. <pos>a</pos> for sweet potatoes to be small and fibrous. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> come out small and fibrous. <i>Mawagut ang kamúti ug linghud pa kaáyu,</i> Very young sweet potatoes are small and fibrous. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having a lot of fibrous inedible portions. <number>2</number> being small and fibrous.

<p><form>wagwag<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; c6]</itype> <tr>spill</tr> s.t. out of a container. <i>Nawagwag ang harína kay nabutbut ang sáku,</i> The flour spilled because the bottom came out of the sack. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> rip or puncture a container so the contents spill. <i>Ikaw diay nagwagwag sa sáku kay ímu mang gidahik,</i> You made the sack rip because you dragged it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>divulge</tr> information. <i>Miwagwag hinúun ku sa tanan kung nasayran báhin níya,</i> I spilled everything I knew about her. <number>3</number> <itype>[A]</itype> go about with penis dangling freely. <i>Walà giyud kay úwaw kun magwagwag kang mulakaw sa karsáda,</i> You sure are shameless if you can walk down the street with your penis waving in the breeze. <pos>n</pos> secret that has become known.

<p><form>wagwag<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a variety of white paddy <tr>rice</tr> with strong panicles maturing late and giving a heavy yield.

<p><form>wáhì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> brush, push s.t. aside to clear the way or view. <i>Ang nag-una mauy miwáhì sa mga sangang nagbabag sa agiánan,</i> The guide <tr>brushed aside</tr> the branches which blocked the way.

<p><form>wahig</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>river</tr>.

<p><form>wáhig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> move s.t. attached to s.t. aside or out of the way. <i>Kamuy muwáhig sa mga bangkù nga nag-ali sa agiánan,</i> You move the benches aside that are in the way. <i>Siyay nagwáhig sa kurtína,</i> He pushed the curtains aside. <form>wahigwahig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>scatter</tr>, <tr>strew</tr> s.t. around. <i>Kinsa bay miwahigwahig niíning mga papil sa sála?</i> Who strewed these papers all over the living room? <i>Basakang nawahigwahig sa dakung pátag,</i> Rice fields scattered over the broad plain.

<p><form>wáhing</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> move s.t. to the side without lifting it entirely. <i>Iwáhing (wahínga) ang kurtína arun makalìlì ta,</i> Pull the curtain to the side so we can peek. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> lay one's work aside. <i>Muwáhing siya sa íyang gitrabáhu kun náay magkinahanglan níya,</i> He will lay whatever he is working aside if s.o. needs him. <form>wahingwáhing</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> flip through pages.

<pb n=1121>

<p><form>wáis</form> <xr>= <sc>WAYIS</sc> (slang).</xr>

<p><form>wait</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lip</tr> (not used in romantic contexts). <i>Mga libakíra nga dagkù, nanipis na lang ang mga wait,</i> They are a bunch of gossips with their thin lips. (Gossipers are said to have thin lips.) <number>2</number> lip-like <tr>edge</tr>, <tr>brim</tr>. <i>Dúnay buak sa wait sa bangà,</i> There is a nick on the lip of the jar.

<p><form>wak</form> <pos>n</pos> word used in writing to represent the sound of a whack.

<p><form>wákag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <tr>scattered</tr> all over not too large an area. <i>Kun kit-an sa mga bátà ning mga duwáan wakágun (iwákag) dáyun ni sa hawanan,</i> If the children get hold of these toys, they'll scatter them all over.

<p><form>wákal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be, become <tr>unintelligible</tr> in one's speech. <i>Wakálun (iwákal) gánì nímug sulti dì ka hisabtan námù,</i> If you <tr>mumble</tr> your words we won't understand you. <pos>a</pos> unintelligible, <tr>mumbling</tr> in speech.

<p><form>*wákang</form> <form>insik, tsíbay &mdash;</form> expression used to tease Chinese. <i>Insik wákang káun kalibang,</i> Ching chong Chinaman, eat and shit.

<p><form>wakanga</form> expression said to be used by Chinamen in anger or surprise.

<p><form>wákat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> <tr>scatter</tr>, put in <tr>disarray</tr>. <i>Nagwákat lang ang mga butang sa íyang kwartu,</i> Junk is scattered all over her room. <number>2</number> <itype>[B6C3]</itype> <tr>intertwine</tr>, be <tr>intertwined</tr>. <i>Nagwákat ang mga gamut sa bakhaw sa katunggan,</i> The roots of the mangroves in the swamps are scattered about in an intertwining maze. <pos>n</pos> the prop roots of mangroves, so called because they scatter out in every direction, intertwining and forming an impenetrable mass.

<p><form>wakay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ornamental fern that has large leaflets having a fine serrated margin, used to cleanse pots: <bio>Cyclosorus sp</bio>. <form>wakaywakay</form> <xr>= <sc>LUKDULUKDU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>wakis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>lift</tr> a cover up or <tr>push</tr> it sideways. <i>Hángin ang miwakis sa ákung sayal,</i> The wind blew my skirt up. <i>Magwakis nà siyang matúlug,</i> Her skirt rides up her legs as she sleeps. <i>Wakisa (iwakis) ang kurtína arun makasulud ang ínit,</i> Pull the curtain aside to let the sun in.

<p><form>waklay</form> <pos>a</pos> tall and thin. <i>Mikalit siyag túbù maung waklay,</i> He grew fast. That's why he is lanky. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become tall and thin. <i>Káun ug túda kay nagkawaklay ka,</i> Eat a lot because you are getting tall and thin.

<p><form>wakli</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> push, brush s.t. away from one. <i>Giwakli níya ang pagkáung gidúnul,</i> He brushed the food they handed him aside. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> drive out from the mind (literary). <i>Iwakli ang mga hunàhúnà mung way hinungdan,</i> Cast aside your foolish ideas. <number>3</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> give away s.t. of little value to oneself. <i>Usáhay waklíhan pud mi níya madiyut,</i> Sometimes he tosses a little something our <form>way</form>. <pos>n</pos> action of pushing s.t. aside. <i>Sa usa ka wakli nahapaúmud ang íyang kuntra,</i> One brush of the arm sent his enemy sprawling.

<p><form>wakling</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> push s.t. aside, usually causing it to topple over. <i>Wà ka giyud makawakling ánang mga kartun nga nakasámuk sa ímung lamísa,</i> Why haven't you pushed those boxes aside since they are in your way as you work at the table? <i>Ayaw nà waklínga (iwakling) arun dì mahúlug,</i> Don't push that aside or it will fall over.

<p><form>wakwak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bird</tr> which comes out at night, so called from its call. Its call signifies the presence of a vampire (<i>unglù</i>) or in some beliefs, it is a form the vampire takes himself. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for the <ix>wakwak</ix> to be about. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> victimize s.o. with vampire activity. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> go about engaging in vampire activity. <form>-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>UNGLÙ</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>wakwak<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the West piece of mahjong <xr>= <sc>WISTI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>wala</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>left hand</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>left side</tr>. <i>Likù paingun sa wala,</i> Turn to the left. <form>&mdash; ug tuu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>spending right and left</tr>. <i>Wág tuu mugastu mu rag <corr sic="unásis">Unásis</corr>,</i> Spending money right and left like Onassis. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be at the left side. <number>2</number> <itype>[a2]</itype> do s.t. with the left hand. <i>Walha pagkuput kay tuu may ímung ipakang,</i> Hold it with the left because you strike it with the right. <i>Ug makigtínis ka nákù walhan ta ra ka,</i> If you play tennis with me, I'll give you the advantage by playing only with the left. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> go or <tr>keep to the left</tr>. <i>Sa Inglatíra magpawala ang sakyanan,</i> In England they drive on the left. <form>walhun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>left-handed</tr>. <number>2</number> implement for s.o. who is left-handed. <i>Awtung walhun,</i> Automobile designed for driving on the left side. <form>walhun nga tikì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>southpaw</tr> (humorous and derogatory from the phrase <ix>walhung tikì tuuhung mangíhì,</ix> &lsquo;He's a southpaw <ix>tikì,</ix> but he uses his right hand to piss&rsquo;). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become left-handed.

<p><form>walà</form> <ix>short forms:</ix> <bx>wà, wâ</bx>. <tr>no</tr>, <tr>not</tr>. <number>1</number> <ix>preceding verbs:</ix> <tr>did not</tr>, <tr>is not doing</tr>. <i>Walà níya lutúa,</i> He did not cook it. <i>Wà ku matúlug,</i> I <tr>wasn</tr>'t asleep. <form>&mdash; madúgay</form> <tr>not long after</tr>. <i>Walà madúgay miabut ang amahan,</i> Not long after, the father arrived. <form>&mdash; sukad</form> <tr>never up to that time</tr>. <i>Walà sukad aku makadungug ánà,</i> I had <tr>never before</tr> heard that. <number>2</number> <tr>not be in a place</tr>. <i>Walà dinhi ang maistru,</i> The teacher is not here. <i>Walà pa (wap-a) sa Sámar ang bagyu,</i> The storm hasn't reached Samar yet. <number>2a</number> not be in a certain condition. <pb n=1122><i>Walà siya sa maáyung buut,</i> He is not in a good mood. <i>Walà ra siya sa kumingking itandì nákù,</i> He is nothing compared to me (lit. he is not even up to my little finger). <number>2b</number> <form>&mdash;y</form> there isn't, wasn't any. <i>Walay táwu,</i> There wasn't anyone. <i>Walà nay (wan-ay) túbig,</i> There's no more water. <form>2b1</form> <form>-y</form> [<ix>noun</ix>] [<ix>nom.</ix>] [nom.] does not have any [noun]. <i>Way kwarta si Huwan,</i> Juan has no money. <i>Walà ku árun,</i> I don't know anything about this. <form>2b2</form> <ix>phrases with walay:</ix> <form>wà tay amígu</form> you're not my friend (baby talk). <form>-y báli, kásu</form> [<i>dat.</i>] it doesn't matter to [dat.]. <i>Way báli nákù ug mabuak,</i> <tr>I don't care</tr> if it breaks. <form>&mdash; pay</form> before there was any, before it got to be. <i>Sa wà pay gíra,</i> Before the war. <i>Wà pa gániy úras,</i> It hasn't even been an hour. <form>-y láin kun dílì</form> <tr>none other than</tr>. <i>Ang mukanta way láin kun dì si Bin Abilyána,</i> Our singer is none other than Ben Abellana. <form>2b3</form> <form>-y</form> [<ix>doubled verb base</ix> or <form>Culu</form>-<ix>verb base</ix>] <tr>without doing</tr>. <i>Milakaw siya sa walay pupananghid (walay tingugtíngug),</i> He left without excusing himself (saying anything). <form>2b4</form> <form>-y</form> [<ix>verb base</ix> + <form>(&rarr;)</form>] <tr>without having done</tr>. <i>Bátang way ligù, way sudlay,</i> An unwashed, uncombed child. <i>Ulan nga way bugtù,</i> Rain without letup. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB12; a12b4(1)]</itype> <tr>lose</tr> s.t., be <tr>lost</tr>. <i>Nakawálà kug libru,</i> I lost s.o.'s book. <i>Nawálà ag ákung pitaka,</i> I lost my pocketbook. <i>Kustumbring nagkawalà,</i> Customs that are <tr>disappearing</tr>. <i>Ayawg wad-a (waláa) nang lapísa,</i> Don't lose that pencil. <i>Nawad-an ku sa pagsálig,</i> I lost confidence. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> lose one's way. <i>Nawálà kus lasang,</i> I got lost in the forest. <form>tag-(&larr;), tig-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>misplace</tr>, <tr>lose track of</tr> s.t. <i>Natagwaláan nákù ang papílis,</i> I have misplaced the documents. <i>Ug dílì katigwaláan nákù ning nagsunud nákù, madakpan ku,</i> If I can't <tr>shake off</tr> these people following me, I'll get caught. <number>2</number> <tr>get lost</tr> s.w. <i>Nadúgay mi kay gitagwaláan mi sa dálan,</i> We were delayed because we lost our way. <form>pahinga-, paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <i>dì, walà &mdash;</i> <tr>be without</tr>. <i>Ang palasikwáti dì magpahingawalà (magpakawalà) ug tablíya,</i> Those addicted to chocolate drink cannot be without chocolate tablets. <form>walàwálà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> occur, <tr>come off and on</tr>. <i>Nagwalàwálà ang ákung hilánat,</i> My fever <tr>comes and goes</tr>. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>void</tr>, <tr>space</tr>. <i>Unyà mibálik ang lalum nga tíngug sa kawaláan,</i> Then a deep voice came again from the void. <form>kawalad-un</form> <pos>n</pos> utter, <tr>abject poverty</tr>.

<p><form>walay</form> <number>1</number> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>WALÀ</sc>, <i>2b.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>WARAY<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>waldas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b5]</itype> move the hands or s.t. held in the hands above the head. <i>Nahadluk kus hubug kay nagwaldas sa íyang pinútì,</i> I was scared of the drunk because he was waving his sword in the air. <form>waldaswaldas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>WALDAS</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>gesticulate</tr> while speaking. <i>Daw búang siya nga nagwaldaswaldas sa íyang mga kamut,</i> He waves his arms around like a madman when he speaks. <number>3</number> <itype>[A1; c6]</itype> spend money wastefully, <tr>squander</tr> money. <i>Nagwaldaswaldas siyag kwarta nga dílì íyang hinagúan,</i> He just squanders money that he didn't lift a finger for.

<p><form>wáli</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sermon</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>lecture</tr> read to s.o. who has done s.t. wrong. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> deliver a sermon. <number>2</number> <tr>lecture</tr> s.o. <i>Ayaw gánì akug walíhi dihà arun dì ka masípà,</i> Read me a lecture, woman, and your head will crack like it never cracked before. <form>mag-r-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>preacher</tr>.

<p><form>wáling</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; c1]</itype> <tr>move</tr> s.t. to the side without lifting. <i>Ang nagwáling (nagpawáling) sa mga lingkuránan mau puy mag-úlì,</i> Whoever pushed the chairs to the side will have to put them back. <i>Walínga (iwáling) kanang mga basahun kay básig náa sa luyu,</i> Push the books aside. Maybe it's behind them. <i>Walínga ímung ilung ug kit-an nímu,</i> <tr>Follow your nose</tr> around the first bend (lit. turn your nose) and you'll see it. <form>walingwáling</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>turn over</tr> from side to side. <i>Giwalingwáling sa ditiktib ang minatay arun pag-ila,</i> The detective turned the corpse from side to side to identify him. <number>2</number> <tr>flip pages</tr> of a book.

<p><form>walingwaling</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>orchid</tr>, grown ornamentally: <bio>Vanda sanderiana</bio>.

<p><form>walis</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB26; c1]</itype> <tr>push</tr> a flexible covering aside. <i>May kamut nga miwalis sa kurtína,</i> A hand pulled the curtain aside. <number>1a</number> for the lips to turn up in a smile. <i>Nawalis (niwalis) ang íyang mga ngábil sa usa ka maanindut nga pahíyum,</i> Her lips turned up in a sweet smile. <number>1b</number> <form>&mdash; ang kahílum</form> <itype>[B26]</itype> for silence to break. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> in volleyball, for the hand to be knocked back and fail to return a ball that was hit with force.

<p><form>walts</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>waltz</tr> music or dance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC]</itype> dance the waltz.

<p><form>walu</form> <ix>numeral</ix> <tr>eight</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>TULU</sc>.</xr> <form>waluwálu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> wind and rain in heavy torrents for eight successive days. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>TAGIWÁLU</sc>.</xr> <form>ka-, maka-</form> <tr>eight times</tr>. <form>ika-</form> <tr>eighth</tr>. <form>tag-(&larr;)</form> eight at a time. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> do in multiples of eight. <form>tagi-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. snake that is said to stay eight days on dry land and eight days in the sea alternately.

<p><form>walug</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>valley</tr>. <number>2</number> <form>&mdash; sa ginluháan, pag-antus</form> <tr>vale of tears</tr> (the world). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> become a valley. <form>kina-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <pb n=1123>the lowest place of a valley.

<p><form>walup, wálup</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>wallop</tr>, strike with a hand blow. <i>Lisud sagngun ang íyang sirbisyu kay kusug kaáyung muwálup (muwalup),</i> It's hard to return his serve because he really wallops it. <pos>n</pos> wallop.

<p><form>walwag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> insert s.t. long in an opening and work it around. <i>Walwaga nang nakasampung sa túbu,</i> Work s.t. around in the pipe to get out whatever is blocking it.

<p><form>walwal</form> (from <ix>diwalwal</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for the tongue to hang out in panting, or figuratively, for s.t. to hang out like the tongue. <i>Muwalwal ang dílà sa irù ug hiinitan,</i> The dog pants with his tongue hanging out when he is in the sun. <i>Nagwalwal ang kinatáwu sa hubug,</i> The drunk's penis is hanging out of his pants.

<p><form>wánang</form> <pos>n</pos> wide or roomy space, esp. a flat place. <i>Dakug wánang ang ílang sála,</i> They have a <tr>spacious</tr> living room. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; a2b2]</itype> be, become <tr>flooded</tr> with. <i>Nawánang ang plása sa túbig sa kusug nga ulan,</i> The plaza became flooded in the heavy rain. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>outer space</tr>. <i>Misutuy ang rákit ngadtu sa kawanángan,</i> The rocket ship shot into <tr>space</tr>.

<p><form>wan-an-ihap</form> <pos>a</pos> a one-and-a-half storey house. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; c6]</itype> be a one-and-a-half storey house.

<p><form>wan-aydyak</form> <pos>n</pos> the jacks of hearts and spades, which are shown with only one eye. <pos>a</pos> blind in one eye (humorous).<i> Magdarkglásis bísag gabíi kay wan-aydyak man,</i> So that's why he wears dark glasses even at night, because he is blind in one eye. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become blind in one eye.

<p><form>wandag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> <tr>roam</tr>, <tr>wander</tr> from place to place. <i>Dì makapuyù nang tawhána muwandag giyud,</i> He never stays put, but he wanders from place to place.

<p><form>wandas</form> <xr>= <sc>WALDAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>wandirin dyú, wandiring dyú</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ornamental spreading <tr>herb</tr> with purple, acuminate leaves: <bio>Setcreasea purpurea</bio>.

<p><form>wandug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> move <tr>unsteadily</tr> as from fatigue, drunkenness. <i>Wà ka wandúgi sa trák?</i> Didn't it seem to you that bus was swaying? <form>wandugwandug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB3; c1]</itype> move unsteadily, <tr>stagger</tr> or <tr>sway</tr> while moving; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Miwandugwandug ang sakayan tungud sa dagkung balud,</i> The boat rocked from side to side in the big waves.

<p><form>wanggu</form> (word play on <ix>gúwang</ix>&mdash;slang. <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>GÚLANG</sc>.</xr>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>old man</tr>.

<p><form>wangì</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>bend</tr>, <tr>displace</tr> s.t. without moving it entirely. <i>Akuy muwangì sa tabla ug kuúta ang búla sa ilálum,</i> I will bend back the plank and you reach for the ball inside. <i>Kinsay nagwangì sa úbas sa sagángat?</i> Who bent one of the tines of the spear? <number>2</number> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> <tr>break off</tr> a piece of s.t. long, get broken off. <i>Muwangì kug sangang pára ilatigus kabáyù,</i> I'll break off a branch to use for a horsewhip. <i>Muwangì (mawangì) ang ákung mga pánit sa ngilit sa kuku usáhay,</i> The skin on the sides of the nail sometimes breaks. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>displaced</tr>. <number>2</number> broken off. <i>Wanging kuku,</i> <tr>Hangnail</tr>. <form>wangìwángì</form> <pos>n</pos> corners of the mouth at the lips. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> hit s.o. at the corners of the mouth. <i>Wangìwángía (iwangìwángì) siya pagkurit,</i> Pinch her at the edge of her lips.

<p><form>*wángis</form> <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> for a pig's canines to grow long because of age. <i>Nangwángis na ang ámung bábuy apan dì pa mangasáwa ang ámung ulitáwu,</i> Our pig has grown long canines but our young man doesn't want to get married yet.

<p><form>wangkata</form> <pos>n</pos> shape of one's body (slang&mdash;word play on <ix>katawan</ix>, Tagalog for &lsquo;body&rsquo;). <i>Mau nay wangkata. Pambátug banggà,</i> My! What a body! A sure winner in a beauty contest!

<p><form>wanglùwanglù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>stagger</tr> in one's walk, esp. of one who is drunk.

<p><form>wangsà</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bucktoothed</tr>, with the upper teeth sticking out and the mouth half-open. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> have this sort of characteristic. <i>Ábi nímug gwápu ka? Nagwangsà lang ang nawung mu,</i> Do you think you are handsome, you and your <tr>buck teeth</tr>?

<p><form>wangsat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> <tr>grin</tr> broadly (exposing the teeth). <pos>n</pos> <tr>broad grin</tr>. <i>Dakù kaáyug wangsat kay daúgan man,</i> He's grinning broadly because he won.

<p><form>wangsì</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having one or both the lips turned up such that it is impossible to close the mouth. <number>2</number> partly opened due to a cut with a side drawn up. <i>Wangsì kaáyu ang íyang samad,</i> She has a very wide cut. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6]</itype> 1 get a wide cut or for s.t. to get upturned. <i>Nawangsì ang tibuuk kung kuku,</i> My whole fingernail got turned up. <number>2</number> get opened, <tr>ajar</tr>. <i>Muwangsì (mawangsì) ang sira kun maluag ang bisagra,</i> The shutter won't close tight if the hinges are loose. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> tear s.t. off, loose. Giwangsì níya ang bungbung, He tore off the wall boards.

<p><form>wangtigu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>old man</tr> (word play on <ix>tigúwang</ix>&mdash;slang. <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>GÚLANG</sc></xr>).

<p><form>wangut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> chew s.t. with the gums. <i>Magwangut gánì ang masúsu sa bibirun sa átù pa katul na ang lagus,</i> When an infant chews the nipple, it means that his gum <pb n=1124>itches. <i>Wangutun (iwangut) sa ákung apuhan ang maskáda,</i> My grandfather chews his tobacco with the gums.

<p><form>wangwang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; b5]</itype> <tr>enlarge</tr> an opening by cutting or pushing two things apart, be <tr>dilated</tr>, widely opened. <i>Wangwángun sa mananabang ang agiánan sa bátà inigpanganak,</i> The midwife dilates the passage for the baby during delivery. <i>Ayaw wangwánga (iwangwang) pag-abli ang gít arun way makasulud nga bábuy,</i> Do not open the gate wide or stray pigs will come in. <pos>n</pos> wide opening made by pushing two things apart.

<p><form>wani</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; c6]</itype> be put in a wrong place, be <tr>mislaid</tr>. <i>Ayaw nà siya padad-ag paypay. Iwani na pud unyà nà,</i> Don't give her a fan to bring with her. She'll just misplace it again.

<p><form>*wani</form> <pos>n</pos> <form>mangga &mdash;</form> k.o. wild mango that bears long fruit with a peculiar smell: <bio>Mangifera odorata</bio>.

<p><form>wanklik</form> <pos>a</pos> in one instant, without any delay. <i>Wanklik ra ning laytíra. Síga dáyun,</i> With one click this lighter lights. <i>Wanklik ra nang bayhána. Way daghang hangyù,</i> That woman can be had instantly, no fuss and bother. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> do s.t. in one <corr sic=full>fell</corr> swoop. <i>Giwanklik lang ang íyang swildu sa súgal,</i> He lost all of his money in one fell swoop in gambling.

<p><form>wantáyim</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> do s.t. just for once. <i>Muwantáyim giyud kug palit niánà bísag mahal,</i> I'll buy it even if it is expensive, just this one time. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> do s.t. all at one time. <i>Wantaymun (wantayman) ta lag hákut arun usa ra ka byáhi,</i> Let's take it all at once so we only have to make one trip. <pos>a</pos> s.t. done just once or done all at one time.

<p><form>wantid</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> needed for employment. <i>Wantid kaáyu ang trabahadur sa kunstruksiyun,</i> They need a lot of workers on the construction. <number>1a</number> want ad. <number>2</number> one <tr>wanted</tr> for a crime. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; a1]</itype> be in need of an employee. <i>Kinsa kahay nagwantid ug tindíra?</i> Where was it they were needing a salesgirl? <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; a1]</itype> become wanted for a crime.

<p><form>wan tu tri</form> call sounded out in games to indicate player is ready for the next thing to be done. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> escape or get away from paying for s.t. (slang). <i>May gats giyud ka kun makawan tu tri kas Bisáyan,</i> You've got to have guts if you eat without paying at the Visayan Restaurant. <number>2</number> do service poorly and hurriedly. <i>Dì ka makawan tu tri ug tupi basta istriktu,</i> You can't cut hair poorly and hurriedly if the customer is fussy.

<p><form>wanwi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>one-way street</tr>, trip. <i>Dì ta makaági dihà kay wanwi nà,</i> We can't go that way because it's a one-way street. <number>2</number> a mode of betting in jai-alai using two digits wherein only one specific combination wins (as opposed to the <i>lyábi<sub>2</sub></i>). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> be, become one-way. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; ac]</itype> bet on s.t. one way and not in a combination (<i>lyábi<sub>2</sub></i>).

<p><form>waping</form> <xr>= <sc>UWAPING</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>wápir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wafer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, have wafers.

<p><form>warak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> throw s.t. or s.o. down with force so that it breaks. <i>Íya na untà nga iwarak ang kúlun sa kalágut,</i> She was about to smash the pot to the ground in anger. <number>2</number> spike a ball in volleyball. <pos>n</pos> a spike in volleyball.

<p><form>warakwarak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> scold continuously and loudly. <i>Kusug kaáyung muwarakwarak si Mama ug madúgay ming mupaúlì,</i> Mother scolds us continuously if we come home late. <pos>n</pos> things said in scolding.

<p><form>waraswáras</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1</number> go back and forth. <i>Nagwaraswáras pa ra ba giyud atubángas bisíta, nanimáhù ra ba!</i> She walked back and forth in front of the visitors, and to think that she had B.O.! <number>2</number> go in all directions hastily. <i>Miwaraswáras si Kuring pagpangítà sa puldir nga nawálà,</i> Coring went around in a dither looking for the lost folder.

<p><form>warawára</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wave the hands or s.t. held in the hands back and forth. <i>Miwarawára siya pagpahúnung sa awtu,</i> He waved his hand to stop the car.

<p><form>Waray<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the language of Samar and Eastern Leyte, so called from the form <ix>waray</ix> used in most dialects of this language analogously to the Cebuano <ix>walà</ix> and <ix>walay</ix>. <number>2</number> one who comes from the Waray-speaking region. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be, become a <ix>Waray</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> speak Waray. <form>-in-, Waraywáray</form> <xr>= <sc>WARAY</sc>, <i>n1,</i> <pos>v</pos>.</xr> <form>-nun</form> <xr>= <sc>WARAY</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr>

<p><form>waray<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> be gone, not in existence (colloquial). <i>Waray na tay pagkáun,</i> We have no more food. <i>Ayaw na lang tu pangitáa, waray na tu,</i> Don't look for it anymore. It's already lost. <form>&mdash; gid</form> none at all (humorous for <ix>walay gayud</ix>&mdash;from Samar-Leyte Bisayan <ix>waray</ix> and Hiligaynon <ix>gid</ix>). <i>&lsquo;Pilay kwarta mu?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Waray gid!&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;How much money have you got on you?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Not a red cent!&rsquo;

<p><form>ward</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hospital ward</tr>. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>PÍWARD</sc></xr> and <xr><sc>PRÍWARD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>wardabáhu</form> <ix>warning shouted when s.t. heavy is going to fall:</ix> timber! gangway!

<p><form>wardámids klím</form> <pos>n</pos> war damage claim.

<p><form>wardas</form> <xr>= <sc>WALDAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>wardin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>warden</tr>, a chief or principal keeper of a prison. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a2]</itype> be, become a warden.

<pb n=1125>

<p><form>wardiwardi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>squander</tr> wealth, spend money thoughtlessly. <i>Maáyu lang kamung muwardiwardi sa kwarta nga wà ninyu hagúi,</i> It's easy for you to squander money which you didn't work for.

<p><form>wargung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> go <tr>gallivanting</tr> around. <i>Ug muwargung mu, kanang mahuman na ug iksámin,</i> You can go gallivanting around after the examination.

<p><form>warì</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac1]</itype> give up a possession. Iwarì ku lang ang ákung yútà kay nagkinahanglan kug kwarta, I will give up my lands because I need the money. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give up one's job. Muwarì ku ning trabahúa ug may mas maáyu pa kung hikit-an, I'll leave this job if I find a better one.

<p><form>wárì</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>confuse</tr> s.o. and <tr>mislead</tr> him. <i>Waríun nátù ang mga bátà arun dílì makabantay inigpanlákaw nátù,</i> Let us mislead the children so they won't notice it when we leave. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> lose one's way. <i>Mawárì giyud kus dawuntawun magabíi,</i> I <tr>get lost</tr> downtown at night. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> in the game of <ix>tubigtúbig</ix>, the line drawn where the defensive players stand (where the offensive team is confused as to how to get through).

<p><form>warm-ap</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>warm up</tr> an engine. <number>2</number> [A; a 12] <tr>warm up</tr> for sports or other activities.

<p><form>warning</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give a <tr>warning</tr> prior to punishment. <i>Warníngan ka úsà. Dílì ka multáhan dáyun,</i> You're given a warning first. You're not fined the first time. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> ring a warning bell in school. <i>Nagwarning na ba?</i> Has the warning bell rung? <number>3</number> <itype>[A]</itype> be two points away from winning in pingpong. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> warning given not to do s.t. again. <number>2</number> warning bell in school. <number>3</number> player two points away from winning in pingpong. <form>&mdash; bil</form> <pos>n</pos> warning bell in school.

<p><form>warung</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dishevelled</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1P]</itype> be dishevelled. <form>(&larr;), ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> [A 13] be very dishevelled. <i>Mu ra kag si Ayinstayin, nagwárung (nagkawárung) ang buhuk,</i> You look like Einstein with your hair going every which way.

<p><form>*wasa</form> <form>hi-</form> <xr>= <sc>ALIWÁSA</sc>.</xr> <form>wasawasa, wasawása</form> <pos>v</pos> [Al; c16] <tr>scatter</tr>, <tr>strew</tr> all about, not over a large area. <i>Asúkar nga nawasawasa na sa yútà,</i> Sugar scattered all over the ground.

<p><form>wása</form> (from <ix>asáwa</ix>&mdash;slang) <pos>n</pos> <tr>wife</tr>.

<p><form>wasag, wásag</form> <xr>= <sc>WATAG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>wasak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>scatter</tr>, put s.t. in <tr>disarray</tr>. <i>Giwasak sa bátà ang mga inutaw,</i> The baby scattered the ironed clothes. <number>2</number> <tr>shatter</tr>, break into many pieces. <i>Nawasak ang básu sa simintu,</i> The tumbler fell and shattered on the cement floor. <form>wasakwasak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ANB12; c1]</itype> <tr>scatter</tr> all over the place, be scattered in disarray.

<p><form>was-anwir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wash-and-wear</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> wear wash-and-wear.

<p><form>wásay</form> <pos>n</pos> large <tr>axe</tr>. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a1]</itype> cut or chop with an axe. <i>Kawatan puy nagwasay sa aparadur arun maabli,</i> Some robbers also hacked the cupboard open with an axe. <form>wasaywasay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> name of <tr>bivalves</tr> which are shaped like the head of an axe, e.g. some kinds of <tr>hammer oysters</tr>. <number>2</number> general name for small <tr>dragonflies</tr>. <form>wasaywásay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>hatchet</tr> with a blade that is at right angles to the hatchet, the back of which is even with the handle.

<p><form>wasdak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> hurl s.t. down. <i>Ug ikaw muwasdak ánang lubi mabuak giyud,</i> If you throw the coconut down, it will surely break.

<p><form>wasi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a3]</itype> <tr>diverge</tr> from a path, go <tr>astray</tr>. <i>Nawasi ang íyang dálan. Mauy katungdánan ta ang paglamdag kaníya,</i> He has <tr>strayed</tr> from the path of righteousness. It is our duty to enlighten him. <form>wasiwasi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB1; c]</itype> <tr>scatter</tr> things; be scattered. <i>Ang iring mauy nagwasiwasi sa inutaw,</i> The cat scattered the newly-ironed clothes.

<p><form>wásì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> for the lips or a similar opening to be cut from violent impact. <i>Nawásì ang ákung wait nga naigù sa bátir,</i> I got an ugly cut in my lips because they were hit with the baseball bat.

<p><form>wasigwasig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB1; c1]</itype> <tr>scatter</tr> s.t. small all around; be scattered all around. <i>Nagkawasigwasig ang mga bugas sa pagkayabu,</i> The rice was scattered all over the floor when it spilled.

<p><form>wásing</form> <pos>n</pos> one who is a helper around a passenger bus, helping loading, washing, or whatever needs to be done. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B156; c1]</itype> be a helper around a passenger bus. <number>2</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> wash a vehicle.

<p><form>waslik<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> push s.t. aside with an abrupt movement of the hands, throw s.t. hurriedly down. <i>Gíkan sa iskuylahan muwaslik lang dáyun siya sa íyang libru dáyung dágan sa gawas,</i> As soon as he gets home from school he throws his books down and runs out to play. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b(1)]</itype> give s.t. as if it had no value. <i>Usáhay muwaslik (mangwaslik) pud siyag diyisun nákù,</i> Sometimes he tosses a ten-spot at me. <pos>n</pos> pushing away with a rapid motion of the hands. <form>&mdash; sa tabu</form>k expression uttered upon hearing s.o. sneezing (lit. go away to the other side of the river).

<pb n=1126>

<p><form>waslik<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wife</tr> (slang). <i>Batan-un siyag waslik,</i> He has a young wife.

<p><form>wasngà</form> <xr>= <sc>WANGSÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>wasngì</form> <xr>= <sc>WANGSÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>waswas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> rinse off soap and dirt with clear water in doing the laundry. <i>Waswási úsag maáyu úsà ihayhay,</i> Rinse it well before you hang it out to dry. <form>-l-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> clothes to be rinsed.

<p><form>waswas<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> rip off clothes, bedding or anything covering the body. <i>Ug inítan ka, waswása (iwaswas) ang ímung hábul,</i> If you feel hot, kick your blanket off.

<p><form>waswas<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wife</tr> (slang&mdash;from <ix>wása</ix>).

<p><form>waswit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wife</tr> (slang&mdash;from <ix>wása</ix>).

<p><form>wát</form> command to make a water buffalo halt. (from <ix>huwat</ix>. <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>HULAT</sc>.</xr>)

<p><form>watag, wátag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB1; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> scatter s.t. fairly good-sized causing a great disorder, not over a large area. <i>Nagwátag ang papil sa salug,</i> Pieces of paper are strewn all over the floor. <number>2</number> for money to be dispersed without one realizing it. <i>Mawatag lang ang átung kwarta ug magbiyáhi ta,</i> Your money goes like water when you travel.

<p><form>watakwatak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> scatter s.t. or splatter so that large splotches result, be scattered or splattered. <i>Nagwatakwatak ang tái sa bátà,</i> The baby's feces are splattered all over the place.

<p><form>wataswatas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> tear s.t. to small pieces, usually cloth or some fairly strong material; be, become torn to pieces. <i>Ang mapintas nga hángin miwataswatas sa atup,</i> The violent wind tore the roofing to pieces. <number>2</number> break a large bill. <i>Dílì lang mahibaw-ang mahurut ang ímung bayintihun kun mawataswatas na ni,</i> Once you break your twenty-peso bill, it will just disappear without your even noticing how it goes.

<p><form>wati<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>earthworm</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infested with earthworms.

<p><form>wati<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>ULAT<sub>1</sub></sc> (slang).</xr>

<p><form>wating</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b8]</itype> hit s.o. behind one's back by accident in lifting a machete or axe preparatory to striking. <i>Paháwà dihà. Tingálig hiwatingan ka,</i> Get out of there. I might hit you with my machete.

<p><form>*wátir</form> <form>&mdash; kan</form> <pos>n</pos> rectangular gasoline container with a handle, holding five gallons. <form>&mdash; kúlur</form> <xr>= <sc>WUTIR KÚLUR</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; mílun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>watermelon</tr>. <form>&mdash; pam</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>water pump</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> install a water pump. <form>&mdash; puls</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>waterfall</tr>. <form>&mdash; sil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>water-seal toilet</tr>, made of cement. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> use water-seal toilets.

<p><form>watsamára</form> <tr>what's the matter?</tr> (humorous). <i>Watsamára? Ngánung mihukyab mug pangatáwa?</i> What's the matter? Why did you burst into laughter?

<p><form>watsinanggu</form> <xr>= <sc>GWATSINANGGU</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>GWATSI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>watsir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> one who proctors an exam. <number>2</number> poll watchers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; b(1)]</itype> be a <tr>proctor</tr>.

<p><form>watsumára</form> <xr>= <sc>WATSAMÁRA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>watsung</form> a <number>1</number> <tr>homely</tr> looking. <number>2</number> of inferior quality or workmanship. <i>Watsung ning pagkagamáa kay wà maáyung pagkasipilya,</i> This was poorly done because it was not <corr sic=well-planed>well-planned</corr>. <number>3</number> not very bright, easily fooled. <i>Ayaw pangumprag ikaw rang usa, kay watsung kaáyu ka,</i> Don't go shopping without bringing s.o. along because you are not bright enough. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> become homely. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> come out inferior in quality or workmanship. <number>3</number> <itype>[B12; a2]</itype> turn out to be simple, not very bright.

<p><form>watúsi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>watusi dance</tr>. <number>2</number> k.o. small <tr>firecracker</tr> that crackles and sparkles when stepped upon. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do the <tr>watusi</tr>. <form>&mdash; bam</form> <xr>= <sc>WATÚSI</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr>

<p><form>watwat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> open up s.t. that opens into a slit. <i>Akuy muwatwat sa ímung mata arun makúhà ang puling,</i> I'll open up your eyes to remove the speck. <i>Nawatwat ang gamayng lungag sa bungbung kay anhà man sila magsígi ug lìlì,</i> The slit in the wall got quite wide because they keep peeping through it. <number>2</number> open up s.o.'s secrets for the <form>whole</form> world to know. <i>Giwatwat ang íyang makauúlawng kagahápun,</i> They opened up her shameful past to public knowledge. <number>3</number> <tr>recount</tr> s.t. in detail. <i>Giwatwat níya ang pagtákas sa Hapun,</i> He <tr>described</tr> the landing of the Japanese.

<p><form>waw wow</form>! an exclamation of great delight, admiration. <i>Waw, ligs!</i> <tr>Wow</tr>, legs! <form>&mdash; sabaw</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>SABAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>wáwa</form> <pos>n</pos> in combos, an electrical device in an amplifier which produces the sound <ix>wáwa</ix> when the guitar is strummed.

<p><form>wàwà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB26; c1]</itype> make a wide opening pushing s.t. aside. <i>Wàwáa ang pultahan kay isulud ang aparadur,</i> Open the door wide because we are going to get the dresser inside. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> wide opening between two things. <number>2</number> <tr>straits</tr> between two bodies of land.

<p><form>wawug</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bent</tr>, <tr>curved</tr>, <tr>warped</tr>. <i>Wawug ang linya,</i> The line is <tr>crooked</tr>. <i>Ang wawug nga tabla dì maáyung himúung hagdan,</i> A <tr>twisted</tr> board does not make a good stair. <number>2</number> wobbly, unsteady in walk. <i>Wawug ang linaktan sa hubug,</i> A drunk walks unsteadily. <pos>n</pos> <tr>bend</tr>, <tr>curve</tr>. <i>Tuluy wawug sa káhuy. Dì magsilbi pára halígi,</i> The tree has three bends. It won't do for a post. <i>Ang wawug sa búla,</i> The curve of a ball. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> be, become <pb n=1127><tr>bent</tr>, <tr>curved</tr>, <tr>warped</tr>. <pos>n</pos> bow. <form>wawugwáwug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> moving in a <tr>zigzagging</tr> fashion. <i>Nagwawugwáwug ug dágan kay gisunud sa bála,</i> Running in a zigzagging fashion because he <form>was</form> being chased by gunfire.

<p><form>wayà</form> <xr>= <sc>WALÀ</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p><form>wayawaya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mosquito wrigglers</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4b4]</itype> have mosquito wrigglers in it.

<p><form>way gid</form> <xr>= <sc>WARAY GID</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <sc>WARAY<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><form>wáyir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>electrical wire</tr>. <form>&mdash; gíds</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wire gaug</tr>e. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> measure with a <tr>wire</tr> gauge.

<p><form>wayis</form> a <number>1</number> <tr>sly</tr>, <tr>crafty</tr>. <i>Wayis si Baúhay kay nagpahilakhílak dihang lumsan untà,</i> How sly the turtle was when he pretended to cry when he was threatened with drowning. <number>2</number> <tr>sly</tr>, <tr>cheating</tr>. <i>Wayis kaáyu ang mga tindíra sa Karbun. Kusug manayúpì,</i> The vendors in the market are quite sly. They love to cheat. <number>3</number> <tr>wise</tr>, <tr>in the know</tr>. <i>Wayis kaáyu siya. Dílì patuntu,</i> He's very clever. You can't put one over on him. <form>&mdash; gay</form> <pos>a</pos> <xr>= <sc>WAYIS</sc>, <i>3.</i></xr>

<p><form>wayit drágun</form> <xr>= <sc>ISPÍHU</sc>, <i>n3.</i></xr>

<p><form>wayit guld</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>white gold</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>latex</tr>.

<p><form>wayit sayidwul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>white sidewall tires</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>white sidewall haircut</tr>, hair cut white on the sides. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear such a haircut.

<p><form>waypir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>windshield wiper</tr>.

<p><form>wayring</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>electrical wiring</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> install electrical :wiring.

<p><form>wayway</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> :dangle loosely. <i>Miwayway ang buktun nga natikbasan,</i> The arm that was hacked dangled loosely. <i>Ayaw iwayway ang panaptun sa bintánà,</i> Do not hang the cloth over the window.

<p><form>wíb<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> in boxing, wave the body to evade a blow. <number>2</number> in basketball, zigzag dribbling the ball. <form>-ing</form> <pos>n</pos> waving to avoid blows or zigzagging in dribbling.

<p><form>wíb<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> waves in the hair. <pos>a</pos> wavy hair. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for hair to become wavy. <form>pinggir &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>finger waving</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> do finger waving. <form>-ing lusyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cold-wave lotion</tr>.

<p><form>wíb<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a pattern of weaving, a weaving design.

<p><form>*wíding</form> <form>&mdash; anibirsari, dris, kík, ring</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wedding anniversary</tr>, dress, cake, ring.

<p><form>wídir byúru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Weather Bureau</tr>.

<p><form>wídu</form> <xr>= <sc>UWÍDU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>wig</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wig</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> wear a wig.

<p><form>wígik</form> <xr>= <sc>UWÍGIK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>wígun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>station wagon</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> ride a station wagon. <form>istisyun &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>WÍGUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>wik-ind</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>week-end</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> do s.t. on week-ends.

<p><form>wiktan</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>WITIK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>wilding</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>weld</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> set a dislocated bone in place (humorous). <form>-in-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>welded joint</tr>.

<p><form>wilga</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>strike</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab(1)]</itype> <tr>go on strike</tr>. <i>Giwilgáhan níla ang kumpaníya,</i> They went on strike against the company. <form>wilgista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>striker</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be a striker. <i>Dì na makabalik sa trabáhu ang nawilgista,</i> Those who had been on strike cannot return to their jobs.

<p><form>wíli</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b3(1)c5]</itype> feel sad at leaving s.t. or for the loss of s.t. gone. <i>Nawíli siya nga mibíyà sa íyang hinigugma,</i> He felt sad upon leaving his beloved. <i>Wà kuy kawid-an (kawilíhan) ning kalibútan,</i> I won't <tr>miss</tr> anything in this world (when I die). <form>&mdash; sa tuguntúgun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> take a long time to leave a place for an errand or to get s.t. accomplished. <i>Kadúgay nímung nakalakaw! Nawíli ka sa tuguntúgun?</i> Why can't you leave right away? What's holding you? <form>paN-(&rarr;), panga-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> having a feeling of sadness because of a loss or s.t. left behind. <i>Nagpangwili (nagpangawili) siya nga mugíkan,</i> He is leaving, but not without a feeling of sadness. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> sad <tr>nostalgia</tr>, <tr>sense of loss</tr>. <form>mawilíhun</form> <pos>a</pos> sad and reluctant to leave. <i>Mawilíhun siya nga nananghid sa pagpaúlì,</i> He said good-night with reluctance. <form>maka-r-</form> <pos>a</pos> engendering a feeling of irreparable loss.&dagger;

<p><form>wilik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> remove s.t. from oneself with a motion of rapid shaking. <i>Nangwilik (miwilik) siya humag hunaw,</i> He shook the water off his hands after washing. <pos>n</pos> action of flicking s.t. off of oneself. <i>Giwilik níya ang íyang itsay nga mikulabyun níya,</i> He shook off his girl as she was clinging to his shoulders.

<p><form>*wilkam</form> <form>&mdash; adris</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>welcome address</tr>. <form>&mdash; parti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>welcome party</tr>.

<p><form>wiltsir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wheelchair</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> ride or convey s.o. in a wheelchair.

<p><form>wilwig<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>sprinkle</tr> s.t. on s.t. <i>Walà ku makawilwig sa tanum,</i> I haven't gotten around to sprinkling the plants yet. <i>Wilwígi (wilwigi) únà ug diyútayng klinsir únà kuskúsa,</i> Sprinkle a little bit of cleansing powder over it before you scrub it. <number>1a</number> hand around money for bribes. <i>Kun walà pa muwilwig ug kwarta dílì untà makadaug sa iliksiyun,</i> If he had not tossed money around, he would not have won the election.

<p><form>wilwig<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> smash s.o. in the face hard enough to distort it. <i>Ayaw na lag supaksupak dihà kay wilwígun ku run nang nawung mu,</i> You'd better stop talking back like that or I'll smash your face so no one can recognize it.

<p><form>winblun</form> <pos>n</pos> windblown hairstyle, cut and curled so that the ends turn outward and to the front. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; c16]</itype> wear the hair or fix it <pb n=1128>in the windblown style.

<p><form>wind</form> <xr>= <sc>BINTUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>windusyáping</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> go <tr>window-shopping</tr>.

<p><form>wíngig</form> <pos>a</pos> deflected, crooked line or row. <pos>v</pos> 1 <itype>[B; c1]</itype> for a line to be deflected. <i>Muwíngig (mawíngig) ang linya kun tandugun ang rúlir,</i> The line will be deflected if the ruler is nudged. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26; c1]</itype> knock the face with a force hard enough to turn it to one side, be knocked. <i>Muwíngig (mawíngig) giyud nang ímung nawung ug ákung hisagpaan,</i> Your head will spin if I slap your face.

<p><form>wings</form> <pos>n</pos> well-developed muscles in the region around the scapula, toward the sides under the arm. <i>Dagkug wings si Mistir Amirika,</i> Mr. America has well-developed muscles on his back under his arms. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> get good-sized muscles in this region.

<p><form>wingwing</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> push the sides of s.t. apart forcefully with both hands to make an opening. <i>Átung wingwíngun (iwingwing) ang bàbà sa bátà ug dì muinum sa tambal,</i> Let's force the child's mouth open if he refuses to take the medicine.

<p><form>winirwínir<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>dodge ball</tr> game with two teams. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; b]</itype> play dodge ball.

<p><form>winirwínir<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>mistreat</tr>, <tr>step all over</tr> (humorous for <ix>daugdáug</ix>&mdash;<ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>DAUG</sc></xr>). <i>Ábi pubri man ku, ímu lang kung winirwinírun,</i> Just because I'm poor, you step all over me.

<p><form>winsild</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>windshield</tr>.

<p><form>wintirgrin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>oil of wintergreen</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> apply oil of wintergreen on oneself.

<p><form>wir-anwír</form> <pos>a</pos> garment that has been worn for some time without being washed (humorous&mdash;play on <i>was-anwír</i>).

<p><form>wíraw, wirawwiraw</form> <xr>= <sc>LÍRAW, LIRAWLIRAW</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>LÍRAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>wiris</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> hit the volleyball with a spin. <i>Walúpa ang búla, ayawg iwiris,</i> Hit the ball squarely. Don't put a spin on it. <pos>n</pos> hit the volleyball with a spin. <form>wiriswiris</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> <tr>scribble</tr>, write or draw squiggly lines. <i>Adris nga giwiriswiris sa papil,</i> An address scribbled on a piece of paper. <i>Giwiriswirisan ku ang íyang ritrátu sa kalágut,</i> In my anger I scribbled all over his picture.

<p><form>wiriwiri</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for a light to <tr>flicker</tr> or for the vision to be blurred, as when one is dizzy. <i>Nagwiriwiri ang ákung panan-aw sa pagtindug nákù,</i> I kept <tr>seeing stars</tr> when I stood up. <i>Hángin ang nakawiriwiri (nakapawiriwiri) sa sígas sugà,</i> The gust of wind caused the light to flicker. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> twisting and wriggling like worms, wrigglers. <i>Ug ayúhun pagtan-aw daghang nagwiriwiri sa súkà,</i> If you look at the vinegar closely you'll see lots of wriggling things in it. <pos>a</pos> <tr>wavering</tr>, <tr>flickering</tr> vision or light. <pos>n</pos> wriggling things, e.g. mosquito wrigglers. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; c1]</itype> move s.t. to and fro with a quick, jerky or shaking motion. <i>Ig-abut nákù muwiriwíri dáyun ang íkug sa ákung irù,</i> As soon as my dog sees me it <tr>wags</tr> its tail immediately.

<p><form>wis baskit</form> <xr>= <sc>WIST BASKIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>wisdam</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> have wisdom teeth. <i>Pagkabátà pa nímu giwisdáman ka na?</i> You have a wisdom tooth at your age? <form>&mdash; tut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wisdom tooth</tr>.

<p><form>wisik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> make s.t. fly off in all directions. <i>Nawiskan kug lápuk pag-ági sa trák,</i> I got mud splattered all over me when the truck sped by.

<p><form>wisiwísi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> shake s.t. violently in all directions to get it loose. <i>Manuk nga nagwisiwísi sa úlud,</i> A chicken pulling and shaking at a worm. <i>Nakawisiwísi ang irù sa íyang láwas gíkan kining nagkahúmud sa kanal,</i> The dog shook its body after it got all wet in the canal. <number>2</number> be violently <tr>mauled</tr>, bested as if shaken violently. <i>Platun sa kaáway nga giwisiwísi sa átung sundáwu,</i> An enemy platoon that was mauled by our soldiers.

<p><form>wiski</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>whisky</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> have whisky.

<p><form>wislayin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>waistline</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> have a waistline of a certain dimension.

<p><form>wislik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b2c]</itype> <tr>flick</tr> s.t. away with the hands, esp. to the sides. <i>Ayaw iwislik ngari ang ímung singut,</i> Don't flick your sweat on me.

<p><form>wispúwin</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>khaki</tr> fabric used for uniforms (from the brand name West Point).

<p><form>wist<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> west piece, the name of one of the winds (<ix>bintus</ix>). <number>2</number> the third player opposite the dealer. <number>3</number> third round in a game (<ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>RÁWUN</sc></xr>).

<p><form>*wist<sub>2</sub></form> <form>&mdash; baskit, kan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wastebasket</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; c1]</itype> make, use a wastebasket. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> throw into the wastebasket. <i>Mawist baskit nang ímung aplikasiyun ug wà kay bákir,</i> They'll throw your application in the wastebasket if you don't have s.o. backing you.

<p><form>wisti</form> <xr>= <sc>WIST<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>wistirn</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>western movie</tr>.

<p><form>wist layin</form> <xr>= <sc>WISLAYIN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>wist púwin</form> <xr>= <sc>WISPÚWIN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>witik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> strike s.t. with a <tr>flick</tr>. <i>Wikti sa latigu ang lángaw nga náa sa bukubuku sa kabáyù,</i> Take your whip and flick away the flies that are on the horse's back. <i>Wiktan ku nang dunggan mu,</i> I'll flick you one on the ears. <number>1a</number> sprinkle with a flicking motion. <i>Wiktig túbig úsà utawa,</i> Sprinkle water on it before you iron it. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> throw a <pb n=1129>basketball by flicking it (putting a spin to it). <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; bc]</itype> give a <tr>hint</tr>. <i>Ákung wiktan ang íyang dáang pawuntin pin inigpalit níyag bag-u,</i> I'll drop some hints for him to give me his old fountain pen when he buys a new one. <number>2a</number> make indirect, insulting remarks. <i>Abusádu siya. Maáyung wiktan panagsa,</i> He thinks he's so important. He needs a few digs every so often to keep him in line. <number>3</number> <itype>[AN2; c]</itype> give s.t. away of little value to oneself. <i>Nakadaug ka man sa madyung. Wikti sab mi dihà bi,</i> How about tossing some of your extra mahjong winnings our way? <number>3a</number> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> <tr>bribe</tr>. <i>Mihílum na lang ang pulis kay giwiktan (giwitikan) man ug singku,</i> The policeman kept quiet because he was given a fiver. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> blow with a flicking action. <number>1a</number> toss of a ball with a flicking action. <number>2</number> a <tr>hint</tr> or biting <tr>allusion</tr>.

<p><form>wíting<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> in cards or mahjong, be in a position where one needs only one more piece or card to get mahjong or rummy. <number>2</number> one whose days are numbered because of an incurable condition (humorous). <i>Ubang tigúlang nga wíting mupalit dáag lungun,</i> Some old folks that are just waiting to die buy themselves a coffin in advance. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B136]</itype> get to be in the <ix>wíting</ix> situation. <number>2</number> <itype>[b5]</itype> be the card or piece one needs to win. <i>Wà mugawas ang kartang ákung giwíting (giwitíngan),</i> The card I was waiting for simply refused to turn up. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>-AN(&rarr;)</sc>.</xr> <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> card or piece one is waiting for.

<p><form>wíting<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. gambling games with a roulette having 37 numbers, where the wheel is rolled twice and the gamblers bet on the winning combination (either <i>istrít</i> in the first and second or <ix>istrít íkis</ix> on the first and second in either order).

<p><form>wíting lis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>waiting list</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> be put on the waiting list. <i>Wà pay bakanti. Iwíting lis ta lang ka,</i> There are no vacancies. I'll just put you on the waiting list.

<p><form>wíting syid</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>waiting shed</tr>, place where passengers take shelter while waiting for a vehicle.

<p><form>wítir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>waiter</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> be, become a waiter.

<p><form>witkan</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>WITIK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>witris</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>waitress</tr>. <i>Ngánung nangasáwa siya niánang witris?</i> Why did he marry nothing but a waitress? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; b(1)]</itype> be, become a waitress.

<p><form>witwit</form> <pos>a</pos> drooping of lips, with the lower lip hanging down. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B6; b6]</itype> get droopy lips. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>chirp</tr>. <i>Langgam nga nagwitwit sa mga kakahúyan,</i> Birds chirping in the trees. <number>3</number> <itype>[A1; c2]</itype> <tr>complain</tr> about s.t., <tr>criticizing</tr>. <i>Wà kuy kawitwítan (ikawitwit) sa ímung ági,</i> I can find nothing to <tr>complain about</tr> in your work. <number>4</number> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> spread bad things about others. <i>Ang giwitwítan, miwitwit pud. Dì nahibáwu ang tanan,</i> Whoever received the gossip passed it on, so eventually everybody learned of it. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>chirping</tr> of the birds. <number>2</number> <tr>senseless talk</tr>. <i>Ang íyang isturya pulus witwit,</i> Her story is all so much <tr>idle chatter</tr>. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> given to complaining and criticizing. <number>2</number> given to passing on gossip.

<p><form>wìwì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> push the sides apart to create an opening or to widen an opening. <i>Wìwía ang bugang arun makaági ta,</i> Push the grass aside so we can go through.

<p><form>wudrus</form> <pos>n</pos> a vine that grows in thickets or cultivated to grow on fences: <bio>Merremia tuberosa</bio>.

<p><form>wukatun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>walking contest</tr>.

<p><form>wuk-áwut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> stage a <tr>walkout</tr>. <i>Muwuk-áwut ang mga maistra ug dílì usbáwan ug swildu,</i> The teachers will <tr>stage a walkout</tr> if they don't receive their salary increase.

<p><form>wúking</form> <pos>n</pos> walking, a violation in basketball where a player takes more than two steps while holding a ball. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be guilty of committing this violation.

<p><form>wúkir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>men's briefs</tr> (from the brand name, <ix>Walker</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear <tr>briefs</tr>.

<p><form>wukitúki</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>walkie-talkie</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> communicate with a walkie-talkie.

<p><form>wúl<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>woolen cloth</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear s.t. made of <tr>wool</tr>.

<p><form>wul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> one's hand in mahjong. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>PAYIL<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>wulpláwir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wallflower</tr> <corr sic=in>at</corr> a dance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b16]</itype> wind up being a wallflower and not asked to dance.

<p><form>wungwung</form> <xr>= <sc>YUNGYUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>wurding</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lyrics</tr> to a song. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> write the lyrics to a song.

<p><form>wurking</form> <pos>n</pos> student who works his way through school. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> be, become a working student. <i>Dúgay kang mahuman basta magwurking ka,</i> It will take you a long time to finish if you are a working student. <form>&mdash; istyúdint</form> <xr>= <sc>WURKING</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>wuswús</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> dance with s.o. in a wild swaying manner. <i>Nalípung ku kay giwuswús ku níyag sáyaw,</i> I got dizzy because he danced wildly with me.

<p><form>*wútir</form> <form>&mdash; kúlur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>water color</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> color with water colors. <form>&mdash; prup</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>waterproof fabric</tr>. <tr>&mdash; ripílint</tr> <pos>n</pos> <tr>water repellent fabrics</tr>. <form>&mdash; sarásay</form> <pos>n</pos> coconut palm toddy (slang).

<p><form>wuyuwuyu</form> <xr>= <sc>WAYAWAYA</sc>.</xr>


<pb n=1130>
<div1>
<head>Y</head>


<p><number>y</number> particle showing grammatical relations. <number>1</number> subject marker in sentences with nominal, pronomial, numerical, or interrogative predicates. <i>Kinsay muuban nákù?</i> Who will go with me? <i>Siyay muadtu,</i> He is the one who will go. <i>Si Huway ákung paadtúun,</i> I'll send John. <i>Duhay ákung balay,</i> I have two houses. <number>1a</number> in sentences with adjective predicates where the adjective means &lsquo;one which is [adj.]&rsquo;. <i>Pulay íyang gipílì,</i> He picked a red one. <i>Dagkù lay patan-áwun ánang salidáha,</i> They only allow grown-ups to watch that picture. <number>2</number> as a subject marker for subjects which express a future condition. <number>2a</number> in sentences with comparative adjective predicate where the subject means &lsquo;if it is [subject] which is the case&rsquo;. <i>Tambuk pay dyís nímu,</i> You're thinner than a dime (if it is a dime, it is fatter than you). <i>Maáyu pay mulakaw ka run,</i> It would be better if you were to leave now. <i>Dúgay pay mamiluk,</i> It would take longer to blink the eyes. <number>2b</number> after predicates meaning &lsquo;just imagine&rsquo;. <i>Tíaw mu bay mubáyad ug kás,</i> <tr>Just imagine!</tr> He paid cash. <number>3</number> after deictics, <ix>dúna, walà:</ix> there is (was, isn't, etc.) any.... <i>Walay táwu,</i> There wasn't anyone. <i>Dinhi ra bay nangítà nímu,</i> S.o. was here looking for you. <i>Dúna siyay ipamaráyig nímu,</i> He has s.t. he would like to ask you for.

<p><form>yáak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> step on s.t. with the feet treading around on it to squash or knead it. <i>Ákung giyaákan ang bulingun didtus sapà arun pagkúhà sa primírung buling,</i> I stomped on the soiled clothes in the river to get the dirt on the outside off. <form>yaakyaak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> roam around s.w. to look for s.t. <i>Dakung búkid ang ámung giyaakyaakan sa ámung pagpamusil,</i> We roamed around over a huge mountain hunting for wild animals.

<p><form>yaangyaang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> walk through the mud. <i>Lápuk nga kinahanglan yaangyaángan iniglabang sa basakan,</i> Mud we have to wade through every time we cross the rice paddy.

<p><form>yabag</form> <pos>a</pos> deviating from normal or proper actions. <number>1</number> <tr>off key</tr>, <tr>out of tune</tr>. <i>Dì ku makigdyúwit nímu kay yabag ka,</i> I won't sing a duet with you because you're off key. <i>Yabag nga pyánu,</i> A piano that is out of tune. <number>2</number> behaving in an improper, strange way. <i>Táwung yabag nga magkamisins simbahan,</i> An eccentric person that attends church in his undershirt. <number>3</number> s.t. that is <tr>senseless</tr>. <i>Yabag nga panagsulti nga wà kuy nasabtan,</i> Conversation that was gibberish and made absolutely no sense. <i>Yabag kaáyu nang paagíha,</i> That method is completely <tr>crazy</tr>. <number>4</number> given to roaming or wandering. <i>Yabag kaáyu nga amahan ug talagsa ras íla,</i> A father given to roaming about and rarely home. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> deviate from normal or proper action: become out of key, improper in behavior, senseless, a wanderer. Muyabag ang íyang sinultihan (kinantahan) ug makainum-inum, He talks nonsense (sings off key) after he has had a little to drink. (&larr;) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B156; a]</itype> deviate severely from what is proper or normal: be severely out of tune, be hopelessly senseless, completely <tr>eccentric</tr> or <tr>improper</tr>, wandering. <i>Nayábag ang inahan pagkasúnug sa ílang balay,</i> The mother went completely crazy when their house burnt down. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a2]</itype> <tr>play a joke</tr> on s.o. <i>Ayawg tuhúi ang íyang gisulti kay nagyábag lang nà siya nímu,</i> Don't take him seriously. He's just playing a joke on you. <number>3</number> <itype>[C3]</itype> having a great difference of age. <i>Nagkayábag kaáyu ang ílang panuígun,</i> They were very far apart in age. <form>yabagyabag</form> <pos>n</pos> actions which deviate from normal or proper conduct. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> engage in this sort of action. <i>Magyabagyabag ka gánì sa ímung pag-iskuyla, dì ka makagraduwar,</i> If you just fool around in your studies, you'll never graduate. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <xr>= <sc>YÁBAG</sc>.</xr> <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> of a <tr>deviating</tr>, <tr>abnormal</tr> sort.

<p><form>yabana</form> <xr>= <sc>GWAYABANU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yábi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>key</tr> for a lock or for a winding mechanism. 2 term for any wrench but a monkey wrench. <i>-ng balikù</i> <tr>box wrench</tr>. <form>&mdash; túbu, &mdash; ditúbu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pipe wrench</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> open or lock with a key. <i>Yabíhi ang kandádu,</i> Open (close) the lock. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> goad s.o. to anger with words. <i>Wà tà tu siya mangísug apan giyabíhan pung Putin,</i> He wasn't angry then but Poten said s.t. to goad him. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> wind an operating mechanism. <i>Yabíhi ang duláan,</i> <tr>Wind up</tr> the toy. <form>yabihánan</form> <pb n=1131><pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>keyhole</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>winding stud</tr>. <form>yabíra, yabíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>key holder</tr>.

<p><form>yabu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b7c]</itype> pour liquids or grains off, <tr>spill</tr> them over from a receptacle. <i>Yab-ig diyútayng túbig ang baldi kay punù ra kaáyu,</i> Pour a little water out of the pail because it is too full. <i>Nayab-an ug kapi ang ákung libru,</i> Coffee spilled onto my book. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>take out the garbage</tr>. <i>Nakayabu ka na bas basúra?</i> Have you taken out the garbage? <number>1b</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> for vehicles to <tr>capsize</tr> or <tr>turn turtle</tr>. <i>Gamayng sakayan nga sayung iyabu sa balud,</i> A small boat that easily capsizes in the waves. <number>2</number> <itype>[A123P; a3]</itype> <tr>flop</tr>, result in resounding failure. <i>Súgal ang nakayabu (nakapayabu) sa ílang nigusyu,</i> Gambling caused his business to flop. <i>Nayabu kus iksámin,</i> I flopped badly in the test. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> ditch one's sweetheart. <i>Giyabu siyas íyang trátu,</i> Her boy friend<note>boyfriend?</note> ditched her. <number>2b</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>throw a game</tr>. <i>Kinsa tung muyabu sa dúlà suspindihun,</i> Whoever throws the game will be suspended.

<p><form>yab-u</form> <xr>= <sc>UYAB</sc> (slang).</xr>

<p><form>yabun, yabunyabun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. itchy <tr>eczema</tr>, similar to ringworm, which exudes a whitish serum when scratched. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; b4]</itype> get <ix>yabun</ix>.

<p><form>yabyab<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> shake s.t. to remove foreign matter clinging to it. <i>Iyabyab ang abug sa ímung karsúnis,</i> Shake your pants to get the dust off. <number>1a</number> send off a breeze (literary). <i>Huyúhuy nga giyabyab sa kinaiyáhan,</i> Breeze sent forth by Nature. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> rinse laundered clothing in clean water. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make public s.t. secret and unsavory. <i>Mga ginamus nga iyabyab sa publiku,</i> Dirty linen to be washed in public. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A1; a1]</itype> <tr>chatter</tr>, indulge in idle talk. <i>Nagyabyab lang ang bàbà ning bayhána. Dì ka kapúyan?</i> You are always shooting off your mouth. Don't you ever get tired?

<p><form>yabyab<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> cause solids in a container to spill out and be strewn all over. <i>Nayabyab ang bugas nga ákung gidala kay wà ayúhag putus,</i> The rice I brought spilled because it wasn't wrapped well. <i>Ákung giyabyab ang usa ka sákung santul sa salug,</i> I emptied a sackful of santol fruit on the floor.

<p><form>yad-ak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> become sluggish or slow-moving due to excessive obesity. <i>Ása makahuman ug dalì sa íyang búhat nga nagyad-ak man ang líhuk?</i> How could she ever finish anything fast when she is so fat she moves slowly? <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> moving slowly because of obesity. <number>2</number> <tr>dull</tr>, <tr>uninteresting</tr>. <i>Yad-ak kaáyung pakigpúlung,</i> A very uninteresting speech.

<p><form>yadakadtu</form> short for <ix>íya ra kadtu</ix> it was his (her) own (fault). <i>Yadakadtu nga salà nga gilatigu siya,</i> It was his own fault that he got whipped.

<p><form>yadba</form> <xr>= <sc>BÁYAD</sc>, <pos>n</pos>, <i>v1</i> (slang).</xr>

<p><form>yadbut</form> <xr>= <sc>BÁYAD</sc>, <pos>n</pos>, <i>v1</i></xr> (slang&mdash;word play on <xr><sc>YADBA</sc></xr>).

<p><form>yadtu</form> <xr>= <sc>KADTU</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p><form>yad-uk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>swallow</tr> down a liquid. <i>Yad-úkun (iyad-uk) ra níyag kaduha ang usa ka básung bínu,</i> He will swallow the glass of wine in two gulps.

<p><form>yagabyab</form> <xr>= <sc>LAGABLAB</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yagatyat</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>fruit</tr> that is soft, lacking in firmness of flesh. <i>Kinsa guy mukáun ánang yagatyat nga ságing?</i> Who feels like eating that soft banana? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> come out soft, lacking in firmness. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> soft, not firm-fleshed fruit.

<p><form>yágaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB46]</itype> be in noisy <tr>commotion</tr>, <tr>confusion</tr>, bring s.t. into confusion. <i>Nagkadaíyang pangutána ang miyágaw sa iyang pangísip,</i> All those different questions confused his mind. <i>Nagyágaw ang mga táwus sinihan pagsiyáuks bumbíru,</i> The people in the movie house were in a tumult when the fire truck shrieked. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> confusion, din. <i>Lúpig pay tyanggis kayágaw,</i> Worse than the market in noise and confusion. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be in great confusion.

<p><form>yag-aw</form> <xr>= <sc>DYAG-AW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yagawyaw</form> <pos>n</pos> general <tr>din</tr>, <tr>noise</tr>. <i>Hásul kaáyung pamatíun ang yagawyaw sa syudad,</i> The steady noise of the city is annoying. <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>YAWYAW</sc>, <pos>v</pos>.</xr> <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> given to ranting.

<p><form>yagàyagà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>ridicule</tr>, <tr>make fun</tr> of s.o. <i>Isumbung sa maistra ang muyagàyagà sa bakul ninyung klasmit,</i> If anybody makes fun of your lame classmate, report him to the teacher. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>bother</tr>, <tr>disturb</tr>. <i>Ayaw kug yagàyagai (yagàyagaa) niánang ímung prublíma,</i> Do not bother me with your problems. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; bc1]</itype> do one's work carelessly or shoddily. <i>Kun magyagàyagà ka sa ímung búhat dúgay nga mahuman,</i> If you are <tr>careless</tr> with your work, it will take a long time to finish it. <i>Giyagàyagaan lang nímu pagbúhat ang lamísa,</i> You did make the table carelessly. <i>Yagàyagaa (iyagàyagà) paghíwà arun masámad ka,</i> Keep slicing carelessly like that so you can hurt yourself. <pos>n</pos> ridicule, teasing. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> given to making fun of s.o.

<p><form>yagbun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB3(1); c1]</itype> <tr>heap</tr>, <tr>pile</tr> s.t up; be heaped up. <i>Nakayagbun na sila sa mga dalag,</i> They have gathered the dry leaves in a heap. <i>Nagyagbun ang sagbut sa ílang sílung,</i> Garbage is piling up beneath their house.

<p><form>yagbut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> spill out through the bottom <pb n=1132>of a container. <i>Nagyagbut ang bugas kay nabutbut ang sáku,</i> The rice spilled out of the bottom of the container because the sack got a hole in the bottom.

<p><form>yagkaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lanky</tr>.

<p><form>yagpis</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>thin</tr> or <tr>slender</tr> of build, or by extension, thin from having lost weight. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; a]</itype> become thin or slim. <i>Ug muliwat nímu, mayagpis ang ímung anak,</i> If your son turns out to be like you, he'll be thin, too. <number>2</number> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> slice or cut s.t. thinly. <i>Yagpísa (iyagpis) paghíwà ang kasahusun,</i> Slice the meat thinly for jerked meat. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> of a <tr>slim</tr>, <tr>thin</tr> sort.

<p><form>yagubhub</form> a <number>1</number> loud <tr>put-put</tr> sound, as that produced by the engine of a motorboat close by one. <number>2</number> <tr>muttering</tr>, <tr>murmuring</tr> in a low, inaudible voice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; c]</itype> <tr>mumble</tr>, <tr>mutter</tr>. <i>Miyagubhub siyag pangadyiun,</i> He murmured a prayer. <i>Nagyagubhub siya pagkasábà nákù,</i> He muttered s.t. when I scolded him.

<p><form>yagubyub</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>muttering</tr>, <tr>mumbling</tr>. <number>2</number> dull, thudding noises made by wind, water, machinery. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac1]</itype> make muttering noises in angry protest or displeasure. <i>Giyagubyúban sa mga táwu ang mamumulung,</i> The people <tr>muttered</tr> angrily as he gave his speech. <number>2</number> <itype>[AP; ac1]</itype> make dull, continuous thudding noises. <i>Nagyagubyub ang tíngug sa trák sa layù,</i> The truck made thudding noises from afar.

<p><form>yagungyung</form> <pos>n</pos> continuous <tr>humming</tr> or <tr>droning</tr> sound, as of an airplane, engines.<i> Mabátì sa layù ang yagungyung sa ayruplánu,</i> You could hear the droning of the airplane from afar. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make a continuous droning sound.

<p><form>yaguyágu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> move busily about. <i>Dì lang makayaguyágu si Nánay ug magláin ang láwas,</i> Mother always moves busily about except when she is not feeling well.

<p><form>yagùyù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> pester s.o., asking for s.t., but in an endearing way. <i>Ganíha pang buntag siyang nagyagùyù ug kwarta sa íyang amahan,</i> She has been playing up to her father for money since this morning.

<p><form>yagyag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; ac]</itype> <number>1</number> scatter small things around by spilling them from their container; for s.t. in a container to spill out and get scattered. <i>Pagkagísì sa bulsíta, nayagyag ang harína,</i> When the paper bag tore, the flour spilled all over. <i>Yagyágun ku nang tinái mu,</i> I'll stab you so your intestines hang out all over. <number>2</number> <tr>divulge</tr> secrets. <i>Iyagyag ku ang ímung ginamus,</i> I'll let all the world know the dirty truth about you. <number>3</number> distribute s.t. in quantity with an ulterior motive. <i>Kandidátu nga miyagyag ug linibu sa ílang distrítu,</i> Candidates who poured thousands into their districts.

<p><form>yahat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1c]</itype> <tr>look up</tr>, raise one's eyes up, usually without moving the head. <i>Miyahat siya sa nagtawag níya,</i> She looked up to the man who addressed her. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> open one's eyes. <i>Dì na muyahat ang íyang mga mata,</i> His eyes will no longer open.

<p><form>yahigyahig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> <tr>scatter</tr> s.t. all over a place, be scattered all over. <i>Kinsay miyahigyahig sa mga piryudiku?</i> Who scattered the newspapers all over the place?

<p><form>yahung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>soup bowl</tr> or small <tr>bowl</tr>.

<p><form>yakà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> sit with the buttocks and legs flat on a surface. <i>Nagyakà ang Búda,</i> The Buddha is sitting flat on the ground. 2 do s.t. to the finish. <i>Giyak-an níya ang íyang trabáhu hangtud nahuman,</i> He spent all of his time on his work until it was finished. <i>Giyak-an níya ang kinílaw, dà hurut lagi,</i> He sat down to a plate of raw fish and finished it off. <number>3</number> <itype>[B1456]</itype> for the nose to be flat (lit. squat). <i>Ása kuháa ang kagwápa niánà nga nagyakà nang ílung?</i> How can you think that she is beautiful when she has such a flat nose? <pos>a</pos> having a flat nose. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> fall into a sitting position.

<p><form>yakal</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. hardwood <tr>tree</tr>, producing extremely hard, first-class wood.

<p><form>yakbut</form> <pos>a</pos> for a mouth to be sunken. <i>Yakbut kaáyu nà siyag bàbà ug way pustísu,</i> His mouth is sunken without his false teeth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> for the mouth to be sunken.

<p><form>yakmù</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having a protruding pointed chin. <number>2</number> having a sunken mouth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> get to have a protruding chin or sunken mouth. <i>Nayakmù ka kay dílì ka mupustísu,</i> You developed a pointed chin because you would not wear your false teeth. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> being somewhat <tr>protruding</tr>, <tr>sunken</tr>.

<p><form>yakub</form> <pos>a</pos> for the cheeks and the area around the mouth to be sunken. <i>Ang mga tigúlang yakub nag bàbà kay wà na may ngípun,</i> Old people have sunken cheeks and mouths because they are toothless. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for the cheeks to become sunken. <form>(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>YAKUB</sc>, <pos>v</pos>.</xr> <form>yakubyakub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for a person without teeth to move his mouth up and down. <i>Muyakubyakub na ang mga tigúlang nga way ngípun,</i> Old persons that have no teeth keep moving their mouths.

<p><form>yamáda</form> <xr>see <sc>YAMAR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yáman</form> <xr>= <sc>MAYÁMAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yam-ang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; ac1]</itype> do s.t. in a careless way, careless in one's behavior without regard to propriety. <i>Siyay nagyam-ang niánang mga plátu dihà sa lamísa,</i> She just tossed the <pb n=1133>plates anywhere on the table. <i>Ayaw ug yam-ánga (iyam-ang) ang ímung sinultihan kay pikun ang mga táwu dinhi,</i> Be careful about the way you talk because the people here are quick to take offense. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b(1)]</itype> <tr>destroy</tr>, <tr>besmirch</tr>. <i>Siya ang miyam-ang (nangyam-ang) niánang istatúwa,</i> He was the one who marred that statue. <i>Makayam-ang (makapangyam-ang) ka pagsulti kuntra kaníya kay náa may ímung gisalígan,</i> You can say bad things against her because you have s.o. behind you. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>careless</tr> and not paying enough attention. <i>Yam-angan kaáyu nang bayhána maglingkud. Makítà ang panti,</i> That woman is careless about the way she sits. You can see her panties. <number>2</number> careless, not giving a hoot.

<p><form>yamar</form> <pos>v</pos> <form>1&ndash;5</form> <xr>= <sc>LYAMAR</sc>.</xr> <number>6</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>call out</tr> in response. <i>Muyamar ug &lsquo;nía&rsquo; kadtung tawgun ang ngálan,</i> If your name is called, answer &lsquo;here&rsquo;. <number>6a</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>respond</tr>, <tr>react</tr> to stimuli. <i>Patay na tingáli kay dì na muyamar ang íyang kamut bisan dut-úyan ug kaláyu,</i> He must be dead because his hand does not react even if you put fire to it. <number>7</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>attract</tr>, <tr>elicit attention</tr> or <tr>interest</tr>. <i>Wà muyamar sa katilingban ang íyang pakigpúlung,</i> His speech did not attract the attention of the public. <form>yamáda</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> call out to announce s.t. <i>Niyamáda siyag usa ka líbu álang sa pula,</i> He called out a thousand-peso bet on the red cock. <i>Ngánung wà man ka magyamáda nga gibug-atan ka na?</i> Why did you not call out to let us know that it was too heavy for you? <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>demand</tr>, <tr>ask for</tr> s.t. in a bossy manner. <i>Magdagandagan intáwun ang inahan kun muyámada na ang anak ug kwarta,</i> The poor mother runs about everywhere whenever her son demands money. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a <tr>call</tr>, loud-voiced <tr>demand</tr>. <number>2</number> the favored contestant in contests with betting.

<p><form>yámas</form> <xr>= <sc>YÁMAT</sc>, as exclamation.</xr>

<p><form>yámat</form> <number>1</number> <tr>exclamation</tr> of pleasant surprise. <i>Yámat, aháan!</i> My! It's a giant snapper. <number>2</number> exclamation of extreme annoyance at s.t. not being in order, working out, or being done as expected. <i>Yámat ning makinilyáha. Makalangan!</i> Damn this typewriter. It sure holds you back! <form>yamatyamat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> for s.t. that one accomplishes or a situation to be in chaos. <i>Nagyamatyamat ning ákung trabáhu kay wà sa ákung hunàhúnà ang ákung búhat,</i> My work was all <tr>chaotic</tr> because my mind was not on it. <form>ka-, kayamatyamat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <xr>= <sc>YAMATYAMAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yamàyamà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> talk without sense or factual basis. <i>Unsa na sad tung íyang giyamàyamà?</i> What k.o. nonsense was he telling this time? <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; b1]</itype> do work <tr>carelessly</tr>. <i>Íya lang giyamàyamaan ug tahì ang ákung sinínà maung naghíbat,</i> She sewed my dress carelessly and so it is all crooked. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos><note>should be n</note> one who does his work carelessly.

<p><form>yambà</form> <pos>a</pos> for a mouth or mouth-like opening to be <tr>distorted</tr>, <tr>crooked</tr> and <tr>misshapen</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> become crooked or misshapen, cause s.t. to become so. <i>Muyambà ang bàbà sa básag ug lingkúran,</i> The mouth of the clothes basket will become crooked if you sit on it. <i>Ayawg yambáa (iyambà) ang ímung bàbà kay musamut kag kangil-ad,</i> Don't distort your mouth because you will become more ugly.

<p><form>yambì</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for two movable things which should be placed even, directly on top of one another, not to be so, with one <tr>protruding</tr>. <i>Yambì ang takup sa malítang daut,</i> The suitcase is broken and the top hangs over the edge. <number>2</number> for the lower jaw or lip to protrude. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> get to be, be uneven, not closing tightly; <tr>pouting</tr>. <i>Nagyambì ang nawung sa bátang gisugsúg,</i> The child they are teasing is sticking out his lower lip about to cry. <i>Ug mayambì ang gunting dì na mudulut,</i> If the blades of the scissors get apart, they won't cut.

<p><form>yamhang</form> <pos>a</pos> carelessly <tr>inattentive</tr> or <tr>neglectful</tr>. <i>Yamhang kaáyu nang bayhána. Húgaw kaáyug hitsúra,</i> That woman neglects her appearance, and she looks very untidy. <i>Yamhang siyang magtrabáhu. Daghang sayup,</i> She is <tr>careless</tr> in her work and makes lots of mistakes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be carelessly inattentive or neglectful. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>YAMHANG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yam-id</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6c1]</itype> <tr>sneer</tr>, twist the lips in <tr>contempt</tr>, <tr>disapproval</tr>. <i>Miyam-id (nangyam-id) ang bátà sa pagkáun,</i> The child pouted at the food. <i>Babáying mubug lupad nga giyam-íran sa katilingban,</i> A woman of loose morals the whole society sneers at. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> sneer. <form>yam-iran</form> <pos>a</pos> given to sneering or pouting one's lips. <form>mayam-írun</form> <pos>a</pos> done in a contemptuous, sneering way.

<p><form>yamíhid</form> <xr>= <sc>TAMÍHID</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yamíid</form> <xr>= <sc>YAM-ID</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yámis</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>foreskin</tr>. <number>2</number> other thin layers like the foreskin: <number>2a</number> outer <tr>epidermis</tr>. <i>Yámis ra sa íyang buktun ang nagarus, walà ang unud,</i> She only scraped the outer <tr>skin</tr> on her arm, and not her flesh. <number>2b</number> thin transparent meat of a young coconut in the <ix>butung</ix> stage. <number>2c</number> the soft, upper layer of the mature meat of a coconut.

<p><form>yam-is</form> <pos>a</pos> slightly sweet. <i>Yam-is ang ubang imbaw,</i> Some clams taste somewhat sweet. <pb n=1134><pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> taste <tr>sweetish</tr>. <i>Nagyam-is ang ákung bàbà human makainum sa sikwáti,</i> I have a sweetish taste in my mouth after drinking the chocolate. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> of a sweetish kind.

<p><form>yamitak, yamítak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> become <tr>muddy</tr> or <tr>messy</tr>. <i>Basta mag-úwan, muyamitak giyud ang ámung nataran,</i> Whenever it rains, our yard becomes muddy. <i>Kanang inyung pagwasigwasig sa kan-un mauy nakayamítak sa lamísa,</i> The way you strewed the food around, the table has gotten to be a mess. <number>2</number> talk off the topic or nonsense. <i>Sábà dihà. Nagyamitak ka lang. Wà man gánì ka didtu,</i> Be quiet. You don't know what you're talking about. You weren't even there. <number>2a</number> sit around doing nothing.

<p><form>yampungad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b36]</itype> <tr>hang around</tr> a place idly, esp. where one shouldn't be. <i>Nagyampungad sa tubaan,</i> Hanging around the toddy stand. <i>Irù nga nagyampungad sa ámù,</i> A dog hanging around our house.

<p><form>yamtak</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>slow</tr> and <tr>sluggish</tr> in movement. <i>Kayamtak gud nímung naurásan ka ánà,</i> How slow you are. It took you an hour to do that. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> get to be slow and sluggish in motion. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>mope</tr>, hang or <tr>loaf</tr> around. <i>Labihan mung nakayamtak! Buntag, hápun wà giyud kay nabúhat,</i> You sure do loaf. The whole day long you have not done a darn thing.

<p><form>yamu</form> <form>walà &mdash;</form> there isn't (wasn't) any at all. <i>&lsquo;Naa pa bay ságing ánang baskit?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Walà yamu&rsquo;,</i> &lsquo;Are there more bananas in that basket?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;There isn't a single one.&rsquo; <i>Wà yamuy kwarta,</i> Not a bit of money. <pos>n</pos> zero (humorous). <i>Ang numiru sa ákung tilipunu nuybi, tris, yamu, yamu, kwatru,</i> My phone number is 9&ndash;30&ndash;04.

<p><form>yámug</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dew</tr>. <number>1a</number> water droplets on leaves after rain. <i>Humans ulan, nanidlaksidlak ang yámug sa kadahúnan,</i> After the rain, droplets of water sparkled on the leaves. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>DALÍNUG</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B236N; b(1)]</itype> be covered with dew. <i>Nangyámug (miyámug) sa sayu sa buntag,</i> Dew which formed early in the morning.

<p><form>yámuk</form> <xr>= <sc>LÁMUK</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>LAMUK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>*yamúkat</form> <form>ka-</form> <xr>= <sc>KALAMÚKAT</sc>.</xr> <xr>see <sc>LAMÚKAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yamukmuk</form> <xr>= <sc>MAYUKMUK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yamùmù</form> <pos>a</pos> for food to be dry and crumbly in texture, as fine-grained corn meal, cooked hard or steamed. <i>Yamùmù kaáyung kan-un ang binlud nga sinákul,</i> Fine-grained corn meal has a dry and crumbly texture when steamed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> get a dry and crumbly texture.

<p><form>yamutyamut</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fine, slippery sediments that develop inside water containers. <number>2</number> fine membranes that surround meat.

<p><form>yamyam</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> utter, articulate words rapidly and not for the purpose of communicating. <i>Nagyamyam siya sa ímung ngálan samtang natúlug,</i> She was uttering your name while she was asleep. <i>Nagyamyam ug pangadyiun,</i> Uttering a prayer. <number>1a</number> <tr>mumble</tr>, <tr>mutter</tr>. <i>Muyamyam ka man lang. Súkul!</i> You just mutter to yourself. Fight back! <i>Klarúha nang ímung sinultihan, ayaw yamyáma (iyamyam),</i> Say what you have to say distinctly. Don't mumble it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>say</tr> s.t. <i>Dì ka kaákug yamyam sa ímung túyù,</i> You can't get nerve enough to say what you want. <i>Unsay giyamyam mu didtu sa átung agálun báhin kanákù?</i> What did you <tr>tell</tr> our employer regarding me? <pos>n</pos> s.t. uttered, esp. prayers and incantations. <pos>a</pos> <tr>loudmouthed</tr>. <form>-unun</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. usually uttered, esp. prayers.

<p><form>yanà</form> <xr>= <sc>KANÀ<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yanang</form> <pos>a</pos> sloppy and wet. <i>Yanang kaáyu ang agiánan kay gisigíhag uwan,</i> The path is very sloppy because of constant rain. <pos>n</pos> watery mud. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become wet and sloppy. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> become badly wet and sloppy. <number>2</number> be <tr>plentiful</tr> or <tr>abundant</tr>. <i>Nagyánang ang babáyi ug álak sa balay sa kahiláyan,</i> There was no end to wine and women in the bawdyhouse.

<p><form>yandak</form> <xr>= <sc>YANGGAK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yangag</form> <xr>= <sc>DANGHAG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yanggak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> fall on the ground landing on the buttocks. <i>Nakuháan ang burus kay nayanggak sa salug,</i> The pregnant woman fell on the floor on her buttocks and had a miscarriage.

<p><form>yanghag<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> raise the head to look up. <i>Miyanghag siya sa pisami,</i> He looked up at the ceiling.

<p><form>yanghag<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>DANGHAG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yangkaw</form> a tall and <tr>lanky</tr> or too thin for the height. <i>Balay nga yangkaw ug sílung,</i> House that has a disproportionately tall ground floor. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> become tall and lanky. <i>Nagyangkaw lang ang láwas ánà apan bátà pa nà kaáyu,</i> He has a lanky body but he is still a child.

<p><form>yangù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> move the head upwards as a sign of assent or, by extension, as a sign of s.t. else. <i>Miyangù siya sa pagtúgut,</i> He nodded (lifted his head upwards) in assent. <number>2</number> nod downwards, <tr>bow</tr>. <i>Ang Hapun muyangù ágig pagtáhud,</i> A Japanese bows as a sign of greeting. <pos>n</pos> movement of the head in assent or indication of s.t. else. <i>Sa usa ka yangù mudágan dáyun ang íyang mga sulugúun,</i> <pb n=1135>With just one <tr>nod</tr> of the head his servants run immediately. <form>yangùyángù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> nod the head several times. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>GANGÙ</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr>

<p><form>yángud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; a]</itype> <tr>look upward</tr>. <i>Nagyangud ang bátà sa íyang tabánug,</i> The boy is looking at his kite. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>depend</tr>, <tr>rely upon</tr> s.o. for support. <i>Nagyangud ku sa ákung magúwang sa pagiskuyla,</i> I <tr>rely</tr> on my brother to support me in school. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> peep up through the cracks in the floor. <i>Kamaldítu. Gamay ka pa gánì mangyángud na,</i> What a naughty child. At your age you already peep at girls through the floor.

<p><form>yangùngù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make insistent and repeated requests. <i>Muyangùngù siya hangtud hatágan,</i> He keeps asking for some until he gets it. <pos>n</pos> repeated and insistent requests.

<p><form>yanta</form> <pos>n</pos> rim of a wheel onto which the rubber or tire is mounted; or a metal rim put around a wooden wheel.

<p><form>yantak</form> <xr>= <sc>YAMTAK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yantas</form> <xr>= <sc>YANTA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yánu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>simple</tr>, <tr>humble</tr>. <i>Ang íyang amahan usa lámang ka yánung iskribinti,</i> His father is just an <tr>ordinary</tr> clerk. <number>2</number> simple, without ornate design. <i>Yánung tabas sa sinínà,</i> Simple cut of dress. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be, become simple, humble; do s.t. <tr>simply</tr>. <i>Giyánu níya ang íyang panlihuklíhuk,</i> She acted in a simple, humble way without putting on. <i>Yanúha ang ímung panimuyù,</i> Live in a simple way. <form>yanuyánu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> do things in a simple, ordinary manner. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; abc]</itype> do s.t. to s.t. without proper consideration or deference. <i>Giyanuyánu lang nímug gámit ang ákung mga butang,</i> You dare use my things without permission. <i>Iyanuyánu man lang nang mahalun nga sapátus ug támak sa lápuk,</i> He wears those expensive shoes anywhere, even in the mud.

<p><form>yanyan</form> a <tr>sagging</tr>, <tr>drooping</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> <tr>sag</tr>. <i>Tútuy nga nagyanyan,</i> Sagging breasts. <i>Nagyanyan na ang salug tungud sa kadaghan sa táwu,</i> The floor is sagging under the weight of the people. <i>Nagyanyan ang sanga sa daghang prútas,</i> The branch is weighted down with all the fruits.

<p><form>yapa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> lie flat, either on one's stomach or back, with the arms and feet spread out. <i>Dílì ku makayapag katúlug kay may hubag ang ákung likud,</i> I can't sleep lying flat on my back because I have a boil on my back.

<p><form>yapà</form> <xr>= <sc>YAPÙ</sc>, of females only.</xr>

<p><form>yapak</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> soil in small pieces. <number>2</number> <tr>mud</tr> or <tr>mud puddle</tr>. <i>Milúnang sa yapak ang bábuy,</i> The pig wallowed in the mud puddle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> be, become <tr>muddy</tr>. <i>Giyapak sa mga bábuy ang ílang búngun,</i> The pigs made the space beneath their house muddy. <form>ka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <number>1</number> be full of small soil particles. <i>Nagkayápak ang harína,</i> The flour has got lots of soil particles in it. <number>2</number> be all covered with mud. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having soil particles mixed in. <i>Bugas nga yapakun,</i> Cereal with lots of particles of dirt in it. <number>2</number> <tr>soiled</tr>, full or splotched with mud. <i>Yapakun ang ímung gisul-ub,</i> You are wearing <tr>mud-splotched</tr> (soiled) clothes.

<p><form>yápak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>step on</tr>, put one's foot on. <i>May nagyápak sa bag-ung gitanum,</i> S.o. stepped on the things I just planted. <i>Giyapákan níla ang laráwan sa Pangúlu,</i> They <tr>trampled</tr> on the caricature of the President.

<p><form>yapayapa</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b36]</itype> wave both arms in the air, as in a fond welcoming gesture. <i>Nagyapayapa ang bátà sa kalípay,</i> The child waved his arms for joy. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> flap the wings, for s.t. else to <tr>flap</tr> in an analogous way. <i>Inighurus sa hángin muyapayapa sad ang bandíra,</i> When the wind blows the flag flutters.

<p><form>yapù</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>handsome</tr>, <tr>good-looking</tr> (slang). <i>Kasagáran sa mga artista yapù,</i> Most actors are handsome. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become handsome.

<p><form>yapyap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>cheep</tr>, <tr>chirp</tr>. <i>Miyapyap ang mga pisù nga nawad-an sa inahan,</i> The chicks who lost their mother are chirping. <pos>n</pos> <tr>cheeping</tr>, <tr>chirping</tr>.

<p><form>yarda<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>yard</tr>. <i>Tulu ka yardang panaptun,</i> Three yards of cloth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> measure in yards.

<p><form>yarda<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lumber yard</tr>.

<p><form>yárì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>finish off</tr>, <tr>kill</tr> s.o. (slang). <i>Wà sila makayárì sa pangúlu sa tulisan,</i> They didn't manage to get the bandit leader. <number>2</number> spoil a woman's virtue, abuse sexually. <i>Tulu ka táwu ang miyárì sa dalága,</i> Three persons <tr>raped</tr> the maiden. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dead</tr>, <tr>finished</tr>. <i>Yárì na ang íyang agálun,</i> His employer has kicked off. <number>2</number> having lost one's maidenly virtue.

<p><form>yaruk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> drink bottoms-up, without removing the container from the lips. <i>Giyaruk níya ang usa ka básung pipsi,</i> He <tr>gulped down</tr> a whole glass of pepsi. <pos>n</pos> action of drinking at a long stretch. <i>Madá ang rám sa usa ka yaruk,</i> You can drink the rum in one gulp.

<p><form>yása</form> <xr>= <sc>IÁSA</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ÁSA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yasmì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be <tr>destroyed</tr>, <tr>ruined</tr>, brought to a low condition (colloquial). <i>Nayasmì ang balay sa hángin,</i> The wind destroyed the house. <i>Nayasmì siya sa súgal,</i> Gambling ruined him. <i>Nagkayasmì ang íyang láwas sa nagkadaghan ang íyang anak,</i> Her figure is <tr>going to pot</tr> as she has more and more children. <pb n=1136><pos>a</pos> <tr>broken down</tr>, <tr>ruined</tr>.

<p><form>yasyas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> slash wide open. <i>Giyasyásan sa kawatan ang ákung bág,</i> The thief slashed my bag open. <number>2</number> <itype>[B4; c1]</itype> for clothing to hang loosely. <i>Nagyasyas ang ímung karsúnis kay way bakus,</i> Your pants are hanging loose on you because you don't have a belt. <number>2a</number> hang loosely in tatters. <i>Adurnung patikan nga nagyasyas,</i> Palm leaf decorations that were hanging down. <number>2b</number> for the entrails to hang out. <pos>a</pos> <tr>loose</tr>, <tr>hanging loosely</tr>. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> place slashed open.

<p><form>yátak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>step on</tr> s.t. forcefully. <i>Ang muyátak sa alambri makuryintihan,</i> Whoever steps on the wire will be electrocuted. <i>Yatáki ang gasulinadur,</i> Step on the gas. <number>2</number> kick usually in a forward direction. <i>Yatáki ang takup sa pultahan,</i> Kick in the door. <number>3</number> violate an agreement, rule. <i>Kapila ka makayátak sa súgù sa Diyus?</i> How many times have you violated God's commandments? <number>3a</number> violate a woman's honor.

<p><form>yáti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>yacht</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; a1c]</itype> ride, bring s.t. in a yacht. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a yacht. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12; b(1)]</itype> have, obtain a yacht. <form>yatíhan</form> <pos>a</pos> having a yacht.

<p><form>yátì<sub>1</sub></form> (euphemism for <i>yáwà</i>) <number>1</number> expression of disgust, annoyance. <i>Yátì ning bat-ána uy,</i> <tr>Darn</tr>, this child is a nuisance. <number>2</number> as a pause word when one cannot think of the right word. <i>Kanang yáting, unsingálang ... klats,</i> The, <tr>um</tr>, <tr>what-do-you-call-it</tr>, the clutch. <form>&mdash; ra</form> <number>1</number> expression of disbelief. <i>Yátì ra, dì giyud nà musalir,</i> <tr>Oh, yeah?</tr> That will never work. <i>Yátì ra! Íya tà kung gisultían,</i> I don't believe it. He would have told me. <number>2</number> expression of great surprise at s.t. <i>Yátì ra. Lima ka líbu!</i> <tr>No kidding!</tr> Five thousand!

<p><form>yátì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>teak</tr>, a large tree of waste spaces, the value of which is little recognized in Cebu: <bio>Tectona grandis</bio>.

<p><form>yátis</form> <xr>= <sc>YÁTÌ<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yatut</form> <pos>n</pos> name given in Leyte to supernatural beings having nearly the same characteristics as the <ix>ingkantu</ix>'s. However, they seem to be more closely associated with illnesses than the <ix>ingkantu</ix>'s.

<p><form>yatyat<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> slow in action, lacking energy and thinking power. <i>Walay mubulan nímu kay yatyat kaáyu ka,</i> Nobody will hire you because you are unenergetic and unintelligent. <i>Kayatyat nímu uy! Wà giyud ka makahunàhunag pilù sa ngilit arun mulig-un?</i> You sure cannot think. It never occurred to you to turn the edge over to make it strong? <i>Yatyat nímu à! Tu, kuyúgi diays Iyay!</i> Boy are you slow! Eyay is just there waiting for you! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B145; b6]</itype> be, become slow and unintelligent.

<p><form>yatyat<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> loose and <tr>sagging</tr> due to lack of fullness. <i>Yatyat nga unlan,</i> A soft and sagging pillow. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B]</itype> get to be soft and sagging. <i>Miyatyat ang íyang tútuy human siya manganak,</i> Her breasts started to <tr>droop</tr> after she had her baby. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <tr>sag</tr> under a weight. <i>Nagyatyat ang atup sa tulda,</i> The roof of the tent is sagging loosely. <number>2a</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> pull s.t. down making it dangle loose. <i>Ayaw yatyáta (iyatyat) ang sanga sa mangga,</i> Do not pull the branch of the mango tree down.

<p><form>yaub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB6; c1]</itype> turn s.t. over on its belly, turn over on the belly. <i>Magyaub ang bátang matúlug,</i> The baby sleeps on its stomach. <i>Iyaub ang basúra,</i> Throw out the garbage (lit. turn the can over).

<p><form>yaúsà</form> (from <i>ayaw úsà</i>) <xr>= <sc>YÚNÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yáwà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>devil</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>devilish person</tr>. <i>Ag yáwà, mudáyig nímu sa atubángan unyà manglibak sa luyu,</i> The devil praises you to your face but behind your back she stabs you. <ix>exclamation</ix> (somewhat coarse): expression of anger, annoyance, frustration. <i>Yáwà! Pukáwun ta áning maáyung pagkahinánuk!</i> <tr>Hell</tr>! I was just sleeping nicely, too! <form>litsing &mdash;</form> expression of extreme irritation or frustration. <i>Litsing yáwà. Ímu na pud nang gibálì,</i> <tr>God damn!</tr> You broke it again! <form>&mdash; ra</form> <number>1a</number> expression of strong disbelief. <i>Yáwà ra. Dì giyud nà musalir,</i> Hell! That's not going to work. <number>1b</number> expression of surprise at s.t. found out. <i>Yáwà ra! Tinúud ba nga gitirúhan ang Prisidinti?</i> <tr>Really</tr>! You mean they shot the President? <number>2</number> in exclamations at s.t. surprising. <i>Yáwang nindúta ning ímung balay, Siyung!</i> <tr>Jesus</tr>! What beautiful house you have, Siong! <number>3</number> pause word used when one cannot find the right term. <i>Kanang yáwang, kuan, unsingálan....</i> That damn, <tr>what do you call it?</tr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be in or caught in a bad situation. <i>Nayáwà na ta áni nga nahutdag gasulína nga layù sa istasyunan,</i> We are <tr>in for it</tr> running out of gas far from the station. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b5]</itype> <tr>castigate</tr> severely, <tr>get hell</tr>. <i>Yawaun (yawaan) ka run nákù ug dílì mu pasagdan nang makinilya,</i> You will get hell from me if you don't let that typewriter alone. <number>2</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> be inspired by the devil. <i>Ayaw pagdúwà ug kutsilyu kay tingálig mayawaan ka,</i> Don't play with the knife. The devil might inspire you (to harm s.o. with it). <number>2a</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> be possessed of a blinding and uncontrollable fury. <i>Sa íyang kasukù giyawaan siya,</i> He was possessed of a blinding, uncontrollable anger. <number>3</number> <itype>[AB126]</itype> <tr>ruin</tr>, cause to flop; be <tr>ruined</tr>. <i>Mga dúlun nga muyawà sa tanum,</i> Locusts that utterly <pb n=1137><tr>destroy</tr> a crop. <form>yawàyawà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be, become a hell. <i>Nayawàyawà ang ílang pagpuyù tungud sa pagkabisyúsu sa íyang bána,</i> Their home life has become miserable because of the husband's excessive indulgence in vice. <number>2</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> be made <tr>devilish</tr>. <i>Párì ang maghingílin sa panúway sa táwu nga yawàyawaan,</i> A priest exorcises evil spirits from a person's body. <form>kayawàyawà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be somewhat spoiled. <i>Nagkayawàyawà ang átung pangalígù kay nakalimtan ang sud-an,</i> Our picnic was kind of spoiled because we forgot the food. <form>yawan-un</form> <pos>a</pos> devilishly evil, <tr>diabolical</tr>. <i>Yawan-un nga mga panghunàhúnà,</i> Diabolical thoughts. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become diabolical.

<p><form>yawan</form> <xr>= <sc>AWAYAN</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ÁWAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yáwas</form> euphemism for <xr><sc>YÁWÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yáwat</form> <xr>= <sc>IYÁWAT</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; bángil tinggutum</form> a half a loaf is better than none (lit. s.t. to make do in times of starvation). <i>Naminyù ang dágang gúwang ug sugarul. Yáwat bángil tinggutum,</i> The old maid married a no-good. Well, <tr>better than nothing</tr>.

<p><form>yáway</form> euphemism for <xr><sc>YÁWÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yáwi</form> <xr>= <sc>YÁBI</sc>, <i>n1, v.</i></xr>

<p><form>yáwì</form> euphemism for <xr><sc>YÁWÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yáwis</form> euphemism for <xr><sc>YÁWÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yawit</form> <xr>= <sc>YAWYAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yawyaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b3c]</itype> talking at length in complaints or scolding. <i>Kun muyawyaw na siya, mahílum ang tanan,</i> When he starts to <tr>scold</tr>, everybody keeps silent. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> mumble or mutter words to oneself as in saying a prayer, memorizing a piece, and the like. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> given to ranting.

<p><form>yay</form> short for <xr><sc>AYAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yáya<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>nursemaid</tr> or servant in charge of caring for a child. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> work as a nursemaid.

<p><form>yáya<sub>2</sub>, yáyà</form> <xr>= <sc>TIYÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yàyà</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sluggish</tr>, <tr>slow moving</tr>. <i>Ámung gipapaháwà ang mutsatsa námung yàyà,</i> We fired our maid. She was too slow. <number>1a</number> slow, <tr>gentle in speech</tr>. <i>Ang sinultihan sa Ilunggu yàyà kaáyu,</i> People from Iloilo speak in a slow and gentle way. <number>2</number> loosely hanging. <i>Yàyà na ang ímung tútuy,</i> Your breasts are already <tr>sagging</tr>. <i>Nagsul-ub si Tátay ug yàyà nga karsúnis,</i> Dad is wearing <tr>baggy</tr> trousers. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be, become <tr>slow</tr>, not lively. <i>Way kaláki ang bayli kay nagyàyà ang urkista,</i> The dance was no good because the orchestra was so slow and uninspired. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; c1P]</itype> hang down or around unevenly or loosely.

<p><form>yáyay</form> (child talk) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pain</tr>, <tr>wound</tr>. <i>Háin ang yáyay mu Bíbi?</i> Where does it <tr>hurt</tr> you, Baby? <number>2</number> causing pain. <i>Ayg gúnit ánà, day, yáyay nà,</i> Don't touch that, darling. That'll <tr>hurt</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; a1]</itype> give pain, be <tr>in pain</tr>. <i>Bunálan ta ang nagyáyay nímu ha, Bíbi?</i> Let's give that guy that hurt you a sound spanking. <i>Nayáyay intáwun ang Bíbi ku,</i> My poor little darling, you are in pain.

<p><form>yayha</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; c1]</itype> for one side of wearing apparel to be hanging loose. <i>Luag nga blawus nga nagyayhas abága,</i> A loose blouse, one side of which has slipped off the shoulders. <number>1a</number> open s.t. wide with one side hanging loose. <i>Nangyayha ang íyang pitáka,</i> Her handbag was open. <i>Átung yayháun (iyayha) ang sáku,</i> We will spread the mouth of the sack open. <number>2</number> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> for solids to spill, pour out of a sack or a similar container. <i>Tahia ang gisì sa sáku arun dì mayayha ang sulud,</i> Mend the tear of the sack so the contents will not spill out. <i>Yayháa (iyayha) ang ginhawaan sa bábuy nga aslunun,</i> Take out the entrails from the pig before you roast it.

<p><form>yáyu</form> <pos>n</pos> boy hired to watch a child.

<p><form>yáyung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; b6(1)]</itype> carry s.t. together. <i>Magkayáyung ta íni kay bug-at,</i> We will have to carry this together because it's heavy. <form>&mdash; ang búlan</form> <xr>= <sc>HAYÀ ANG BÚLAN</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; ug túig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> for siblings to be born <corr sic=in>on</corr> different dates but in the same year. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> a pole to hang a load from when two people carry it. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>TAMBAYÁYUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yíba</form> a shout of jubilation. <i>Yíba! Magparti diay mi,</i> <tr>Hurray</tr>! We are going to hold a party.

<p><form>yíbar</form> <xr>= <sc>YÍR BAR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yíbu</form> <pos>n</pos> exclamation of joy.

<p><form>yílu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ice</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> be, become ice. <i>Muyílu (mayílu) ang túbig kun ibutangs prísir,</i> The water will become ice if you put it in the freezer. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make ice. <i>Dalì rang muyílu átung pridyidir,</i> Our refrigerator makes ice fast. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> put <tr>ice</tr> on s.t. <i>Nagyílu kus mga isdà arun dílì muransiyu,</i> I am putting ice on the fish so they won't spoil. <form>litsi kun &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> a sweet made of shaved ice mixed with milk and sugar. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> have, make such a sweet.

<p><form>yílu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>yellow</tr> in color. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> be, become <tr>yellow</tr>. <i>Madugáyan muyílu (mayílu) ang papil,</i> After a time the paper will yellow. <form>yiluhun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>yellowish</tr>.

<p><form>yílu bil</form> <xr>= <sc>KAMPANILYA<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yípi</form> expression of jubilation.

<p><form>yirba buyna</form> <xr>= <sc>HIRBUBUYNA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yír bar</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>year bar</tr>, a piece of metal fastened above the right pocket on the uniform of an ROTC trainee, indicating which year a student is. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> use, wear a year bar.

<p><form>yirs-uld</form> <pos>a</pos> well-advanced in years, esp. said of <pb n=1138>a single woman (humorous). <i>Bísag yirs-uld basta mayrun, pangasaw-a lang,</i> She may be <tr>old</tr>, but she's rich, so marry her. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125]</itype> be well-advanced in years. <i>Anus-a ka pa magminyù? Unyà nag mayirs-uld?</i> When are <form>you</form> going to get married? When you are too far along in years?

<p><form>yíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>iron</tr>, <tr>steel</tr>. <form>káha di-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>steel safe</tr>.

<p><form>yist</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>yeast</tr>. <i>Ang yist pára patúbù sa pan,</i> Yeast is a leavening agent for bread.

<p><form>yù</form> short for <xr><sc>IYÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yuad</form> <pos>a</pos> having a protuberant belly and having a lower back curved forward. <i>Kasagáran sa mga mabdus yuad,</i> Most pregnant women have big stomachs and a lower back curved forward. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> walk with the stomach sticking out forward.

<p><form>yúbit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a1c]</itype> <tr>look down on</tr>, <tr>despise</tr> with mockery. <i>Ayaw yubíta ang kabus,</i> Do not despise the poor. <i>Giyúbit ang bungì sa isig níya ka bátà,</i> The harelip was teased by his playmates. <pos>n</pos> <tr>derision</tr>, words of <tr>contempt</tr>. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of heaping derision. <i>Yubitan kaáyu, mu rag way apan,</i> He loves to heap contempt on others as if he were perfect. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125]</itype> be, become fond of heaping contempt. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>derisive</tr>, full of contempt.

<p><form>yudipurmu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>iodoform</tr>, a medicinal powder. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> apply iodoform powder.

<p><form>yudkap</form> <xr>= <sc>YUGKAP</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yúdu</form> <pos>n</pos> tincture of <tr>iodine</tr>.

<p><form>yudupurmu</form> <xr>= <sc>YUDIPURMU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yudyud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <number>1</number> push s.o. down into the dirt repeatedly. <i>Iyudyud ang nawung sa irù sa íyang húgaw,</i> Push the dog's face into his mess. <number>1a</number> pull or push s.t. down in general. <i>Giyudyud sa bátà ang ákung buktun pagyangùngù níyag kindi,</i> The child kept pulling on my arm asking for candy. <number>2</number> drag s.o. down into a low state. <i>Giyudyud ta sa kakabus tungud sa ímung pagkasugarul,</i> We have been dragged into poverty because of <form>your</form> gambling.

<p><form>yúga</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>yoga</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do yoga.

<p><form>yugkap</form> <pos>a</pos> lifeless, sluggish from poor health, lack of sleep. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> be, become sluggish. <i>Nagyugkap ku rung adláwa kay nagbilar ku gabíi,</i> I'm sleepy today because I was up all night last night.

<p><form>yugkung</form> <pos>a</pos> tall and stooping, <form>yugkungyugkung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; c1]</itype> walking in a bouncing but stooped way with long strides.

<p><form>yugtù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>episode</tr>, section out of a series of happenings. <number>1</number> a <tr>chapter</tr> in a story, <tr>act</tr> in a drama. <i>Katapúsang yugtù sa sugilambung,</i> The final episode in the novel. <number>2</number> episode in one's life. <i>Halandúmung yugtù sa kinabúhì,</i> Memorable episodes of one's life. <number>3</number> moment that s.t. happens. <i>Sa mga yugtù sa pag-inusára,</i> During the moments of loneliness. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> appear, write s.t. in episodes.

<p><form>yúgu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> ~yoke placed over the shoulder of a beast of burden for attaching the harness. <number>2</number> problem weighing on the shoulders like a yoke. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make into or use a yoke. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> mount a yoke.

<p><form>yugut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; b3(1)c5]</itype> <number>1</number> feeling a deep and indescribable sadness (literary). <number>2</number> feel angry indignation and resentment. <i>Nagyugut sa pagbáhin sa yútà,</i> Was full of resentment at the way the land was divided. <i>Gikayugut níya ang wà ku pagbáwus sa sulat,</i> She resented it that I failed to answer the letter. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> feeling of extreme sadness (literary). <i>Tungud sa kayugut sa íyang buut, íyang gihálad ang láwas sa íyang anak nga patay na,</i> Because of the <tr>indescribable sorrow</tr> that overcame him, he offered up the dead body of his son. <number>2</number> feeling of angry resentment. <form>mayugtánun</form> <pos>a</pos> characterized with resentment and indignation.

<p><form>yugyug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> shake back and forth or up and down in short, quick movements. <i>Yugyúga ang dúyan arun matúlug dáyun ang bátà,</i> <tr>Rock</tr> the hammock so that the baby will soon sleep.

<p><form>yúhu</form> an expression of joy. <i>Yúhu! Hatágan diay tag búnus ni Sir!</i> <tr>Yoohoo</tr>! We are going to get a bonus from the boss!

<p><form>yuhù</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. long-legged <tr>bird</tr>.

<p><form>yuhum</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>PAHIYUM</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>HÍYUM</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <tr>dimple</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <xr>= <sc>PAHIYUM</sc>.</xr> <form>ma-un(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>MAPAHIYÚMUN</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>HÍYUM</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yuhut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB3; cP]</itype> go out, in through s.t., cause to do so. <i>Ang pagyuhut sa usa ka mabiaybiáyung tamíhid sa íyang mga ngábil,</i> When a smile of derision formed itself on his lips. <i>Iyuhut (ipayuhut, payuhuta) ang íyang mga púlung sa píkas dalunggan,</i> Let his words go in one ear and out the other. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> go in or out of a place stealthily. Yuhut ta sa míting, Let's <tr>sneak out</tr> of the meeting. <number>2a</number> do anything secretly without being observed. <i>Nagyuhut siyag kúhag kindi sa lamísa,</i> He <tr>sneaked</tr> a piece of candy from the table. <number>2b</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>smuggle</tr>. <i>Wà madakpi ang miyuhut sa sigarilyu,</i> The fellow who smuggled the cigarettes in was not caught. <form>yuhutyuhut, yuhutyúhut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> 1 come in and go out. <i>Giyuhutyuhútan sa hángin ang ílang payag nga nagkagusbat,</i> The wind just blows freely through their dilapidated shack. <number>2</number> <tr>penetrate</tr> through. <i>Dì mi makayuhutyuhut sa kabaknitan,</i> We can not penetrate through the thickets. <form>mag-r-(&larr;)</form> <pb n=1139><pos>n</pos> <tr>smuggler</tr>, one who sneaks things in and out.

<p><form>yúin</form> <pos>n</pos> @<xr><sc>UN</sc></xr> acronym for <tr>United Nations</tr>.

<p><form>yúka</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>yucca</tr>.

<p><form>yúkab</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a1]</itype> <tr>drag on</tr> a cigarette, cigar, pipe. <i>Yukába (iyúkab) ang abánu arun dílì mapálung,</i> <tr>Draw in on</tr> the cigar so it doesn't go out. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> light a cigarette, cigar, pipe.

<p><form>yukalíli</form> <xr>= <sc>YÚKI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yukaliptus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>eucalyptus</tr> tree.

<p><form>yukaristika</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Eucharist</tr>.

<p><form>*yukaristiku</form> <form>kunggrísu &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Eucharistic Congress</tr>.

<p><form>yukayu</form> answer to <ix>kingkiri</ix> &lsquo;who wants what I've got in my hand&rsquo;, expressing that the speaker wants it. <i>&lsquo;Kingkiri?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Yukayu.&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Who wants what I've got in my hand?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;I want it.&rsquo;

<p><form>yukbù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>bow down</tr>, <tr>bend low</tr>. <i>Muyukbù ang taas nga táwu nga musulud sa kupà nga pultahan,</i> A tall man has to bend to enter a low door. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; b]</itype> recognize s.o.'s power, <tr>pay homage</tr>. <i>Ang mga táwu sa karáan nagyukbù sa adlaw,</i> People of ancient times <tr>bowed</tr> down to the sun. <i>Dì sila muyukbù sa hukum sa ripiri,</i> They will not <tr>submit</tr> to the judgment of the referee. <i>Langyawng gahum nga giyukbúan sa gagmayng násud,</i> Foreign power to which small nations submit.

<p><form>yúki</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ukelele</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> play the ukelele. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make a ukelele.

<p><form>yukilíli</form> <xr>= <sc>YÚKI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yukù</form> <pos>a</pos> bent way over. <i>Táwu nga yukù na kaáyu sa kagúlang,</i> A person who is already very much bent with age. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become <tr>bent</tr>. <i>Humay nga nagyukù sa kahinug,</i> Rice bent over in ripeness. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>bend over</tr>. <i>Miyukù siya arun pagpunit ug batu,</i> He <tr>bent down</tr> to pick up a stone. <form>yukùyukù sa buktun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>crook of the arm</tr>.

<p><form>yukug</form> a having one's back bent forward, as under a heavy load or due to old age. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> for the upper back to be bent forward. <i>Nayukug siya sa kabug-at sa gipas-an,</i> He was bent over with the load on his shoulders. <i>Nayukug siya pagdinúkù sa íyang trabáhu,</i> She has become <tr>stoop-shouldered</tr> from bending over her work too much.

<p><form>yukum</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dimple</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> form into a dimple. <i>Muyukum ang íyang áping ug mupahiyum siya,</i> Her face forms a dimple when she smiles. <form>yukman</form> <pos>a</pos> get dimpled. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b8]</itype> get to be dimpled.

<p><form>yukyuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> stab and jiggle around. <i>Yukyúka ug maáyu arun daling mamatay ang bábuy,</i> Stab the pig jiggling the knife around well, so it will die <corr sic=quick>quickly</corr>.

<p><form>yumù</form> <pos>a</pos> for tiny animals to be weak and sickly from overhandling. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> handle an animal until it becomes weak and sickly. <i>Kinsay nagyumù sa pisù nga himalatyun na?</i> Who has been handling the chick that it's about to die?

<p><form>yúmud</form> <pos>a</pos> having a <tr>frowning</tr>, <tr>pouting</tr> expression on the face from displeasure or anger. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b3c1]</itype> <tr>pout</tr> and <tr>frown</tr>. <i>Nagyúmud ang nawung kay naatrasáwu ang pagkáun,</i> He's frowning in annoyance because dinner is late. <form>yumuran</form> <pos>a</pos> having a tendency to frown.

<p><form>yumudyumud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> mumble unintelligibly. <i>Dì ku gustung magyumudyumud ang ákung mga anak ug kasab-an,</i> I don't want my children to mumble under their breath when they are scolded.

<p><form>yumyum</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> give s.o. a long and sensual kiss. <i>Nawung nga way mangarastig yumyum,</i> A face nobody could bear to <tr>kiss passionately</tr>. <form>-ay(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> kiss each other passionately. <i>Dì siya makigyumyumay ug babáyi nga bahù ug bàbà,</i> He doesn't like to engage in passionate kissing with a woman who has bad breath.

<p><form>yunà, yúnà</form> (from <i>ayaw únà</i>) <number>1</number> <form>&mdash; pa</form> <number>1a</number> <tr>wait a minute</tr>, <tr>just a minute</tr>. <i>Yúnà pa, Rus, ayaw únag lakaw,</i> Just a minute, Rose, don't go yet. <number>1b</number> expression used to change the tack of a conversation. <i>Yúnà pa. Anus-a tung pitsáha?</i> Just a minute. On what date did you say it was going to be? <number>2</number> expression interrupting a speaker to get the word. <i>Yúnà! Patiwasa ku arun mahibáwu sila sa tinúud,</i> Just a minute! Let me tell it so they will know the truth.

<p><form>yunanimus</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. that has been done with unanimity. <i>Yunanimus ang hukum,</i> It was a <tr>unanimous</tr> decision. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be unanimous.

<p><form>yungatyúngat<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> sit about idly puffing on a pipe or cigar.

<p><form>yungatyúngat<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>UNGAT-ÚNGAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yúngib</form> <pos>n</pos> large hole in the side of s.t. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; b]</itype> dig a cave, tunnel. <i>Miyúngib ang mga Hapun sa búkid,</i> The Japanese <tr>dug tunnels</tr> in the mountain. <number>1a</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> carry away dirt to form a cave. <i>Nayúngib ang kílid sa pangpang pagbahà,</i> A cavity formed in the side of the cliff after the flood. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> hole up in a cave. <i>Nagyúngib ang kaáway,</i> The enemies are holed up in a cave. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>YÚNGIB</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>yungit</form> <pos>a</pos> unable to pronounce consonants clearly. <i>Yungit ang sinultihan sa Insik kay dì makaluwas sa íri,</i> The Chinaman still speaks with an accent because he cannot <pb n=1140>pronounce <i>r.</i> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be unable to pronounce consonants clearly.

<p><form>yungki</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>anvil</tr>. <i>Yungki ang dukdúkan sa binágang puthaw,</i> Red-hot metals are hammered on the anvil.

<p><form>yungyung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> hang loosely down, <tr>droop</tr>. <i>Muyungyung ang buhuk ug dì masudlay,</i> The hair will hang loosely down if you don't comb it. <i>Ang mga sanga sa káhuy nagyungyung,</i> The tree branches are hanging low. <i>Giyungyung níya ang íyang kálù,</i> He pulled his hat down over his face. <number>2</number> lower s.t. on a rope tied at one end. <i>Yungyúngig písì ang táwu sa atábay,</i> Drop the man in the well a rope.

<p><form>yunik</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>unique</tr> in kind or excellence. <i>Yunik kaáyu ning bayhána ug mga idíya,</i> This woman has very unique ideas.

<p><form>yunipurmi</form> <pos>a</pos> similar, identical in appearance. <i>Yunipurmi ug hitsúra ang mga balay sa subdibisyun,</i> The houses in the subdivision look exactly alike. <pos>n</pos> <tr>uniform</tr>. <i>Utawa ang íyang yunipurmi,</i> Press his uniform. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C; c1]</itype> have <tr>uniform</tr> looks. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> wear a uniform.

<p><form>yunùyunù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> shake, quiver with obesity. <i>Tiyan nga nagyunùyunù sa katambuk,</i> A stomach shaking like a bowlful of jello. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for steps to be shaky. <i>Tigúlang nga nagyunùyunù ang linaktan,</i> An old man taking shaky steps.

<p><form>yunyun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sagging</tr>, <tr>drooping</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> stand on s.t. and <tr>bounce</tr> up and down on it, bounce s.t. up and down. <i>Ayaw yunyúni ang katri,</i> Don't bounce up and down on the bed. <i>Yunyúna (iyunyun) ang sanga kay íyang kabay-an,</i> Bounce the branch up and down because he wants to ride it. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> <tr>hang down</tr>, <tr>sag</tr>. <i>Nagyunyun ang sanga sa búnga,</i> The branch is bent under the weight of the fruit.

<p><form>yunyun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>labor union</tr>. <form>líbur &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>YUNYUN<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yúpis</form> <xr>= <sc>LÚPIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yupu, yúpu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>docile</tr>, <tr>tractable</tr>. <i>Kining kabayúa tun-ig pagkabayù kay yupu kaáyu,</i> Learn how to ride on this horse because it is very docile. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become docile. <i>Nagkayupu si Kurding human siya makaamgu nga mapalagput siya sa trabáhu,</i> Cording is becoming more docile now that she realizes she could be fired from her work.

<p><form>yupyup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> draw in smoke, air into the mouth. <i>Yupyúpag sígi arun dì mapálung,</i> Keep <tr>dragging on</tr> it so it won't go out. <number>2</number> <tr>suck on</tr> s.t. <i>Nagyupyup lang gihápun siyas kumagkù,</i> He still <tr>sucks</tr> his thumb. <number>3</number> suck s.o. off. <pos>n</pos> action of <tr>inhaling</tr>. <i>Usa lang ka yupyup sa mariwána hubug ka na,</i> One drag on the marijuana <corr sic=ang>and</corr> you'll be dizzy. <form>-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. one smokes or draws on.

<p><form>yúsà</form> (from <ix>ayaw úsà</ix>) <xr>= <sc>YÚNÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yusapi, yusápi</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for USAFFE, <tr>United States Armed Forces in the Far East</tr> (of the postwar period).

<p><form>yúsi, yúsig</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cigarette</tr> (word play on <ix>sigarilyu</ix>&mdash;slang).

<p><form>yusyus</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>loose</tr>; clothing not fitting tight or sacks having little content. <i>Yusyus ang sáku kay gikuháan man sa súd,</i> The sack is loose because they took some of the content out. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> be loose or not tightly packed. <i>Nayusyus ang íyang sinínà kay nidaut na siya,</i> Her dress is loose because she lost weight. <number>2</number> for s.t. held up by a garter to slip down from looseness.

<p><form>yútà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>piece of land</tr>. <i>Nakapalit siyag yútà duul sa syudad,</i> He bought <tr>land</tr> near the city. <number>1a</number> <tr>realm</tr>, <tr>country</tr>. <i>Yúta sa mga higanti,</i> <tr>Domain</tr> of the giants. <form>&mdash; sa mga sáad</form> <tr>Land of Promise</tr> (name given to <tr>Mindanao</tr>). <form>-ng tabúnun</form> the <tr>Philippines</tr> (lit. the land of the brown-skinned race&mdash;literary). <number>2</number> <tr>earth</tr>. <i>Matúman ang ímung pagbuut dinhi sa yútà maingun sa lángit,</i> Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. <number>3</number> <tr>soil</tr>. <i>Tambuk ang yútà sa ámung gardin,</i> We have fertile soil in our garden. <number>4</number> <tr>ground</tr>. <i>Nakuyapan siya ug natumba sa yútà,</i> She fainted and fell to the ground. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain, acquire land. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>farm</tr>, <tr>cultivate lands</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> for a question or suggestion to be disregarded and not entertained (as if thrown to the earth). <i>Nayutà ang íyang pangutána kay may kasulti man ang íyang gipangutána,</i> Nobody answered his question because the man he asked was busy talking to s.o. else. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>landed</tr>, having lands. <form>yutan-un</form> <pos>a</pos> of the earth (as opposed to heavenly). <i>Kita mga táwung yutan-un,</i> We are <tr>earthly</tr> creatures. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tracts of lands</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>nations</tr>. <form>mag-r-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>farmer</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>landowner</tr>. <form>yutàyutà</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>snake</tr>, the size of an earthworm, with black skin and poisonous. <form>tag-</form> <pos>n</pos> owner of a piece of land.

<p><form>yutawhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>native land</tr> (coined from <ix>yútang natawhan</ix>). <form>-un, maki-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>patriotic</tr>.

<p><form>yútik</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>muddy</tr>, <tr>slushy</tr>. <i>Yútik kaáyu ang dálan ug ulan,</i> The path is all muddy on rainy days. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a12]</itype> be, become muddy or <tr>slushy</tr>. <form>ka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be all slushy. <pos>n</pos> state or degree of being slushy. <i>Kayútik sa lápuk nga mu rag linúgaw,</i> Mud that has the slushy consistency of porridge.

<p><form>yúturn</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>U-turn</tr>. <number>2</number> sign prohibiting a U-turn. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> make a U-turn.

<pb n=1141>

<p><form>yutyut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>baggy</tr> and <tr>wrinkly</tr> around the waist. <i>Yutyut kaáyu nga karsúnis nga dakù ug pila ka sukud pára níya,</i> A very baggy pair of pants several sizes too big for him. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>YATYAT<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr> <form>-un(-)<note>(&rarr;)?</note></form> <pos>a</pos> of a baggy sort.

<p><form>yutyut<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>UT-UT<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yúyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>yoyo</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>wristwatch</tr> (slang). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> play with, make into a yoyo. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, have a wristwatch (slang).

<p><form>yúyù</form> <xr>= <sc>TIYÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>yùyù</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sagging</tr>, <tr>drooping</tr>. <i>Yùyù ang abága sa pildíru,</i> His shoulders are drooping because he is sad after he lost. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; c16]</itype> <tr>sag</tr>, <tr>droop</tr>. <i>Nayùyù ang hayhayan tungud sa kabug-at sa hinayhay,</i> The clothesline sagged under the weight of the wash.




<div1>
<head>ADDENDA</head>

<p>Forms marked with a dagger have already been entered in the main portion of the dictionary, and what is listed here should be studied in conjunction with the main entry.


<p><form>&dagger;ab-ab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for a fire to be <tr>blazing</tr>. <i>Miab-ab (naab-ab) na ang káyu pag-abut sa bumbíru,</i> The fire was already ablaze when the firemen arrived. <pos>a</pos> <tr>chewed up</tr>, <tr>eroded</tr>, <tr>festering</tr>, <tr>blazing</tr>.

<p><form>abansádu</form> <pos>a</pos> be close to the roadway. <form>&mdash; sa buling</form> <pos>a</pos> not showing dirt, masking stains well. <i>Abansádus buling ang kalsúnis nga itum,</i> Black pants don't show dirt. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> be, become close to the roadway. <i>Maabansádu ang inyung balay kun padak-an ang kalsáda,</i> Your house will be close to the road if they widen it.

<p><form>abansáwu</form> <xr>= <sc>ABANSÁDU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;abri</form> <form>&mdash; birat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> yield to a man under threat (humorous&mdash;from the pidgin Japanese for <ix>abríhi ang bilat</ix> used during the Japanese occupation). <i>Abri birat (miabri birat) na lang si Kulása kay gitiúnan mag ribulbir,</i> Colasa surrendered herself because they were pointing a revolver at her.

<p><form>abrisíti, abrisyíti</form> <xr>= <sc>ABRASÍTI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;ábung<sub>1</sub></form> <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <i>2</i> being in a state where s.t. is likely to happen to one. <i>Ayaw mug panaway sa kaminyúun kay abung pa mu,</i> Don't scorn marriage because it won't be long before you, too, will be married. <i>Ang tigúwang abung sa kamatáyun,</i> Old folks are in the state where death is likely to overtake them. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> for an event to <tr>approach</tr>. <i>Nag-abung na ang Pasku,</i> Christmas is approaching.

<p><form>ábung<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the drunken feeling one gets from eating tainted food. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> get this feeling. <i>Giábung ku human makakaun sa dubuk nga tulíngan,</i> I got dizzy after eating the tainted tuna.

<p><form>&dagger;abut</form> <form>(&larr;)</form> a variety of grain that gives a big yield or k.o. soil that yields well. <i>Ábut kaáyu ang basakan kay sa kamad-an,</i> Rice paddies yield more than the uplands. <form>pa-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> expected delivery date for a mother. <i>Karung simanáha ang paábut sa ákung asáwa,</i> Our baby is due this week.

<p><form>&dagger;abyadur &mdash; sa lubi</form> <pos>n</pos> palm toddy gatherer (humorous).

<p><form>adbinturar</form> <xr>= <sc>ABINTURAR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;adlaw &mdash; gabíi</form> doing s.t. all the time. <i>Adlaw gabíi ang ákung trabáhu,</i> I work day and night. <form>may &mdash; rang magabíi</form> the day will come when the tables will be turned (lit. the day will come that will turn to night). <i>Ímu kung gidaugdáug kay ábi pubri man ku, apan may adlaw rang magabíi,</i> You are stepping all over me because I am poor, but the day will come when the tables are turned. <form>-an(&rarr;), hiN-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> the share of palm toddy given to the owner of the tree, reckoned as the amount gathered on one particular day of the week.

<p><form>adlib<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> deliver s.t. <tr>extemporaneously</tr> without any script. <i>Kinahanglan sa usa ka anawunsir nga maáyu muadlib,</i> It's necessary for an announcer to be good at <tr>ad-libbing</tr>. <i>Giadlíban na lang níya ang lima ka minútus,</i> He just filled in the five minutes by ad-libbing.

<p><form>&dagger;admirar</form> <form>admiradur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>admirer</tr>. <i>Daghan siyag admiradur kay gwápa man,</i> She has lots of admirers because she is beautiful.

<p><form>&dagger;adult pur &mdash;</form> for adults only (movie).

<p><form>adupt&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> adopt a form of government. <pb n=1142><i>Kun unsang matánga sa kagamhánan ang aduptahun kanà mag-agad lang unyà sa plibisítu,</i> It depends on the plebiscite as to what form of government will be adopted.

<p><form>&dagger;adwána</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> place where the customs house is located or the port area near the customs house. <i>Didtus adwána dunggù ang bapur,</i> The ship docked near the customs house.

<p><form>ág &mdash; lang</form> <tr>anything and everything</tr>. <i>Ág lay kan-un sa bábuy,</i> Pigs eat anything and everything. <i>Ág lang trabáhu ang íyang gidatug kanákù,</i> She dumped whatever she had to do on me.

<p><form>&dagger;ágak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>guide</tr> s.o. in doing things. <i>Musúkul kus kásu ug dúnay muágak nákù,</i> I'll put up a fight in court if I have legal counsel. <i>Agákun tikaw sa pag-atiman sa tanum,</i> I'll show you how to tend the plants.

<p><form>&dagger;agálun paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> for a long-lost thing to be found again by its owner or for a thing long sold by its owner to find its way back to him. <i>Nangagáwun ang ákung singsing nga narimáti kay aku ra gihápuy nakapalit sa pagsubasta,</i> My ring must consider me its master, because after I pawned it and failed to redeem it, I still got it back at the auction.

<p>&dagger;<i>agaw ig-(&larr;) ug ikatrayinta idús ug tungà</i> (humorous) one's fiancee (lit. thirty-second and a halfth cousin).

<p><form>agay-ay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B346]</itype> for liquid to <tr>trickle</tr> down very slowly from a source. <i>Nag-agay-ay ang túbig sa punúan sa káhuy,</i> The water is trickling very slowly down the trunk of the tree. <pos>n</pos> slow <tr>trickling</tr> of water. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> slow <tr>trickling</tr> of liquid. <number>2</number> water which has trickled out.

<p><form>&dagger;ági (&rarr;) anhà mag-</form> it will <tr>inevitably</tr> be so. <i>Anhà giyud ka mag-agi sa latigu kay buyágun ka man,</i> It looks like you're going to have to get whipped. You're so naughty. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ab]</itype> go over s.t. with an instrument. <i>Paagia kug kadiyut sa ákung sinínà,</i> Let me just press my dress a second time. <i>Gipaagian ku na ang mga hábul nga gisiun,</i> I have already run the torn sheets through the sewing machine. <form>pa-(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>PA-</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr>

<p><form>&dagger;agpas</form> <pos>v</pos> 5 <itype>[c]</itype> for medicine to cure an ailment. <i>Dílì maagpas (maagpasan) sa binisayà ang sakit sa bágà,</i> Folk medicine cannot cure a lung disease.

<p><form>agribyádu</form> <xr>= <sc>AGRABYÁDU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;agwáda</form> <form>agwadahan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the pole carried on the shoulder with a can on each end. <number>2</number> the cans used to convey water. <number>3</number> the place where one fetches water. <number>4</number> the families to whom water is delivered by the carrier.

<p><form>&dagger;agwádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>2</number> for dough not to be baked through. <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> come out not baked through. <i>Ang kakúlang sa síga mauy nakapaagwádu sa bibingka,</i> The rice cake came out half-cooked because the fire was too low.

<p><form>ahan</form> <xr>= <sc>KAYHÀ</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;ahaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be without, <tr>lack</tr>. <i>Hala, níay mil arun dì ka maahaws igalastus syudad,</i> Here is a thousand pesos so you won't lack spending money while you are in the city.

<p><form>akadímik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>academic supervisor</tr>, the second highest official of a public school, next to the superintendent. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be, become an academic supervisor.

<p><form>akawunting</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>accounting</tr> as a subject in schools.

<p><form>alabádu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> clasp the hands on one's breast. <i>Ug mualabádu ang párì, sunud pud,</i> If the priest clasps his hands on his breast, do the same. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> say one's final prayers at the point of death. <i>Nag-alabádu na ang bitayun,</i> The doomed man is saying his final prayers.

<p><form>alahíbi</form> <xr>= <sc>ALHÍBI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;álam</form> <form>may (walay) (&rarr;)</form> <corr sic=educated>uneducated</corr> (having no education). <i>Lisud ang pangimplíyu ug wà kay alam,</i> You'll have a hard time finding a job if you have no education.

<p><form>&dagger;alarma</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> be <tr>alarmed</tr> about s.t. <i>Nagkaalarma ang mga táwu sa kahimtang sa násud,</i> The people are getting <tr>concerned</tr> about the condition of the nation.

<p><form>alastar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> for an anchored boat to get loose and drift away. <i>Nagkaalastar na ang ímung sakayan,</i> Your boat is getting loose and is drifting away.

<p><form>albumina</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>albumen</tr>. <form>albuminahun</form> <pos>a</pos> containing albumen.

<p><form>alibanta</form> command to <tr>heave</tr> s.t. <i>Únu, dus, tris, alibanta!</i> One, two, three, heave!

<p><form>alibay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> drape s.t. over the shoulders. <i>Alibayan ta kag tualya arun dì ka tugnawun,</i> I'll drape a towel over your shoulders so you won't feel cold.

<p><form>&dagger;alirdyik</form> <number>3</number> having an aversion to s.t. <i>Alirdyik kaáyu ku sa hílak,</i> I <tr>hate</tr> crying. <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become <tr>averse</tr> to s.t.

<p><form>alis</form> <tr>get out</tr>, <tr>scram</tr> (colloquial). <i>Alis dihà bi. Akuy naglingkud dihà,</i> Get out of my chair.

<p><form>ális</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wake</tr> of a boat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> produce a wake. <i>Muális ug maáyu ang ispidbut ug pakusgan,</i> The speedboat produces high waves in its wake when it runs fast.

<p><form>aliyunyun</form> (from <ix>yunyun</ix>) <pos>n</pos> an insect similar to a spider, of light dirty-brown color, having long spindly legs, so called because it moves its body up and down when it is disturbed.

<pb n=1143>

<p><form>almahadun</form> <xr>= <sc>ALMUHADUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>alpabit</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>alphabet</tr>.

<p><form>&dagger;álup</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[B24]</itype> for one's popularity to wane. <i>Miálup na ang bitúun ni Súsan Rúsis,</i> Susan Roces' popularity has waned.

<p><form>alupaup</form> <xr>= <sc>ALUP-UP</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>amamaylu</form> <xr>= <sc>TABILUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>amara</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>brandish</tr> a weapon in a fighting stance or in anger. <i>Misibat siya pagkakità sa íyang kuntra nga nag-amara ug pinútì,</i> He got out of there when he saw his enemy waving a sword.

<p><form>amatung</form> <pos>n</pos> large boulder or pile of rocks formed into a boulder found in shallow waters, usually slightly exposed even at high tide.

<p><form>&dagger;ambak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> go, <tr>climb down</tr>. <i>Mihínay siyag ambak sa káhuy,</i> He climbed out of the tree slowly. <number>2a</number> <tr>go out</tr> of a house. <i>Bisag gabíi na, muambak gihápun ka?</i> It's already night. Don't tell me you're going out! <number>2b</number> get, bring off a vehicle. <i>Anhi ra ku dinhi ambak,</i> I'm getting off here. <i>Iambak ra ang ákung dala,</i> Take my baggage off. <number>3</number> <itype>[B6]</itype> for the seam between the shoulder and the sleeve to fall below the shoulder line. <i>Ipausab nang sinínà kay miambak ang tahì<note>accent unclear</note> sa abagahan,</i> Let them redo that dress because the shoulder seam falls below the shoulder line. <pos>a</pos> shoulder seam falling below the shoulder line. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> edge of an area that drops off. <i>Ang ambakan sa intabládu,</i> The edge of the stage.

<p><form>&dagger;ambas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[AC]</itype> for two or more persons or things to arrive at almost the same time. <i>Nag-ambas ug abut ang sulat ug ang tiligráma,</i> The letter and the telegram arrived almost at the same time.

<p><form>&dagger;ambisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> way of playing mahjong where one doesn't open as soon as he has mahjong but rather tries to parley his holdings into s.t. that gives a better return. <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[AP; b]</itype> play one's hand in this way. <i>Mumadyung na tà ku, apan wà lang kay nag-ambisiyun (nagpaambisiyun) kug syíti páris,</i> I could have gone mahjong, but I didn't because I was holding out for seven pairs. <number>2a</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> make it an <ix>ambisiyun</ix> hand. <form>-ar</form> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>AMBISIYUN</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr> <form>-adu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>ambitious</tr>. <i>Ambisiyunádu kaáyu ning batáa nga makahuman sa íyang pagtuun,</i> This child is very ambitious to finish his studies. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be, become ambitious.

<p><form>ambisyúsa</form> <xr>= <sc>AMBISYÚSU</sc> (female).</xr>

<p><form>ambríla kat</form> <pos>n</pos> style of skirt with several triangular pieces flaring to the hem and narrow at the waist, roughly resembling an umbrella. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a dress in this style. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear a dress in this style.

<p><form>amimispis</form> <xr>= <sc>PISPIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;amin</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>admit</tr> a wrong or mistake one has done and be held responsible. <i>Kun aminun nímung tanang nabitabù, maminusminus pa ang ímung sintinsiya,</i> If you admit everything, your sentence will be reduced. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>kill</tr> (humorous). <i>Akuy muamin ánang hingusig nga irù,</i> I'll put an end to that noisy dog. <pos>a</pos> <tr>dead</tr>.

<p><form>&dagger;amping -in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. one must guard. <number>2</number> genitalia of a virgin (euphemism).

<p>&dagger;<form>amù</form> <form>maáyu pay amù náa pay duha ka dakù sa lubut</form> poor as a church mouse (lit. a monkey is better off because at least he has two centavo pieces on his buttocks).

<p><form>amurítis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lovesickness</tr> (humorous). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a4]</itype> be affected with &lsquo;amoritis&rsquo;. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lovesick</tr>.

<p><form>Ámuy<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Amoy Chinese</tr>.

<p><form>amuy-ámuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> pacify, <tr>appease</tr> one's anger. <i>Amuy-amúya (amuy-amúyig) kindi ang bátà ug maghilak,</i> Appease the child with a piece of candy when it cries. <pos>n</pos> act of appeasing, pacifying.

<p><form>amyat</form> <pos>a</pos> looking down on others and being <tr>pretentious</tr>. <i>Amyat nang bayhána. Dílì makighuyhúy nátù,</i> That woman is <tr>stuck up</tr>. She won't go around with us. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become stuck up and pretentious. <i>Lagmit ang kadátù makaamyat (makapaamyat) sa usa ka asáwa,</i> Usually wealth makes a wife think too highly of herself. <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> behave in a <tr>conceited</tr> and <tr>affected</tr> way.

<p><form>an</form> <xr>= <sc>ANG</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;anak</form> <pos>n</pos> <form>&mdash; sa salà, pagpakasalà</form> <tr>illegitimate child</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa pagkaulitáwu</form> a man's child before his marriage. <form>&mdash; sa pagkadalága</form> a child born to a woman before her marriage. <form>&mdash; sa Táwu</form> <tr>Jesus Christ</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa Diyus</form> <tr>Jesus Christ</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa sakramintu</form> <tr>legitimate child</tr>.

<p><form>&dagger;andir &mdash; gráwun</form> <pos>a</pos> done <tr>in secret</tr>. <i>Andir-gráwun ang mga kalihúkan sa mga kaáway nátù,</i> Our enemies carried out their activities in secret. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> do s.t. <tr>secretly</tr>. <form>&mdash; wit</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>underweight</tr>. <i>Andir wit kaáyu ning batáa kay níwang,</i> This child is very underweight because he is thin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become underweight.

<p><form>&dagger;ángal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> reveal a secret (slang). <i>Muángal siya sa pulis kun dì nátù bahínan,</i> He will sing to the police if we do not give him a share.

<p><form>anghuy</form> <xr>= <sc>ANHUY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;angka</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3a</number> <itype>[A23P; b3]</itype> change one's mind, <tr>back out</tr> of an agreement. <i>Dì ku muangka. Ang sábut, sábut,</i> I will not back out. An <pb n=1144>agreement is an agreement. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make s.o. quit or change his mind. <pos>n</pos> s.t. to make one change his mind. <i>Ingun sa paangka ang ílang gipangáyù nga bugay,</i> They asked for that bride price just to get him to back out.

<p><form>&dagger;anislag -un</form> <pos>n</pos> a rooster feather coloration of shiny, light gold with streaks of dark brown.

<p><form>&dagger;ánit</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> strip of leather attached to the ends of the rubber strips of a slingshot used to cradle the stone. <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> attach the sling to the slingshot. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> shave the head bald. (&rarr;) <pos>a</pos> shaved bald.

<p><form>&dagger;ansuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> get sick from getting oneself wet after sexual intercourse. <i>Gíkang mugámit dì siya muhíkap ug túbig kay mahadluk ansúyan,</i> He doesn't go near water after sexual intercourse for fear of getting sick.

<p><form>antidit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> <tr>antedate</tr>, assign an earlier date to a document than the true date. <i>Antidítun (iantidit) lang nátù ang aplikasiyun kay ulahi na,</i> Let's put an earlier date on the application because it is too late.

<p><form>antititanus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>anti-tetanus injection</tr>.

<p><form>&dagger;antiyúhus &mdash; ug bíka</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> miss seeing s.t. too big to be overlooked (lit. wearing glasses made of potsherds).

<p><form>antrak, antraks</form> <pos>n</pos> a big boil without a head, usually growing on the breast, the nape of the neck, or at the back. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123; b5]</itype> have a big boil of this sort.

<p><form>&dagger;anyil &mdash; sa lubut</form> <pos>n</pos> a patch of blue skin found at the tip of the vertebral column of infants.

<p><form>apart&acaron;r</form> <pos>a</pos> located <tr>far</tr> from s.w. <i>Apart&acaron;r kaáyu ang ámung balay sa mirkádu,</i> Our house is very far from the market. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be, become far from s.w. <i>Apartaha (iapart&acaron;r) pagtúkud ang inyung balay sa karsáda,</i> Build your house far from the road. <form>-du</form> <xr>= <sc>APART&Acaron;R</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;apikt&acaron;r -du(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>affected</tr> by s.t. <i>Apiktádu kaáyu ang mga ginikánan sa mga bátang magbinúang,</i> The parents are very much affected if their children misbehave. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be affected. <i>Maapiktádu ang tibuuk láwas sa bísan unsang sakit nga átung batíun,</i> The whole body is affected by any sickness one has.

<p><form>&dagger;apindiks</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> <tr>appendix</tr> of a book.

<p><form>aplikisyun</form> <xr>= <sc>APLIKASIYUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>aprísir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>appraiser</tr>.

<p><form>apsaydawun kik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>upside-down cake</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make upside-down cake.

<p><form>aptudit</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>au courant</tr>, <tr>up-to-date</tr> on events. <i>Aptudit kaáyu ning bayhána sa mga tabì,</i> That woman is au courant when it comes to gossip. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be au courant.

<p><form>apunt&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>record</tr>, <tr>list down</tr> s.t. <i>Ang iskúrir mauy miapunt&acaron;r sa iskur sa nagbaskit,</i> The score-keeper recorded the score of the teams playing basketball. <i>Iapunt&acaron;r unya kiring ákung giútang,</i> List down the things I am getting on credit.

<p><form>arangka<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; b3]</itype> engage in a noisy <tr>quarrel</tr>. <i>Gubut kaáyug mag-arangka na ang bana ug ang íyang abubhuang asáwa,</i> All hell breaks loose when the husband and his jealous wife quarrel.

<p><form>arast&acaron;r</form> <xr>= <sc>ALAST&Acaron;R</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>*araw-áraw</form> <form>paN-</form> <pos>a</pos> for one's daily and ordinary use (slang). <i>Pang-araw-áraw níya ang ílang mutsatsa, ang íyang uyab panagsa ra níya dulgi,</i> He has his maid for ordinary, everyday intercourse, and only rarely his fiancée.

<p><form>&dagger;arbul<sub>2</sub></form> <form>&mdash; di</form> <xr>= <sc>ARBUR DI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>arbur di</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Arbor Day</tr>.

<p><form>aríba<sub>4</sub></form> shout of encouragement to a player or performer. <i>Aríba, Kutya, usa na lang ka puwint,</i> <tr>Come on</tr>, Cotia, you only need one more point.

<p><form>ar-ip si</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for the <tr>Rehabilitation Finance Corporation</tr>, now known as the <tr>Development Bank of the Philippines</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make a loan with the R.F.C.

<p><form>&dagger;árit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sexual intercourse</tr> (slang). <form>pala-</form> <pos>a</pos> having a great capacity for sexual intercourse.

<p><form>&dagger;aríya<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>5a</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for a boat to begin moving away from the wharf. <i>Miaríya na ang barku pag-abut námù sa pantalan,</i> The boat had started to move away when we arrived at the wharf. <number>6</number> <itype>[B4]</itype> start to <tr>give way</tr>, <tr>collapse</tr>. <i>Miaríya ang payag nga nadaghanan sa táwu,</i> The hut was so full of people it started to collapse.

<p><form>armunída</form> <xr>= <sc>ALMUNÍDA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>arsínik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>arsenic</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> poison with arsenic.

<p><form>arsupu</form> <pos>n</pos> word-play on <ix>arsubispu</ix> (humorous).

<p><form>asam-asam</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> dare do s.t. difficult, beyond one's capacity to do. <i>Mag-asam-asam kag pangusína nga dì gánì ka kamaung muháling?</i> Do you dare cook when you don't even know how to kindle a fire? <number>2</number> dare do s.t. one doesn't have a right to do. <i>Nag-asam-asam man siyag lingkud sa uluhan sa lamísa, dì nauláwan siya?</i> He had the nerve to sit at the head of the table. So he was put to shame.

<p><form>&dagger;asáwa asawaasáwa, uluasáwa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>common-law wife</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> be, become; have a common-law wife.

<p><form>asáyin</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>assign</tr> s.o. to a position. <i>Giasáyin ku sa paniktikag bakì,</i> I was assigned to the backwoods. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> assign s.o. work. <i>Wà kuy humwurk nga giasayin,</i> I was <pb n=1145>not assigned any homework. <form>-min</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>assignment</tr> to a job. <number>2</number> assignment to do work.

<p><form>asimbul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>assemble</tr> a contrivance, machine. <i>Asimbul na ang radiyung ákung gipalit kay dì ku maantígung muasimbul,</i> I bought an assembled radio because I don't know how to assemble one.

<p><form>asimbul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> <tr>assemble</tr> together in a place. <i>Didtu ang parid mag-asimbul sa plása,</i> The parade assembled in the plaza.

<p><form>&dagger;asinda asindíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> owner of salt beds (humorous). <form>asindíra</form> <xr>= <sc>ASINDÍRU</sc> (female).</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;asiráwu &mdash; ug buhuk</form> having wiry hair.

<p><form>asirkásu</form> <xr>= <sc>ASIKÁSU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;asist&icaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <tr>attend</tr> a function, meeting. <i>Asistiran (asistihan) ug banda ang ílang kasal,</i> There will be a band in attendance at their wedding.

<p><form>&dagger;atay</form> <number>4</number> <form>&mdash; sa abu</form> the whitest part of the ashes made into lye, used as medicine to treat indigestion. <number>5</number> <form>&mdash; sa súkà</form> the accumulated dregs of vinegar that form into a soft, slippery mass. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> for vinegar to form a soft, slippery mass. <i>Dì pa aslum ang súkà ug dì pa muatay,</i> Vinegar is not sour before it has formed a soft, slippery mass.

<p><form>atitaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)4]</itype> for a boil to come to a good, clear head. <i>Tusdíka ang buthanan sa hubag ug muatitaw na,</i> Prick the boil when it comes to a well-formed head. <pos>a</pos> having a sharply defined head.

<p><form>&dagger;atras</form> <number>4</number> <tr>stern</tr>, rear of a boat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1a</number> for a boat to back up.

<p><form>&dagger;atsa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> grade in the seventies (so called because a figure 7 looks like an axe).

<p><form>atsak</form> <xr>= <sc>ATSAY<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>átut</form> <xr>= <sc>ÁTUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>awagan</form> <xr>= <sc>ULAGAN</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ÚLAG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;awhag</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>urge</tr> to do s.t. <i>Ang awhag nga lawasnun,</i> (Sexual) urges of the body.

<p><form>ay-ar it</form> <pos>n</pos> a recently introduced variety of <tr>rice</tr>, the IR-8 miracle rice.


<p><form>báag<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>BÁLAG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>báag<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a small preparation of food for a get-together. <i>Ug dúnay báag sa inyu muadtu ku,</i> I'll go to your house when you have a little eating party. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> attend a small eating party.

<p><form>&dagger;baang, báang (&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the mouth opened to eat s.t. <i>Kagamay nga táwu apan dakug báang,</i> Such a small man, but how wide he can open his mouth to eat. <number>2</number> <tr>mouthful</tr>. <i>Usa ra ka báang sa buáya,</i> You are only one mouthful for a crocodile.

<p><form>&dagger;bàbà dakù ug &mdash;</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>talkative</tr>, <tr>noisy</tr>.

<p><form>badíday</form> <pos>n</pos> loving and tender address for little girls. <i>Gikápuy ang ákung badíday?</i> Is my little sweetie tired?

<p><form>&dagger;badigard</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> one's <tr>fiance</tr> or <tr>spouse</tr> (humorous).

<p><form>&dagger;bag</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>4</number> <form>syuldir &mdash;</form> <tr>shoulder bag</tr>. <form>pansing, pantsing &mdash;</form> <tr>punching bag</tr>. <form>ubirnayit &mdash;</form> <tr>overnight bag</tr>. <form>ayis &mdash;</form> <tr>ice bag</tr>. <form>pípar &mdash;</form> <tr>paper bag</tr>. <form>ham-, hand-</form> <tr>handbag</tr>.

<p><form>bagnul</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dull</tr>, not sharp. <i>Ang bagnul nga kutsilyu dì limpiyu ug pinutlan,</i> A dull knife will not make a clean cut. <number>2</number> for solids to be <tr>hard</tr> and compacted, not easily crumbling. <i>Bagnul ang batu ikumparar sa anapug,</i> Stone is harder than lime. <number>3</number> for skin to be <tr>calloused</tr> and tough. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> <number>1</number> for a blade to become dull. <number>2</number> <tr>solidify</tr> or form into hard lumps. <i>Ang kabugnaw makapabagnul (makabagnul) sa túbig,</i> Cold will make water solidify. <number>2a</number> for the skin to form callouses. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lumpy</tr>, having hard lumps. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> become lumpy.

<p><form>&dagger;bagting</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> one of the three significant events in one's life for which bells are rung: baptism, marriage, death.

<p>&dagger;bagtuk <pos>a</pos> <number>2</number> having a sour expression on the face. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6]</itype> <number>2</number> wear a heavy and sour look. <i>Dì ka giyud makasúgù niánang bayhána kay mubagtuk dáyun ang nawung,</i> You can never ask that girl to do anything because she immediately gets a nasty expression on her face.

<p><form>&dagger;bag-u</form> <number>2</number> <form>-ng kaláyu, kandílà, túbig</form> blessing of the New Fire, Easter Candle, and Holy Water on the night of Holy Saturday. <form>-ng kinabúhì</form> new lease on one's life after it has been spared from an accident or from a serious illness. <i>Magpasalámat ta sa Diyus sa átung bag-ung kinabúhì,</i> Let us thank God for giving us a <tr>new lease on life</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <form>&mdash; sa kaláyu, kandílà, túbig</form> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> perform the rite of blessing the Holy Water, New Fire and Easter Candles. <number>3</number> <form>&mdash; sa kinabúhì</form> <itype>[A12]</itype> give s.o. a new lease on life. <form>&mdash; sa útang</form> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> renew a loan. <form>kabag-úhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>modern times</tr>. <number>2</number> the younger generation.

<p><form>bagul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>poor</tr>. <i>Dì ku mutúu nga kun bagul ka sa sinugdan, bagul ka na lang sa hangtud,</i> I don't believe that if you start poor, you must always remain poor.

<p><form>bagurung</form> <xr>= <sc>BAGRUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;bagyu &mdash; sa kinabúhì</form> <tr>misfortunes</tr> in life (literary). <i>Taliw[=à] sa ímung kalípay muhúrus usáhay ang mga bagyu sa kinabúhì,</i> Into every life some rain must fall.

<p><form>&dagger;bahù paniN-</form> <number>1b</number> <form>-ng yútà</form> for death to be <pb n=1146>near (lit. smell of earth&mdash;humorous). <i>Nagpanimahù nang yútà ang kansirun,</i> The cancer patient already smells of the grave.

<p><form>bait</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> walk the straight and narrow path (slang). <i>Dì na siya muinum. Nagbait na siya,</i> He doesn't drink anymore. He is following the straight and narrow path.

<p><form>&dagger;bakgráwun -ir</form> <xr>= <sc>BAKGRÁWUN</sc>, <i>n3, 4, 5.</i></xr>

<p><form>bakhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>backhand slap</tr>, <tr>backhand stroke</tr> in tennis. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> strike with a <tr>backhand</tr> slap or hit with a backhand stroke. <i>Bakhánun ta ka rug magtubagtubag ka,</i> I'll slap you with the back of my hand if you talk back to me.

<p><form>&dagger;bakì -in-</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> sitting squat with the legs crossed. <number>2</number> <tr>bikini panties</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> sit on the ground with crossed legs. <number>2</number> wear bikini panties.

<p><form>bakig</form> <xr>= <sc>PAKÌ<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;bakrayid</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>share</tr> in what s.o. else has. <i>Mahímù bang mubakrayid kus ímung kan-un?</i> May I share your food?

<p><form>baksit</form> <pos>n</pos> back seat of a bicycle or motorcycle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> ride on the back seat.

<p><form>&dagger;balalà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>BALÁLÀ</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> fail in school. <i>Balaun (ibalà) tikaw sa klási ug dì ka magtuun,</i> I'll fail you if you don't study. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> fall to the ground with a big thud. <i>Mibalà ku sa salug nga sínaw,</i> I fell flat on the slippery floor with a thud.

<p><form>&dagger;balay &mdash; sa lamígas</form> <tr>ant hill</tr>. <form>tag-</form> call shouted upon reaching the house of a friend to announce one's presence.

<p><form>balbangáhan</form> <xr>= <sc>BALBANGÁAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;baldúsa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> k.o. square-shaped white <tr>cracker</tr>.

<p><form>&dagger;bali<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>7</number> <itype>[A]</itype> change goals in basketball at the second half. <pos>n</pos> exchange of goals.

<p><form>bali<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ballet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> dance the ballet.

<p><form>&dagger;báli</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>2</number> <form>&mdash; ug ígù</form> serves [so-and-so] right. <i>Báli ug ígù ang íyang gidangátan kay matinumánun sa gustu,</i> It serves her right what happened to her because she is so headstrong.

<p><form>&dagger;bálì balìbálì</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>3</number> in basketball, bending the upper part of the body far to the back while shooting to make it difficult to block the ball. <i>Maáyu sa balìbálì si Bárun,</i> Baron is good in making shots with his body bent backward. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> shoot the ball in this way.

<p><form>&dagger;balibul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> toss s.t. about as if it were a volleyball. <i>Gibalibul sa mga bugáung ang tubul nga nag-utaw-útaw,</i> The jarbua fish are poking at the hard stools that are floating in the sea.

<p><form>balikturyan</form> <pos>n</pos> student who failed a grade (word play on <ix>balidikturyan</ix> and <ix>bálik</ix> &mdash; humorous).

<p><form>&dagger;balisbis paN-an</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> for rain to be heavy enough to flow from the eaves. <i>&lsquo;Kusug ba ang ulan?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Ígù giyung nakapamalisbisan,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Was the rain heavy?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;It was heavy enough to flow from the eaves.&rsquo;

<p><form>&dagger;balista</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> for wind or luck to change to an opposite direction. <i>Mibalista ang hángin maung nanimbang na pud sila sa píkas,</i> The wind blew in the opposite direction and so the people moved to the other side of the boat to balance it. <i>Namawì na pud si Pabling. Mibalista na tingáli ang íyang dimálas,</i> Pabling is having a winning streak. Maybe his luck is starting to change. <form>-da</form> <xr>= <sc>BALISTA</sc>, <i>v3.</i></xr>

<p><form>&dagger;balítà walay (&larr;)</form> without any knowledge of what is going on or what had happened. <i>Wà lay balítà ang bána nga naglaki ang íyang asáwa,</i> The husband has <tr>no idea</tr> that his wife is playing around.

<p><form>bálit prup</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bullet proof</tr>.

<p><form>&dagger;bálun pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give a <i>pabálun, 4a, 5.</i> <pos>n</pos> <number>4</number> the custom of throwing earth or gravel upon the coffin as soon as it is lowered into the grave as a sign of respect and also so that the soul of the dead person may not come back to haunt those he left behind. <number>4a</number> soil that is thrown on the coffin in the <ix>pabálun</ix> ceremonies. <number>5</number> send-off gift for a newly-wed couple consisting of equal contributions from both sets of parents.

<p><form>&dagger;balur</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dignified</tr>, having high prestige. <i>Ang pagmaistra balur kaáyung pangitáa,</i> Teaching is a prestigious calling. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b7]</itype> give dignity to oneself or to one's office. <i>Magpabalur giyud ang huwis sa kurti,</i> A judge should maintain his dignity in court. <form>di-</form> <pos>a</pos> carrying respect and high prestige. <i>Dibalur nga tígum. Púlus imbahadur sa mga násud ang mitambung,</i> A <tr>high-level</tr> meeting, attended by ambassadors of various nations.

<p><form>baluskad</form> <xr>= <sc>BALUSKAG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>bambu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> hit s.o. in the body with a hard blow with a thumping sound. <i>Bambuhun ta kag magtubagtubag ka,</i> I'll give you a hard blow on the body if you talk back.

<p><form>&dagger;banà pasi-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> call s.o.'s attention to, <tr>warn</tr>. <i>Gipasiban-an (gipasibanáan) ku siya sa dílì pagpúnay ug kúyug adtung tawhána,</i> I warned her not to go out with that man all the time.

<p>&dagger;bandu<sub>2</sub> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> place where a group of people united for a common purpose meet. <i>Bandu Usminya,</i> The place where the followers of Osme&ntilde;a meet.

<pb n=1147>

<p><form>&dagger;bangdaybangday</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> children's game of flicking rubber bands by turns wherein one wins a rubber band if it lands lying over the opponent's. <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[AC; b]</itype> play <ix>bangdaybangday</ix>.

<p><form>&dagger;banghag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A23; b6]</itype> cut into a conversation. <i>Dì ka mubanghag ug náay magsulti, panábì,</i> Don't join in a conversation suddenly. Ask permission. <pos>a</pos> cutting in a conversation even when one doesn't know the topic being talked about.

<p><form>&dagger;bangku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>toilet</tr> (humorous&mdash;cf. <ix>dipusitu, v 5</ix>). <i>Buysit. Humag káun, diritsus bangku!</i> Darn! As soon as I had finished eating I had to rush to the &lsquo;bank&rsquo;.

<p><form>bangkúru</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small <tr>tree</tr> of the seashore and thickets with a stinking fruit used medicinally: <bio>Morinda citrifolia</bio>.

<p><form>&dagger;banting</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> weigh s.o. down with an onerous task, impositions. <i>Lima ka klási ang gibanting sa usa ka maistru,</i> The teacher was <tr>burdened</tr> with five classes.

<p><form>&dagger;bantuk</form> <pos>n</pos> land for upland rice as opposed to paddies. <form>humay sa &mdash;</form> upland rice. <form>pulis &mdash;</form> a humorous and deprecatory allusion to a policeman who is not quite up to standard or k.o. funny-looking.

<p><form>&dagger;banwag -in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a newly-organized religious sect in Mindanao that patterns its religious practice after those of the Roman Catholic Church. <number>2</number> member of this sect. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be, become a member of the <ix>binanwágan</ix>.

<p><form>bara<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB]</itype> <tr>clog</tr> s.t. up, be <tr>clogged up</tr>. <i>May nuug nga mibara sa túbu sa hugasan,</i> A piece of cloth clogged up the drain in the sink. <i>Nabara ang isdang búhì sa ákung tutunlan,</i> The live fish stuck in my throat. <i>Magkabara ang trapiku basta magkaalas dúsi,</i> Traffic gets clogged up at about twelve o'clock.

<p><form>&dagger;bára<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>4b</number> <form>&mdash; sa Ispiritu Santu</form> <pos>n</pos> a grievous sin originally committed by an ancestor to be paid subsequently by seven generations. <pos>v</pos> <number>2a</number> <itype>[b5]</itype> suffer from having incurred the wrath of the Holy Spirit. <i>Gibára (gibaráhan) sa Ispiritu Santu nang pamilyáha,</i> That family has incurred the wrath of the Holy Spirit.

<p><form>bards</form> <xr>= <sc>PART</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>barit</form> euphemism for <xr><sc>BARUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;bása</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> say the prayers for a dying person. <i>Gibasáhan ang himalatyun nga nagtingà,</i> Prayers were said for him as he breathed his last. <number>1b</number> <form>&mdash; ug kúmiks</form> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> for a prostitute to be so oblivious of the sex act that she can read the comics while she is being had. <i>Basáhan ka lag kúmiks ánang kapúnga, dakù na kaáyu nag bangag,</i> That prostitute will hardly feel you (lit. will read the comics on you), she has such a huge hole.

<p><form>&dagger;baskit bul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> k.o. <tr>dance</tr> characterized by movements which suggest the dribbling and shooting of a ball. <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> dance the <tr>basketball dance</tr>.

<p><form>batangginyu</form> <xr>= <sc>BATANGGINYA</sc> (male).</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;batbat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> follow, traverse along the edges or outskirts. <i>Mibatbat sila sa lapad nga humayan,</i> They walked around edges of the wide rice field. <i>Batbáta ning dalána ug muabut ka sa tubud,</i> Follow this footpath, and you will reach the spring.

<p><form>&dagger;bátì -l-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2a</number> <tr>epidemic</tr>. <i>May balatían karun sa Pásil,</i> There's an epidemic in Pasil now. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> be, become <tr>sick</tr>. <i>Nagbalatían ang inahan,</i> The mother has an illness.

<p><form>*batingting</form> <form>hugut ang &mdash;</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>HUGUT</sc>, <i>a5.</i></xr>

<p><form>&dagger;batu batubátu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>4</number> <tr>testicles</tr> (humorous slang).

<p><form>baybay<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>dance</tr> in which partners embrace each other and swing the upper part of their body sidewise in rhythm with the music. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> dance the <ix>baybay</ix>.

<p><form>bayi kababayin-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>BAYIN-AN</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> belong to the group consisting of friends or relatives of the bride.

<p><form>baylarína</form> <xr>= <sc>BAYLIRÍNA</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>BAYLI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>báyung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. dark-colored <tr>hardwood</tr>.

<p><form>&dagger;bibirun</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for a grown person to behave with childlike immaturity and dependence. <i>Unsa, nagbibirun ka pa nga magpatábang ka pa mag pasul-ub sa karsúnis?</i> Are you still a baby that you ask for help in putting on your pants?

<p><form>&dagger;bíbu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> in a card game of the bridge or whist type, the situation where the players must follow suit. <number>2</number> the card lead. <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> lead with a suit that must be followed or follow suit. <i>Bibúhun (ibíbu) giyud sa magburiskas ang íyang baráha ug dúna siyay ikabíbu,</i> The <ix>buriskas</ix> player follows suit if he can do so.

<p><form>&dagger;bigu tilyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> wearing a <tr>mustache</tr>. <i>Sa úna bigutilyu nà siya,</i> He used to have a mustache.

<p><form>&dagger;bikarbunátu &mdash; disúsa</form> <xr>= <sc>BIKARBUNÁTU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;bilíbid</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> <tr>jail</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be put in jail, <tr>imprison</tr>. <i>Nabilíbid sa salà nga panlúgus,</i> Imprisoned for rape.

<p><form>binhurun</form> <pos>a</pos> women who are not highly esteemed, women left by their husbands, <tr>disgraced women</tr>, women of ill repute, and the like. <i>Ayawg pangasáwag binhurun,</i> Don't marry a <tr>cheap woman</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> consider a woman cheap.

<p><form>binipisya</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> concoct medicine from <pb n=1148>herbs. <i>Binipisyahun (ibinipisya) sa tambálan ang mga sagibunhun,</i> The medicine man concocts medicine from herbs.

<p><form>&dagger;binta<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> ready-made clothes that are not finely-done. <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> be cheaply and poorly made.

<p><form>bintul<sub>2</sub></form> an expression of mild disappointment or disgust. <i>Bintul, wà man diay nákù kasirhi ang pultahan,</i> <tr>My goodness!</tr> I forgot to lock the door.

<p><form>&dagger;bínug</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> <tr>quicksand</tr>.

<p><form>birianádir</form> <pos>a</pos> having adopted a <tr>haughty</tr>, <tr>stand-offish</tr> attitude (colloquial). <i>Basta iksámin birianádir siya kay dì man pakupya,</i> He is very different when it comes to exams because he doesn't let you copy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> develop a stand-offish attitude to others. <i>Nabirianádir na siya sukad muasinsu,</i> He has become quite <tr>distant</tr> since he got his promotion.

<p><form>bís<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>military base</tr>.

<p><form>&dagger;bisti</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. that is typical of a place. <i>Ang kuting ug lamuk mauy bisti sa Sugbu,</i> Bedbugs and mosquitoes are an integral part of Cebu. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> for s.t. to be typical of a place.

<p><form>bitirána</form> <xr>= <sc>BITIRÁNU</sc> (female).</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;bitiránu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>3</number> <tr>widower</tr> (humorous).

<p><form>&dagger;bitúun</form> <number>6</number> <form>&mdash; sa dágat</form> the <tr>Blessed Virgin</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <number>3</number> <form>&mdash; ang panan-aw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S3P]</itype> <tr>see stars</tr>. <i>Namitúun ákung panan-aw pagkaigù sa ákung mata,</i> I saw stars when I was hit in the eyes.

<p><form>bluprint</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>blueprint</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a blueprint of s.t.

<p><form>bradi, brádi</form> <xr>= <sc>BRAD</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr>

<p><form>&dagger;búang -in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>misfunction</tr>. <i>Nagbinúang na sad ning awtúha dà. Dílì na sad muandar,</i> This car is <tr>acting up</tr> again. It won't start.

<p><form>bugalu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bugaloo</tr> dance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> dance the bugaloo.

<p><form>&dagger;bugas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2a</number> <form>&mdash; bugtung</form> a small boil without a head. <pos>v</pos> 2a <itype>[a4]</itype> have a small boil without a head. <i>Gibugas bugtung ku,</i> I have a small boil without a head.

<p><form>&dagger;bugtik</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; a]</itype> for containers to stretch, <tr>bulge</tr>, and become tight from being too full. <i>Mubugtik (mabugtik) ang íyang pitáka kun tingsuwildu,</i> His wallet bulges on payday. <i>Bugtíka pagsulud ang sáku,</i> Fill the <note>add something like: sack brimful.</note>

<p><form>búgù<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>BUGUN</sc>, <i>n1, v.</i></xr>

<p><form>&dagger;bugwak</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> reclaimed area in Cebu City, so called from the spewing of mud during dredging.

<p>&dagger;búhat <pos>n</pos> <number>4a</number> the <tr>Acts of the Apostles</tr>, one of the four Gospels.

<p><form>&dagger;búhì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>2</number> <form>&mdash; nga bakak</form> <tr>obvious lie</tr>. <form>&mdash; ug bakak</form> <tr>obvious liar</tr>. <i>Way mupiyal sa mga táwung búhì ug bakak,</i> No one believes an obvious liar.

<p><form>búing</form> euphemism for <ix>búang</ix>, used as an endearing curse and not particularly as an insult. <i>Kabúing nímu uy! Gipahulat ku nímug maáyu,</i> You sure made me wait, you handsome S.O.B., you!

<p><form>bukádu<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>ABUKÁDU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;bukàkà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>open</tr> s.t. up. <i>Kinsay nagbukàkà sa putus?</i> Who opened the package up? <number>4</number> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become a tattler, talking too much. <i>Nabukàkà siya tungud sa pagpanumbálay,</i> She became a gossip because she liked to go visiting.

<p><form>bulakt&acaron;y</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. scaly <tr>fish</tr> with a silvery body, 2" in diameter and 3" long, found in brackish waters of bays.

<p><form>bulasa, bulasà</form> <xr>= <sc>LAMUDLAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>bulis walà ma-</form> [so-and-so] did not fail to happen, just as was expected. <i>Giingnan ta kag musaka ka dinhà, mahúlug ka. Dà, wà mabulis ag ákung sulti,</i> I told you you'd fall if you climbed up there. There, now you fell.

<p><form>bulitlit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a small opening wide, push the sides apart with both hands. <i>Akuy mibulitlit sa gamayng lungag sa bungbung,</i> I was the one who <tr>widened</tr> the small opening in the wall. <i>Ákung bulitlitan<note>bulitlítan ?</note> ang ímung buhuk ug wà bay kútu,</i> I'll go through your hair to see if there are any lice.

<p><form>bupalu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>buffalo</tr>.

<p><form>&dagger;búru<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <form>mangga &mdash;</form> salted green, sliced or shredded mangoes.

<p><form>burumbut</form> <xr>= <sc>ALUNDRIS<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>búsa núba</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bossa nova</tr> song, dance. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> dance the bossa nova. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> do the music in bossa nova time.

<p><form>busting</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>show off</tr>, <tr>braggart</tr> (slang). <i>Busting kaáyu siya, pakitàkítà dáyun sa íyang bag-ung rilu,</i> He is such a <tr>show-off</tr> displaying his new wristwatch for everybody to see. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become a show-off, braggart (slang).

<p><form>butáka<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> in movie houses, the section at the back of the orchestra.

<p><form>&dagger;butang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>5a</number> <form>butangi</form> [<ix>b[=ú]tangi</ix>] exclamation indicating that a taunt is so apt there is no answer possible (lit. hit him where it hurts). <i>&lsquo;Primírang tihik ug mangáyù lag sabaw nga dílì mupalit ug unud.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;B[=ú]tangi,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;What a tightwad! He asks for gravy but won't buy the meat it's supposed to go with.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;OK, you win (I can't answer that).&rsquo;

<pb n=1149>

<p><form>&dagger;butar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>favor</tr> or give one's approval to s.o. or s.t. <i>Mubutar ku kun duktúra ímung pangasaw-un,</i> I would <tr>approve</tr> if you married a doctor. <i>Dílì sad ku makabutar ánang idíya nga muwilga ta,</i> I would not favor the idea that we go on strike.

<p><form>butikin</form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>drugstore</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a space into a small drugstore.

<p><form>butíkul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pockmarks</tr> (humorous). <number>2</number> person with pockmarks (humorous). <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having pockmarks (humorous).

<p><form>&dagger;butu paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> develop skin eruptions. <i>Namutu ang ákung líug,</i> I developed skin eruptions. <pos>n</pos> eruptions of the skin caused by tuberculosis of the skin.

<p><form>buyna<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> black <tr>beret</tr> made of felt. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> wear a beret.

<p><form>bwaybuway</form> <xr>= <sc>BURAYBÚRAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>bwisit, bwísit</form> <xr>= <sc>BUYSIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;byáhi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2a</number> <form>katapúsang &mdash;</form> <form>2a1</form> last trip to the cemetery. <form>2a2</form> last chance to get married. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> marry at the last chance. <i>Bísag makatapúsang byáhi basta prantsit, úki,</i> Even if it is the last trip, it is all right, as long as I get a good seat. (I.e. never mind if I marry late so long as it is a good catch.)

<p><form>&dagger;byúda &mdash; aligri</form> a flirtatious widow. <i>Nagpalámì uruy ang byúda aligri,</i> Humph! The merry widow seems to be having fun. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B13]</itype> be, become a flirtatious widow.

<p><form>&dagger;dágat paN-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fishing boat</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>fishing grounds</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> be made into a fishing boat or fishing ground.

<p><form>&dagger;daghan</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> put <tr>more than enough</tr> of s.t. <i>Nadaghanan ra sa asin ang ákung linatan,</i> I put <tr>too much</tr> salt into my stew.

<p><form>Dagúhuy</form> the leader of an anti-Spanish revolt in Bohol. <form>kalíwat ni &mdash;</form> people from Bohol.

<p><form>&dagger;dagungdung</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> heavy with fruit. <number>2</number> <tr>overcast</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> <number>2</number> for the sky to be overcast. <i>Nagkadagungdung ang panahun. Muulan tingáli,</i> It is getting overcast. It will probably rain.

<p><form>&dagger;dagway</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>4</number> <xr>= <sc>BAYHUN</sc>, <i>n4.</i></xr>

<p><form>dahúluy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> for food to slide smoothly down the throat. <i>Ang landang mudahúluy lang inigtún,</i> The buri starch sweet just slides down the throat.

<p><form>dakang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>DAKUL</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> hammer s.t. down hard. <i>Dakngun ku ang mga lansang nga nanglábaw,</i> I'll <tr>hammer down</tr> the nails that are protruding. <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to rap or hammer s.t.

<p><form>&dagger;dakdak -an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <form>-an ug Sabadu</form> a face that is so flat it looks like the stone they pound their wash on on Saturdays. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125]</itype> for a face to become flat.

<p><form>dakug</form> <xr>= <sc>PAKUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;dalága</form> (&rarr;) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> for a widow to primp herself up. <i>Gustu na pud tingáling magminyù pag-usab ang byúda kay nagdalaga man,</i> The widow must want to get married again because she is primping herself up.

<p><form>&dagger;dalágan dagandagan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <number>1</number> for money to grow. <i>Mudagandagan ang kwarta ug inigusyu,</i> Money will grow if you invest it in business. <number>2</number> not be used up for a certain period. <i>Maáyu kay nakadagandagan ang ámung bugas hangtud sa katapúsan sa búwan,</i> It's a good thing our rice lasted until the end of the month.

<p><form>dalímasù</form> (from <ix>pásù</ix>) <pos>n</pos> an insect about 1" by 3/4" in diameter, covered with green, kinky, hair-like growths, found on the underside of coconut leaves. They produce an itchy, burning sensation and affect fowl that consume them with extreme debility.

<p><form>dalipasù</form> (from <i>pásù</i>) <pos>n</pos> a k.o. skin protrusion like a <i>pasù,</i> <pos>n</pos>1, in appearance, having a clear liquid content, caused by the bite of a mite found in loose, powdery soil.

<p><form>dalipsut</form> <xr>= <sc>DALIPSÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>damagan</form><sub>3</sub> a careless in doing one's work. <i>Dì giyud magkadimáu ning íyang búhat kay damagan kaáyu,</i> Her work is always a mess because she is so careless. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125]</itype> be careless in doing s.t.

<p><form>&dagger;damikà, damíkà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> sit flat on the floor, usually with the legs crossed at the ankles. <i>Gidamikaan níla ang húgaw nga salug,</i> They sat sprawled on the dirty floor.

<p><form>dámun</form> <xr>= <sc>KANÁMÙ</sc> (dialectal).</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>KAMI</sc>.</xr>

<p>&dagger;dánag <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> be unaware of what is going on round about one.<i> Nagdánag lang ang bána sa dautang líhuk sa íyang asáwa,</i> The husband is unaware of the terrible things his wife is doing.

<p><form>&dagger;danggit -in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> position in sexual intercourse where the partners both lie on their sides and the man faces the woman's back. <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> do it in this position.

<p><form>&dagger;daplak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[B3(1)6]</itype> be lying flat on the ground. <i>Giánay ang trúsu nga nagdaplak sa yútà,</i> The log that is lying flat on the ground has gotten infested with termites. <i>Nadaplak ang bátang nadugmù sa balas,</i> The child stumbled and fell flat on the sand.

<p><form>dapli, daplì</form><i> v</i> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put, set aside. <i>Mìdaplì siya sa íyang buluhatun pag-abut námù,</i> She put the things she was working on aside when we arrived. <i>Nagdaplì kug sud-an pára ninyu,</i> I set some food aside for you. <i>Nakadapli kug duha ka gatus ka písus,</i> I have put aside two hundred pesos.

<p><form>&dagger;daplin pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> put aside s.t. one is <pb n=1150>doing. <i>Mipadaplin siya sa íyang gibása ug namátì sa tabì,</i> She put aside what she was reading and listened to gossip.

<p><form>dápul bag</form> <pos>n</pos> duffel bag. <pos>v</pos> [<form>c1</form>] place in a duffel bag. <i>Dapulbága (idápul bag) ang tanang bulingun,</i> Put all the soiled clothes in a duffel bag.

<p><form>&dagger;dáru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> plowed field. <form>daruhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> animal used for plowing.

<p><form>datsun</form> <pos>n</pos> dachshund.

<p><form>&dagger;dátù<sub>3</sub></form> <form>sakit ug, sa</form> &mdash; <pos>n</pos> TB (from the notion that one who has TB should have a total rest).

<p><form>dátù</form><sub>3</sub> <pos>n</pos> k.o. crudely distilled medicinal liquor of local make.

<p><form>dawa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; b6]</itype> for the blood in a dish of <form>dugùdugù</form> to curdle.

<!-- Check this entry -->

<p><form>dawungdung</form> <pos>a</pos>, <pos>v</pos><number>1, 2</number> <xr>= <sc>DAGUNGDUNG</sc>.</xr> <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>DAYUNGYUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;dáyun -in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>3</number> continuous in one piece. <i>Dináyun ang karsúnis ug kamisadintru,</i> The shirt and the trousers are sewn together.

<p><form>dì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> word used to call pigs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> call a pig by saying <bio>dì,</i> <i>dì,</i> <i>dì</bio>. <form>dìdì<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>DÎ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;dibisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1a</number> school division. &mdash; <form>syupirintindint</form> <pos>n</pos> Division Superintendent of Schools.

<p><form>diditi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>DDT</tr>.

<p><form>didtut</form> <xr>= <sc>DIDTU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>dík</form> <xr>= <sc>DÎ<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>dikyam</form> <xr>= <sc>KYAMUY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>dimasyádu, dimasyáwu</form> <xr>= <sc>MASYÁDU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;dipirinsiya -du</form>(&larr;) <pos>a</pos> defective. <i>Dipirinsiyádu siyag matris,</i> She has a defective uterus. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> develop a defect.

<p><form>diprisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> depression of atmospheric pressure. <i>May diprisyun kunu kay may bagyu,</i> They say that there's a depression because there is a storm coming.

<p><form>&dagger;diskarga</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1b</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> defecate or urinate (colloquial). <i>Mudiskarga úsà ta dinhi kay way mga táwu,</i> Let's urinate here because there is no one around.

<p><form>diskutsu</form> <xr>= <sc>BISKUTSU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;dispatsar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>5</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> tell s.o. off, say s.t. curtly to s.o. <i>Dispatsahun ka lag ingun nga wà kay kwalipikasiyun,</i> They will just tell you curtly that you are not qualified.

<p><form>&dagger;dispatsu</form> <pos>n</pos> errand boy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> be an errand boy.

<p><form>&dagger;dispuwis</form> <number>2</number> therefore, so. <i>Miingun ka nagdamgu ka, dispuwis natúlug ka,</i> You said you were dreaming, so you must have been sleeping.

<p><form>&dagger;distansiya</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A23; a]</itype> <corr sic=given>give</corr> an opponent an advantage of a certain distance in a race. <i>Mudistansiya ka níyag lima ka dupa?</i> Will you give him an advantage of five lengths?

<p><form>distinar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>assign</tr> s.o. s.w. for a job. <i>Supirintindinti mauy nagdistinar nákù dinhis isla,</i> The superintendent assigned me to this island. <number>2</number> be <tr>destined</tr> to a certain fate. <i>Gidistinar ku sa pag-antus,</i> I was destined to suffer.

<p><form>distribyútur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>distributor</tr> of an engine.

<p><form>distrungk&acaron;r</form> <xr>= <sc>ISTRUNGK&Acaron;R</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;distsards</form> <form>unurabul, dis-unurabul &mdash;</form> honorable, dishonorable discharge. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give an honorable, dishonorable discharge.

<p><form>dramstik</form> <pos>n</pos> ice-cream cone shaped like a drumstick.

<p><form>dridyir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dredger</tr>, for clearing out or deepening channels, harbors. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>dredge</tr> out.

<p><form>drísing</form> <pos>v</pos> (A; b6(1)] <tr>dress</tr> a wound or sore. <pos>n</pos> <tr>dressing</tr> for a wound.

<p><form>duak</form> <xr>= <sc>DUKÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;duas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> <tr>rot</tr> or <tr>wear down</tr> from exposure to the elements. <i>Bísan ang dagkung batu muduas sa kadugáyan,</i> Even large rocks wear out with time.

<p><form>dugsaw</form> <xr>= <sc>DUGSAK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;duha</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> do s.t. with both hands. <i>Bug-at nà. Kinahanglan duhaan nímu pag-aswat,</i> It's so heavy you have to lift it with both hands.

<p><form>&dagger;dukà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[B1456]</itype> for light to <tr>flicker</tr> or to burn unsteadily. <i>Nagdukà ang lamparilya kay wà na nay gás,</i> The lamplight is flickering. It must be out of kerosene.

<p><form>&dagger;dulurúsa</form> <form>&mdash; ug nawung, panagway</form> <pos>a</pos> having a sad look on the face. <i>Dulurúsag dagway kay gibulagan sa trátu,</i> She has a sad look because her boy friend left her.

<p><form>dulyan</form> <xr>= <sc>DURYAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>dumikà</form> <xr>= <sc>DAMIKÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;dungug</form> <form>dunggánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>2</number> having the reputation of being a vampire (<i>unglù</i>). <i>Dunggánun kaáyu nang pamilyáha,</i> The people in that family are reputed to be vampires. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> get to be reputed to be a vampire.

<p><form>dyíay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> an American soldier during World War II. <number>2</number> a six-by-six lorry. <number>3</number> acronym for galvanized iron.

<p><form>dyú</form> term of address to American men (from the WW II appelation of American GI's). Máni, dyú, Give me money, Joe.

<p><form>&dagger;gabíi</form> <form>gabíing</form> <form>gabhiúna</form> exactly <tr>last night</tr>. <i>Gabíing gabhiúna mukrás ang ayruplánu,</i> The plane crashed just last night.

<p><form>gabing<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>dependent</tr> that is an encumbrance. <i>Makalakaw ku bísan ása kay wà kuy gabing,</i> I can go out anywhere because there is no one I have to stay home for.

<p><form>gábing</form> <xr>= <sc>GABLING</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=1151>

<p><form>gái</form> <ix>short for</ix> <form>tagái</form>. <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>*TÁGÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gakàgákà</form> <xr>= <sc>BAKÀBAKÀ</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>BÁKÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;galinggaling</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> k.o. <tr>cicada</tr> that makes noise in the late afternoon.

<p><form>gangstir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gangster</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; b6]</itype> be, become a gangster.

<p><form>&dagger;gangù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> for a small or slender object joined to s.t. else or a continuation of s.t. to break off, get detached; cause it to do so. <i>Migangù ang tiil sa lamísa,</i> The leg of the table broke off. <i>Wà siya makagangù sa sanga,</i> He was not able to break the branch off.

<p><form>garantisar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> give assurance that s.t. is as asserted. <i>Garantisaran ta kang mulampus ning batáa,</i> I can guarantee you that this boy will succeed.

<p><form>gardim</form> <xr>= <sc>GÁDIM</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gardímit</form> <xr>= <sc>GADÍMIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>garis</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. itchy <tr>skin disease</tr> caused by a mite, usually spreading over large areas of the body. <number>2</number> very light scratches, as one would get from brushing against s.t. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> get this skin disease. <i>Garisun giyud ka ug magsígi kag táak sa lápuk,</i> You'll get <tr>scabies</tr> if you keep wading in the mud. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; b8]</itype> be lightly scratched. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having this skin ailment.

<p><form>*gats</form> <form>may &mdash;</form> have the <tr>guts</tr> to do s.t. <i>May gats ka ug makawan tu tri kas Wayt Guld,</i> You have got to have guts to steal s.t. at the White Gold.

<p><form>gay</form> <pos>n</pos> intimate nickname among young men (colloquial). <i>Muuban ka námug panúruy, gay?</i> Won't you go out with us, buddy?

<p><form>gidlaw</form> <xr>= <sc>GINLAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;gílis</form> <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for palm leaflets to separate. <i>Sa dì pa makagilis ang lubi, piligru sa mga mananap,</i> Before the leaflets of the coconut palm frond break apart, the plants are in danger of being eaten by harmful insects.

<p><form>gil iskáwut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>girl scout</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be, become a girl scout.

<p><form>giníya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>guinea fowl</tr>.

<p><form>gíwaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> start to appear or come out from behind a hiding place. <i>Migíwaw na ang adlaw sa pagmata nákù,</i> The sun had started to appear when I woke up. <i>Dì pa makagíwaw ang turuk sa pugas humay sa duha ka adlaw,</i> In two days the rice sprouts still won't have come out. <pos>n</pos> s.t. that has started to appear.

<p><form>&dagger;grába</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b5]</itype> pave with gravel.

<p><form>&dagger;grádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>5</number> degree of a fever.

<p><form>&dagger;grátis</form> <form>&mdash; it amúri</form> <xr>= <sc>GRÁTIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>gráyin</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. dance characterized by grinding action. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do the grind.

<p><form>&dagger;gúlang</form> <form>ma-(&rarr;)</form> <number>3a</number> <form>&mdash; sa hátag, pangáyù</form> so cheap it is practically being given away, being asked for for nothing. <i>Kanang ímung hangyù maguwang lang sa pangáyù,</i> You're offering so little, you might as well just ask me to give it to you.

<p><form>gús</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gauze</tr>.

<p><form>gutì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>small</tr>. <i>Ang mga gutì kaáyung mga sigay maáyung isungkà,</i> The small cowries are good to play <i>sungkà</i> with. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become small in amount, size. <i>Mugutì (magutì) ang inyung kapital ug sigíhag útang,</i> You're going to run out of capital if you keep extending credit.

<p><form>gúwing istrit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146]</itype> <tr>go straight</tr>, follow the straight and narrow. <i>Kaniadtu gibuguybugúyan níya ang pag-iskuyla, karun naggúwing istrit na siya,</i> He used to fool around with his studies, but now he is serious. a following the straight and narrow.


<p><form>hábir sak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>knapsack</tr>.

<p><form>&dagger;hagkut &mdash; ug kamut</form> <tr>light-fingered</tr>. <i>Ayaw isayàsayà ang ímung kwarta kay hagkut ra bag kamut ang mga mutsatsa dinhi,</i> Don't leave your money around because the maids around here are light-fingered.

<p><form>hàhà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> clean s.t. in water by swishing it around. <i>Ákù nang gihàháan ang mga piníkas nga isdà,</i> I swished the split fish around in the sea to clean them.

<p><form>hákut(&rarr;)<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> for a boil to accumulate pus. <i>Mag-ugnap ang hubag nga maghakut ug nánà,</i> A boil develops a throbbing pain when it begins to accumulate pus.

<p><form>halag</form> <xr>= <sc>HALAGHAG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>halahála</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>halahala</tr>, a k.o. dance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do the halahala.

<p><form>halíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jelly</tr>, <tr>jam</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> make a fruit jelly.

<p><form>haltir</form> <pos>n</pos> women's upper garment designed like a <tr>halter</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make into this sort of garment.

<p><form>hambù</form> <xr>= <sc>HAMBUK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>hamilsing<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>healthy</tr>, <tr>growing well</tr>. <i>Hamilsing ang mga tanum sa walug,</i> The plants in the valley are healthy. <i>Hamilsing ang bátà nga pinainum ug gátas,</i> A child who is fed with milk is healthy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be, become healthy.

<p><form>hamuy<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>HAMLUY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>hantir</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sharpshooter</tr>. <i>Hantir kaáyu siya. Makaigù ug langgam nga maglupad,</i> He is a <tr>good shot</tr>. He can fell a bird on the wing.

<p><form>hapaag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> playfully jump on s.o. <i>Natumba ming duha kay mihapaag man siya nákù nga walà ku kabantay,</i> We both fell to the ground because he jumped on me when I wasn't looking.

<pb n=1152>

<p><form>&dagger;hapnut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>2</number> for a mixture of solids and liquids to be smooth and stiff. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> be, become smooth and thick. <i>Muhapnut ang sikwáti ug ayúhun ug kusukúsu,</i> Chocolate becomes smooth and thick if it is well stirred.

<p><form>hapsak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hopsacking</tr>, a k.o. rough, loosely woven fabric used for clothing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear s.t. of hopsacking.

<p><form>háras</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>harass</tr>. <i>Pulis ang nagháras sa mga pumipilì,</i> The police harassed the voters.

<p><form>hard líbur</form> <pos>n</pos> sentence to <tr>hard labor</tr> in prison.

<p><form>&dagger;haum</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> apply aptly. <i>Pangartíyu sa bálak sa ininglis nga muhaum sa pamálak nga binisayà,</i> Techniques in writing English poetry that are applicable as well to Visayan poetry.

<p><form>háwung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a123]</itype> <tr>rekindle</tr> s.t. smouldering to produce a flame. <i>Hawnga tung káyu kay maglung-ag na ta,</i> Rekindle the fire because we are going to cook rice now. <number>2</number> encourage s.o.'s burning interest or desire of s.t. <i>Ang íyang pag-apil-apil sa dráma nakahawung sa íyang tingúhà nga maartista,</i> Her parts in small plays fanned her interest in becoming an actress.

<p><form>hibul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> dress a chicken. <i>Ákung hibulan ang manuk nga ímung giíhaw,</i> I'll dress the chicken that you killed.

<p><form>hidláyin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>headlines</tr> of a newspaper. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; c1]</itype> be in the headlines of a newspaper. <i>Nahidlayin ang kamatáyun ni Kinidi,</i> President Kennedy's death was in the headlines.

<p><form>híkaw<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bracelet</tr>.

<p><form>&dagger;híkug</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>suicide</tr>.

<p><form>hinhin<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> women <tr>refined</tr> and <tr>delicate</tr> in manners (colloquial). <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> behave gently and @<corr sic=refinely>refinedly</corr>. <i>Bágis kaáyu nang bayhána apan magpahinhin dáyun igpamisíta sa íyang trátu,</i> She's a rough sort of woman, but when her boy friend calls on her, she is ever so delicate.

<p><form>&dagger;hitak hitakhitak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> play around in the mud, jumping around in it or walking back and forth in it.

<p><form>&dagger;hitsu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[a]</itype> do s.t. to completion, to the <tr>finish</tr>. <i>Hitsúa ang usa ka búhat úsà ka magsúgud ug láing buluhatun,</i> Finish one piece of work before you start s.t. else. <i>Wà pa ku níya hitsúi ug báyad,</i> He has not paid me <tr>in full</tr>.

<p><form>&dagger;hiyá(&larr;)</form> <number>2</number> <itype>[B146]</itype> be growing, produced in abundance. <i>Barátu ang mangga karun kay naghíya pagbúnga,</i> Mangoes are cheap because they are fruiting in vast quantities.

<p><form>&dagger;hubag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2a</number> <form>&mdash; ang pusud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4; b6]</itype> become <tr>pregnant</tr> (humorous).

<p><form>hubashúbas</form> <pos>a</pos> money coming and going at irregular intervals. <i>Hubashúbas ning panápì sa sugarul,</i> For gamblers, money comes and goes at irregular intervals. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> for money to come and go at irregular intervals.

<p><form>&dagger;hulam</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> develop uncultivated land belonging to s.o. else and cultivate it without sharing with the owner. <i>Hulamun (hulaman) nákù ang ímung lasang ug napúlù ka túig,</i> I'll clear your forest and cultivate it for ten years without sharing.

<p><form>&dagger;hulat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>4</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> set s.t. aside to have it in readiness for an event or suitable occasion. <i>Ayawg ibaligyà! Ihulat ug maáyung prisyu!</i> Don't sell it! Keep it in readiness until you can get a good price for it.

<p><form>hulbut sínaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sexual intercourse</tr> (humorous allusion&mdash;word play on English &lsquo;All boats are in the sea now&rsquo;&mdash;lit. pull it out, it's glistening). <i>Hulbut sínaw sa buntag?</i> Doing &lsquo;it&rsquo; in the morning? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> do the <ix>hulbut sínaw</ix>.

<p><form>hulstir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>holster</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> use a <tr>holster</tr>, put in a holster.

<p><form>&dagger;hulughúlug</form> <xr>= <sc>BÙBUAY</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>BÙBÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;hulungíhung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> be <tr>rumored</tr>. <i>Gihulungíhung nga makadawat kitag búnus,</i> There's a <tr>rumor</tr> going around that we're going to get a bonus.

<p><form>hurn&acaron;l</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>laborer</tr> who does odd, heavy manual work. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b6]</itype> do heavy, odd jobs. <i>Dì ku maghurn&acaron;l sa piyir kay bug-at kaáyu ang pangalsáhun,</i> I can't be a laborer at the pier because they make you carry terribly heavy things. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> hire s.o. to do <tr>heavy labor</tr>.

<p><form>huswà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> leave the bed undone after waking up. <i>Kining mga batáa mu rag mga úmang. Muhuswà lang sa ílang higdaánan inigmata,</i> These children are like hermit crabs. They leave their beds undone when they get up.

<p><form>hútuy<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a reddish swelling on the skin due to a burn or disease, soft with water beneath. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S3(1); b4]</itype> get this sort of swelling. <i>Mihútuy ang íyang buktun nga nayab-an sa ínit túbig,</i> She developed a big red <tr>blister</tr> on her arm when she spilled hot water on it.

<p><form>&dagger;huwis &mdash; diprimir istansiya</form> <pos>n</pos> judge in the Court of First Instance.


<p><form>&dagger;igurut</form> <number>2</number> euphemism for <ix>ignuranti</ix>.

<p><form>&dagger;ihap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> give s.o. a count to three to get going. <i>Iphan ta ka kay bunálan ta kag dì ka mulíhuk,</i> I'll count three. If you don't move, I'll whip you.

<p><form>&dagger;íhì</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> liquid excretion of some worms and <corr sic=millepedes>millipedes</corr>. <i>Ang íhì sa labud makapásù kunu,</i> <pb n=1153>They say millepede excretions burn the skin.

<p><form>*ikman</form> <form>tigúlang &mdash;</form> <pos>a</pos> a <tr>very old</tr> person.

<p><form>&dagger;ikstra bágids</form> <pos>n</pos> third party when there is a couple (humorous). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be a third party. <i>Ayawg uban kay maikstra bágids ka,</i> Don't come with us because two is a company, three is a crowd. <form>-lards</form> <pos>n</pos> extra large size.

<p><form>&dagger;ila<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>4a</number> <form>dílì, walà &mdash;</form> <itype>[A23]</itype> not mind, take into consideration as s.t. worth noting. <i>Trabahanti nga walà muilag ulag ínit paghuman sa taytáyan,</i> Workers that didn't mind the rain and heat in building the bridge.

<p><form>ilidyitimit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>illegitimate child</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be an illegitimate child.

<p><form>&dagger;ilígal &mdash; pusisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> illegal possession of firearms. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be booked for illegal possession.

<p><form>ilik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>elect</tr> or <tr>vote for</tr> s.o. for a position in school. <i>Nag-ilik mig mga upisyal sa ámung klási,</i> We elected our class officers.

<p><form>&dagger;imbalsamar</form> <form>imbalsamádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>embalmed</tr>.

<p><form>impirmu</form> <pos>n</pos> ill or <tr>wounded soldier</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for a soldier to be admitted to the infirmary. <i>Impirmúhun (iimpirmu) ang sundálung magdaut,</i> Sick soldiers are admitted to the infirmary.

<p><form>impiyirmu</form> <xr>= <sc>IMPIRMU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>inday<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>AMBUT</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p><form>indibag</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>in the bag</tr>, very <tr>certain</tr> that s.t. will come out as one wishes (colloquial). <i>Indibag na ang ímung kadaúgan kay gipamalit man nímu ang mga butanti,</i> Your election is in the bag because you bought lots of votes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be, become in the bag.

<p><form>inggrasadur</form> <pos>n</pos> one in charge of lubricating an engine in a ship. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; c1]</itype> work as an engine <tr>oiler</tr>.

<p><form>Ingk</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for <tr><ix>Iglisya ni Kristu</ix></tr>.

<p><form>ingkargu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>order</tr> s.t. by list. <i>Nag-ingkargu na kug mga dapat sa balay,</i> I have ordered the things we need to build the house.

<p><form>&dagger;Inglis &mdash; ispíking</form> <pos>n</pos> one who uses English in daily conversation, even at home. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become an <tr>English speaker</tr>.

<p><form>ini</form> <xr>= <sc>KINI<sub>1</sub></sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p><form>inkargu</form> <xr>= <sc>INGKARGU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>insisaryu</form> <xr>= <sc>INSINSARYU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>instraktur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>school instructor</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be, become a school instructor.

<p><form>instrumintal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>instrumental</tr> (as opposed to a vocal) musical number. <i>Instrumintal na puy ákung ipatukar,</i> I'll put on an instrumental number this time.

<p><form>&dagger;insultu insultadur</form> <pos>a</pos> given to insulting people.

<p><form>&dagger;intirnal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> give an internal medical <tr>examination</tr>. <form>&mdash; himurids</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>internal hemorrhage</tr>.

<p><form>intrabínus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>intravenous</tr> feeding or injection. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> give an <tr>intravenous injection</tr>.

<p><form>&dagger;intráda</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>6</number> the coming-in of an accompanying instrument. <i>Sayup ang ímung intráda. Nag-una ka ra sa tayming,</i> You didn't come in right. You were ahead of the beat.

<p><form>ip-is</form> <pos>n</pos> surplus navy ships used for inter-island shipping (so called from the legend <xr><sc>FS</sc></xr> painted on the sides).

<p><form>iri</form> <xr>= <sc>KIRI</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p><form>irpap</form> <pos>n</pos> hairstyle of the early Twenties where the hair was tied into a knot in the back and puffed around the ears.

<p><form>&dagger;isdà</form> <form>&mdash; sa insik</form> <tr>groupers</tr> (<ix>lapulápu</ix>), so called because Chinese are fond of buying this fish. <form>&mdash; sa mintiryu</form> k.o. large, fleshy catfish (<ix>tambangúngu</ix>) which in folk belief is said to be the body of a corpse turned into a fish by magic powers.

<p><form>ísi<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> metal bar or rod formed into a letter S, usually hooked on to a horizontal bar and used for hanging objects.

<p>iskram<sub>2</sub> <tr>scram</tr>, <tr>get out</tr> of here.

<p><form>ispiktur</form> <xr>= <sc>INSPIKTUR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;ispiritu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>3</number> <form>walay &mdash;</form> <tr>lifeless</tr>, without spirit. <i>Walay ispiritung ikasulti,</i> A person who doesn't react when one talks to him.

<p><form>&dagger;ispisyal &mdash; minsiyun</form> having <tr>especial mention</tr>, getting publicity for s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a1]</itype> get publicly mentioned. <i>Naúlaw siya nga naispisyal minsiyun ang íyang pagkaismaglir,</i> He was embarrassed to hear his name mentioned in connection with smuggling.

<p><form>isplit<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> split a class or political party. <i>Ang way pagsinabtanay mauy nakaisplit sa partídu,</i> Lack of mutual understanding split the party. <i>Isplitun (iisplit) ang klási ug dakù ra,</i> The class is split if it is too big.

<p><form>&dagger;ispunsur</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>4</number> sponsor of a wedding. <pos>v</pos> <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> be, become a <tr>wedding sponsor</tr>.

<p><form>ispur is</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for &lsquo;smooth four sides&rsquo; (S-4-S), a classification of lumber, all four surfaces of which have been planed. <pos>a</pos> beautiful girl (humorous).

<p><form>istínu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stenography</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> write in <tr>shorthand</tr>.

<p><form>istraglir</form> <pos>n</pos> an outsider who mingles with a group, one who doesn't belong to a group (humorous). <i>Nakúlang ang pagkáun sa parti kay dúnay daghang istraglir,</i> There wasn't enough food at the party because there were so many <tr>gate-crashers</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a gate-crasher, go with a group one does not belong to.

<p><form>istritkat</form> <pos>n</pos> straight cut pants. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c16]</itype> tailor trousers in the straight cut style.

<pb n=1154>

<p><form>istú is</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for &lsquo;smooth two sides&rsquo; (S-2-S), a classification of lumber, only the top and bottom surfaces of which have been planed.

<p><form>íyay</form> <pos>a</pos> asking for sympathy, affection by crying. <i>Íyay kaáyung bayhána. Gamay lang kaáyu nga sakit muhílak dáyun,</i> She whines a lot. The slightest thing and she has to burst into tears.


<p><form>&dagger;kabáyù kabayùkabáyù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>3</number> a toy-horse race which determines winners by lottery.

<p><form>&dagger;kadastral</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for lands to be surveyed for tax purposes. <i>Kadastrálun (ikadastral) ang tanang yútà sa búkid,</i> All the lands on the mountain will be surveyed for tax purposes.

<p><form>kamagung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B23]</itype> be, become <tr>dark-complexioned</tr>. <i>Nakamagung na ka sa pagkinalígù sa dágat,</i> You have become dark because you always bathe in the sea.

<p><form>kaman</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> give a <tr>military command</tr>. <i>Nikaman ug atinsiyun ang sarhintu,</i> The sergeant gave the command of attention. <pos>n</pos> military command.

<p><form>kamanir</form> <xr>= <sc>KAMANÍRU</sc> (humorous).</xr>

<p><form>kampíhì</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tiny <tr>crab</tr> of the sand with one pincer considerably larger than the other.

<p><form>kantar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> call s.t. out loud to notify people within earshot. <i>Kinsa kadtung ngálan ang ikantar dúul,</i> Whoever's name is <tr>called out</tr>, come forward. <number>2</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> for documents, letters or any official paper to state s.t. <i>Ang gikantar sa papílis mau nga akuy tag-íya sa yútà,</i> The document states that I am the owner of the land.

<p><form>kanugkug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>roar</tr> with a low, continuous rumble. <i>Mga kany&ucaron;n nga nagkanugkug pagbumbardíyu sa baybay,</i> Thundering cannons shelling the shore.

<p><form>karapkarap</form> <xr>= <sc>KURAPKURAP</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>kárat</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>carat</tr>, unit of weight of precious stones or metals. <number>2</number> <form>may, walay &mdash;</form> having (not having) money. <i>Gwápa untà siya apan way kárat,</i> She is beautiful but she doesn't have a cent.

<p><form>&dagger;karbun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>3</number> a black speck in a diamond, considered a flaw in the stone.

<p><form>&dagger;karta -s</form> <tr>cards</tr>, <tr>mahjong pieces</tr> (plural).

<p><form>kas-a<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> tell s.o. frankly. <i>Kas-aha (kas-ahi) ug sulti arun dì magdahum nga gastúhan siya sa íyang pag-iskuyla,</i> Tell him frankly not to count on our sending him to school because we don't have the money to do so.

<p><form>kásir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cashier</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> have, be, become a cashier.

<p><form>kasyir</form> <xr>= <sc>KÁSIR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>kátir<sub>2</sub></form> <form>-ir(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>caterer</tr> of food and food service. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be, become a caterer.

<p><form>katlà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> cut with the tips of the scissors. <i>Katláa ang panaptun,</i> Clip the cloth with the tip of the scissors. <i>Ikatlà ang gunting,</i> Use the tip of the scissors to cut it.

<p><form>katsuy</form> <xr>= <sc>HATSUY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>kaw-ing</form> <xr>= <sc>KAB-ING</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>kidni</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>kidney ailment</tr>. <form>batu sa &mdash;</form> <tr>kidney stone</tr>. <form>sakit sa &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>KIDNI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>kighud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4]</itype> for the tide to go out. <i>Manginhas ta ug mukighud ang taúbun,</i> We will gather shells when the tide begins to ebb. <pos>n</pos> the receding of the tide.

<p><form>kimúnu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>sweat jacket</tr> used in judo or karate. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear a <ix>kimúnu</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a <ix>kimúnu</ix>.

<p><form>kiwat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b8]</itype> be hit with the tip of a slender object. <i>Ayawg ikiwatkíwat nang rúlir kay hikiwatan ta,</i> Don't wave the ruler around. We might be hit. <form>kiwatkíwat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> wave slender objects about.

<p><form>krak<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> crack company in military training. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be, become a crack company.

<p><form>krak<sub>4</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> work a handgun mechanism to make it ready for firing, usually with a clicking round. <pos>n</pos> sound of the <tr>cocking</tr> of a rifle.

<p><form>&dagger;krismas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[B146]</itype> put up Christmas decorations. <i>Krísis kaáyu ta karung tuíga. Dì lang ta magkrismas,</i> We don't have any money this year, so let's not put up any decorations.

<p><form>&dagger;Kristu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Christ</tr> in his various roles. <form>Ang -ng Diyus</form> <tr>Christ God</tr>. <form>Ang -ng Hárì</form> <tr>Christ the King</tr>. <form>-ng Hisus</form> <tr>Jesus Christ</tr>. <form>-ng manunúbus</form> <tr>Christ, the savior</tr>.

<p><form>kruwis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> take a <tr>cruise</tr> for pleasure.

<p><form>kudlungun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. marine <tr>crab</tr>, poisonous to eat, growing to 4", having fine hair on the legs and having uneven bulges at the back.

<p><form>&dagger;kúgi kinugíhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> one's children (humorous).

<p><form>&dagger;kulasísi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> husband's paramour. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> maintain a paramour.

<p><form>kulintas</form> <xr>= <sc>KWINTAS<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;kulur &mdash; dikarni</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>flesh-colored</tr>.

<p><form>&dagger;kumbinsiyun kunstitusyunal &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Constitutional Convention</tr>.

<p><form>kumpay<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>KÚPAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;kumpisal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[AN]</itype> <tr>defecate</tr> (humorous). <form>-an(&larr;), kumpisinaryu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> <tr>toilet</tr> (humorous). <i>Túa pa sa kumpisálan,</i> She's still out back.

<p><form>kumpus pit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>compost pit</tr>.

<p><form>kunbinsyun</form> <xr>= <sc>KUMBINSIYUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>kunsirba<sub>2</sub>, kunsirb&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>conserve</tr> s.t. <i>Ákung kunsirbahun (kunsirbarun, ikunsirb&acaron;r) <pb n=1155>ang mga karáang mga butang sa ákung mga apuhan,</i> I'll save the old things which belong to my grandparents.

<p><form>&dagger;kuntra &mdash; risíbu</form> <pos>n</pos> document entered upon to nullify a previous document. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> execute a document of this sort. <i>Ámung gikuntra risibúhan ang dukumintu sa pálit,</i> We have executed a document nullifying the sale.

<p><form>kurasunáda</form> <xr>= <sc>KURSUNÁDA</sc>.</xr>


<p><form>labanu</form> <xr>= <sc>GWAYABANU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>lagang<sub>2</sub></form> a a woman who is completely bald. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b]</itype> for a woman to become bald. <i>Gilagangan ang bátang punúun arun sayun pagtambal,</i> They cut all the hair off the child with scabies so that it would be easy to treat her.

<p><form>lagpat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b8]</itype> do s.t. <tr>by chance</tr>, <tr>at random</tr>. <i>Hilagpatan kug pílì ang kukakúla nga may lakináyin,</i> I <tr>happened</tr> to choose the bottle of coke that had the lucky nine prize in the cap. <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. done or said in guesswork. <i>Tubag nga palagpat básun na lag swirtihun,</i> Answer I just guessed at in the wild hope that it would come out to be right.

<p><form>&dagger;lagus sa ímung, íyang &mdash;</form> expression of disbelief. <i>Unásis sa ímung lagus nga wà gánì tuy diyuy!</i> Onassis, <tr>my foot!</tr> He doesn't have a penny!

<p><form>&dagger;lagut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <form>walay gi-</form> not have anything to eat. <i>Bisag way gilagut mutan-aw giyud ug sini,</i> Even when there is no money for food, she has to go to the show.

<p><form>laksit</form> <xr>= <sc>LAKSÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;lála</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>3</number> having destructive effects on plants. <i>Lálang háyup ang kanding kay dílì tubúan ang ílang sinibsiban,</i> Goats are destructive animals because they nibble at plants in such a way that they won't grow back.

<p><form>&dagger;lamánu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[AC3]</itype> for couples to join their hands or have their hands joined in the wedding ceremony. <i>Nagkalamánu na ang gikasal sa dihang may mibábag,</i> The priest had already told the couple to take each other's hands when s.o. stopped the ceremony.

<p><form>lampak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for a bamboo tree to bend and crack but not break. <i>Lampákun (ilampak) sa hángin ang kawáyan,</i> The wind bends and cracks the bamboo tree.

<p><form>&dagger;lána</form> <number>2</number> <form>&mdash; sa hílug</form> <pos>n</pos> consecrated oil used for the extreme unction.

<p><form>&dagger;landig</form> <number>1a</number> <form>&mdash; sa pantalan sa himáyà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> ask a woman for coital access for the first time (euphemism). <i>Kurdaping, makahímù bang mulandig ku sa pantalan sa himáyà?</i> Cordaping, let us enter the bower of bliss together.

<p><form>&dagger;lantáka</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> k.o. <tr>cannon</tr> used by the Spaniards.

<p><form>Lapulápu<sub>2</sub></form> the chieftain of Mactan who fought against Magellan in 1521. <form>dílà ni &mdash;</form> the Cebuano language (literary). <form>kalíwat ni &mdash;</form> Cebuanos (literary).

<p><form>largit</form> <xr>= <sc>LARGA</sc>, <i>v, 1b.</i></xr>

<p><form>law-it</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>hook</tr> s.t., pick up with a hook. <i>Nakalaw-it silag sapátus dunut,</i> They hooked an old shoe. <i>Law-íti ang sáku,</i> Pick up the sack with a hook. <number>2</number> hang s.t. on a hook, over s.t. like on a hook. <i>Gwápa ang milaw-it ug lukung sa búlak sa íyang líug,</i> A beautiful lady hung a garland around his neck. <i>Lansang ang law-íti,</i> Hang it on the nail. <pos>n</pos> <tr>hook</tr> to catch things.

<p><form>lay</form> <ix>short for</ix> <xr><sc>ALÁLAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>libud</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. very small <tr>fish</tr> having transparent flesh and dark-grey rings around its body.

<p><form>&dagger;ligal</form> <form>&mdash; nga asáwa, bána, anak</form> <pos>a</pos> lawful wife, husband, <tr>legitimate child</tr>. <form>&mdash; nga siparasiyun</form> <tr>legal separation</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> make an agreement official. <i>Ligalun (iligal) nátù ning átung sábut,</i> We'll make our agreement official.

<p><form>&dagger;lígù paka- sa buláwan, pláta</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> gold-, <tr>silver-plated</tr>. <form>pinaka- sa buláwan, pláta</form> gold-, silver-plated.

<p><form>lihud</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>awl</tr>, a small slender metal hand instrument for piercing small holes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> use an awl, make into an awl.

<p><form>&dagger;likì</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> <tr>female genitalia</tr> (humorous euphemism).

<p><form>liúgat</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>UGAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>líup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> be <tr>laid off</tr> from work. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> one who has been laid off. <number>2</number> action of <tr>laying off</tr>. <form>&dagger;liwat ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2a</number> <form>&mdash; ni Adan</form> men as a group. <form>&mdash; ni Íbà</form> women as a group. <form>ka-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>KALÍWAT</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p><form>&dagger;lublub</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2a</number> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> stay and <tr>live with</tr> s.o. for some time. <i>Túa na lang giyud maglublub si Lusyu sa íyang badyikdyik. Wà na lay uliúlì sa íla,</i> Lucio has finally gone to live with his woman. He doesn't bother going home any more.

<p><form>lunghan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> write s.t. in <tr>longhand</tr>, as opposed to shorthand or in typewritten form.

<p><form>&dagger;lupad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>4a</number> <form>&mdash; ang, sa ispiritu</form> <itype>[B246; c2]</itype> be terribly frightened. <i>Milupad (gilúpad) ang ákung ispiritu sa íyang dakung tíngug,</i> I was terribly frightened by his loud voice.

<p><form>lupug</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> weak and wobbly. <i>Lupug siya kay bag-u pang naáyu,</i> He is weak because he just recovered from an illness. <number>2</number> <tr>crippled</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become weak, crippled. <i>Nalupug siya human mahúlug,</i> He became crippled after he suffered a fall.

<pb n=1156>

<p><form>lúrù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> stare at s.o. with a sharp look. <i>Gilurúan níya ang bátà, maung mihílak,</i> He gave the child a sharp look, and it burst into tears.

<p><form>&dagger;luyu tagluyúan</form> <pos>a</pos> be related to each other in two ways through both the maternal and paternal lines. <i>Tagluyúan mi kay magsúun ang ámung isig ka inahan ug ámung isig ka amahan,</i> We are related twice through both our fathers and our mothers because our mothers are sisters and our fathers are brothers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be, become related on both the paternal and maternal sides.


<p><form>maagmaag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> talk or write without coherence. <i>Nagmaagmaag ang diskursu sa pulitiku,</i> The politician is talking incoherently.

<p><form>mádirn</form> <xr>= <sc>MÚDIRN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>magkunu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. large forest <tr>tree</tr> furnishing dark maroon wood, harder than stone, highly resistant to water, used for foundations of large buildings, ships, deadeyes, et al. <number>2</number> <tr>deadeye</tr>.

<p><form>magkut</form> <xr>= <sc>HAGKUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;maistru</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> be an initiator of mischief. <i>Way láing nagmaistru niíning binúang kun dì ikaw,</i> No one else could have started this mischief but you.

<p><form>&dagger;makinilya</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> use a windlass or winch to hoist s.t. <i>Nagmakinilya siya sa písì sa angkla,</i> He is winding the anchor line around the windlass.

<p><form>mámaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bogeyman</tr>. <i>Ayawg kanáug sa sílung kay náay mámaw,</i> Don't go out because there is a bogeyman.

<p><form>Mandarin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Mandarin</tr> Chinese.

<p><form>manipistu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>manifesto</tr> of passengers or cargo on a boat or plane.

<p><form>&dagger;manday</form> <number>2b</number> instead of doing what is expected. <i>Manday palitan ug sapátus, midílì núun. Minì,</i> Just when I was about to buy him a pair of shoes he didn't want any. The fool!

<p><form>&dagger;mánu manumánu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> do s.t. <tr>by hand</tr> without the aid of mechanical devices. <i>Gimanumánu (gimanumanúhan) lang námù ning pagpanghulma ug halu blak,</i> We are molding the hollow blocks by hand. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> do s.t. alone by oneself. <i>Aku ray mumanumánu sa ákung balay,</i> I'll build my house by myself.

<p><form>máping<sub>2</sub></form> <form>&mdash; upirisyun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> mop up after a battle wiping out the rest of the enemy force. <i>Nagmáping upirisyun ang Hapun sa búkid,</i> The Japanese had a mopping-up operation in the mountains. <pos>n</pos> mopping-up operation.

<p><form>&dagger;Maríya</form> <form>&mdash; agwanta</form> the personification of a woman who is resistant to heavy work, punishment, abuse. <i>Ayaw ku paalsáha ug bug-at kay dílì ku si Maríya Agwanta,</i> Don't make me lift heavy objects because I'm not Maria Agwanta.

<p><form>martinis, martínis</form> <pos>n</pos> variety of <ix>bisul</ix> with purplish, compact meat.

<p><form>masusuylu</form> <pos>n</pos> rough, granular spots on the gums of a baby of several weeks. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a4]</itype> for an infant to have rough, granular spots on the gums. <i>Gimasusuylu (nagmasusuylu) ang bátà,</i> The baby has rough, granular spots on the gums. <form>masusuyluhun</form> <pos>a</pos> having this sort of problem.

<p><form>&dagger;matay</form> <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> <tr>epidemic</tr>, <tr>pestilence</tr>. <i>Gúbat, gútum, ug kamátay mauy mga katalagman nga kastígu sa Diyus,</i> War, famine, and pestilence are the calamities which God sends as punishment.

<p><form>mawmaw</form> <xr>= <sc>MÁMAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;midiya</form> <form>&mdash; lútu</form> <pos>n</pos> mourning halfway with black and white clothing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> be in halfway mourning. <i>Magmidiya lútu ku human sa tulu ka búlan sa pagkamatay sa ákung amahan,</i> I'll go out of full mourning three months after my father's death.

<p><form>míni</form> <xr>= <sc>MINISKIRT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;min-ibint</form> <note>confirm space</note><form>-ir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the boxer of the main bout. <number>2</number> the chief protagonist in a fight or quarrel (humorous).

<p><form>minimu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> minimum amount or quantity. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> do s.t. to a certain amount as the minimum. <i>Kun muminimu (makaminimu) tag hálig usa ka líbu matag adlaw dílì ta maalkansi,</i> If we could make a sale of at least one thousand pesos a day, we won't lose. <i>Sa byáhi kinahanglang iminimu ang ímung gastu bwáhan dílì ka mahutdan,</i> When you travel, keep your expenses to the minimum so you won't run out.

<p><form>miringgi<sub>2</sub></form> female genitalia of a child (humorous).

<p><form>mirku krum</form> <xr>= <sc>MIKRU KRUM</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>míya</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for the Manila International Airport.

<p><form>&dagger;múdus</form> <form>&mdash; upirandi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>modus operandi</tr>, system employed for doing s.t., esp. against the law.

<p><form>&dagger;mutung paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> be, become <tr>violent</tr> when desperate. <i>Nangmutung ang ulitáwu nga wà sugta,</i> The young man became violent because he was spurned.

<p><form>námun</form> <xr>= <sc>NÁMÙ</sc> (dialectal).</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>KAMI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>nárik</form> <pos>n</pos> relief clothing, used or second-hand clothing from the States (humorous).

<p><form>&dagger;natural</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> do s.t. in one's natural way. <i>Inatural (naturala) lang pagkanta. Ayaw <pb n=1157>ipanundug ni Prank Sinatra,</i> Just sing it your own natural way. Don't imitate Frank Sinatra.

<p><form>nayitgáwun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>nightgown</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> wear, make into a nightgown.

<p><form>&dagger;ngísi</form> <number>1a</number> <form>nagngisi mu rag búhì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S]</itype> <tr>grin</tr> stupidly. <i>Wang kasabut sa gisúgù maung nagngisi mu rag búhì,</i> He didn't understand the order, so he is grinning stupidly. &dagger;

<p><form>ninya buníta</form> <xr>= <sc>NINYU BUNÍTU</sc> (female).</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>NINYU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ninyu</form> <form>&mdash; inusintis</form> <xr>= <sc>INUSINTIS</sc>, <i>n4.</i></xr>

<p><form>nípa</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for the National Economic Protectionism Association.

<p><form>&dagger;numíru</form> <form>di-</form> <pos>a</pos> done by the number. <i>Dinumiru ang ílang pagtawag sa ílang mga binatunan,</i> They call their servants by shouting out a number.

<p><form>&dagger;nutaryu</form> <form>&mdash; publiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>notary public</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> be, become a notary public.

<p><form>&dagger;pabur</form> <form>-abli</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>favorable</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>in favor</tr>. <i>Paburabli kaáyu ku sa ímung mga plánu,</i> I'm very favorable to your plans. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> be <tr>advantageous</tr> or favorable to. <i>Ug mapaburabli ang hángin sayu tang muabut sa píkas isla,</i> If the wind is favorable we'll get to the other island quickly. <number>2</number> be in favor of s.t.

<p><form>&dagger;paka-</form> <number>1a</number> added to nouns to form verbs meaning &lsquo;assert oneself, act like a [noun]&rsquo;. <i>Kay dì ka man kirída magpakaasáwa ka,</i> You are not a paramour, so assert your rights as a wife. <i>Pagpakamagulang. Buyaga ang ímung manghud,</i> Show you're the older brother. Tell your younger brother to stop doing it.

<p><form>pakbit</form> <pos>n</pos> dish of vegetables and meat with gravy, originating with the Ilocanos. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make, have <ix>pakbit</ix>. <form>-in-</form> <xr>= <sc>PAKBIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;pálà<sub>1</sub></form> <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>eraser</tr>.

<p><form>pálas</form> <pos>n</pos> Palace of Justice.

<p><form>&dagger;palit (&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[C13]</itype> make a sale with a customer. <i>Dì ta magkapálit sa prisyu nga ímung gitanyag,</i> We cannot make the sale because I cannot give it to you for the price you offer.

<p><form>palsi walsi</form> <pos>a</pos> be palsy walsy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become palsy-walsy.

<p><form>&dagger;palu</form> <form>alúlung &mdash;</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) expression of derision said to s.o. whose request was denied. <i>Alúlung palu. Wà siya tugtis pagsúruy,</i> Nma, nma, nma. You weren't allowed to go out.

<p><form>&dagger;pamínaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> for a treatment or medicine to give temporary relief. <i>Ígù lang mamínaw ug kadiyut sa sakit kining ákung tambal,</i> This medicine just gives me temporary relief.

<p><form>pamugkat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> go s.w. very early in the morning. <i>Nakapamugkat kug puspuru sa tindáhan kay nahutdan mig úhas,</i> I went to the store very early in the morning because we ran out of matches.

<p><form>&dagger;pamúu</form> <form>pinamuhúan</form> <pos>n</pos> compensation for work done. <i>Daghan kag mais nga pinamuhúan,</i> You managed to get lots of corn in compensation for your labor.

<p><form>&dagger;pan</form> <form>&mdash; byína</form> k.o. <tr>bread</tr> baked in a large, rounded loaf. <form>diagwa, dilitsi, dilmundu, ilmundu, ilpuwiblu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. bread shaped like two large buns joined together. <form>&mdash; dipásas</form> <tr>raisin bread</tr>. <form>&mdash; pransis</form> <tr>French bread</tr>, a k.o. elongated hard bread.

<p><form>panghalwan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>barracuda</tr>.

<p><form>parian</form> <pos>n</pos> a small gathering of people in villages to engage in business on a small scale, gamble, take in entertainments. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> hold a <ix>parian</ix>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> attend a <ix>parian</ix>.

<p><form>pariti</form> <pos>n</pos> a law granting Americans equal rights with Filipinos in the Philippines.

<p><form>pasgaw</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. nongregarious <tr>wasp</tr> bigger than the <ix>lampínig</ix> and which gives a painful sting.

<p><form>&dagger;pásis</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[AC; b5]</itype> for two or more people to hook their little fingers as a sign that their quarrel is settled.

<p><form>&dagger;pasku</form> <form>&mdash; sa pagkatáwu</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>Nativity</tr>.

<p><form>pasyandu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> take a leisurely walk when one is supposed to be doing s.t. <i>Uy, mupasyandu giyud ku. Dì bitaw mudágan nang búhat,</i> I'm going for a walk. Anyway, the work won't run away. <form>&mdash; dulur pakítà sa balur</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> walk about for want of anything better to do. <i>Human na mang iksámin, dì magpasyandu dulur magpakítà sa balur,</i> The examination is over so now I can just stroll about.

<p><form>&dagger;patr&ucaron;n midyur, maynur &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>captain</tr> of a small passenger or cargo boat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> be, become a captain of this sort.

<p><form>&dagger;pílay</form> <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> hair style with the hair parted in the middle and laid flat to the sides.

<p><form>&dagger;pildi</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>4</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> break s.t., usually of ordinary value. <i>Ayawg dulái nà kay makapildi ka, wà kay ibáyad,</i> Don't play with that because you have no money to pay for it if you break it.

<p><form>&dagger;pilit</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>2</number> for mechanisms to hold or function efficiently. <i>Pilit ug brík ang íyang awtu,</i> His car's brakes function efficiently.

<p><form>pinakbit</form> <xr>= <sc>PAKBIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pitrun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>patron</tr> of a benefit performance. <form><note> &mdash; ?</note>tíkit</form> <pos>n</pos> patron ticket.

<p><form>*piutpiut</form> <form>panimáhung &mdash;</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> smell unpleasant. <i>Ang mga bátang gipaningut nanimáhung <pb n=1158>piutpiut,</i> The children smell unpleasant because they are sweating.

<p><form>planting rayis</form> <pos>n</pos> aerial bombing where bombs are spaced to obtain contiguous but not overlapping burst coverage. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> bomb in this way.

<p><form>&dagger;primíru -ng buling</form> dirt on the outside of s.t. <form>&mdash; makinista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chief engineer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b6]</itype> be, become a chief engineer.

<p><form>&dagger;pugà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1b</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> put s.t. into s.t. else coupled with squeezing action. <i>Kinahanglan pug-ag asin ang paliya arun mawálà ang kapait,</i> You have to squeeze the ampalaya out with salt to get rid of the bitter taste.

<p><form>&dagger;púkaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A12; c6]</itype> drink alcohol the morning after a drinking bout to sober up. <i>Ug tubà ang makahubug sa gabíi, tubà ra puy makapúkaw,</i> If you get drunk on palm toddy, the only thing that can sober you up the next morning is toddy. <number>4</number> <itype>[A12; c6]</itype> cause the oil to come out of fermented coconut extract by pouring boiling water into it before cooking it. <i>Ang ínit túbig mauy makapúkaw sa tinang-ug nga bulalakawun,</i> Hot water makes the oil come out of the fermented coconut juice when it has become all foamy.

<p><form>&dagger;pulsu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>throb</tr>, <tr>pulsate</tr>. <i>Nagpulsu ang ákung dungandúngan sa kasakit,</i> My temple is throbbing with pain.

<p><form>pungaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>owl</tr>.

<p><form>&dagger;pungkù</form> <xr>= <sc>LINGKUD</sc>, <i>v4.</i></xr> <pos>a</pos> squat (used only in set phrases). <form>&mdash; ug ilung</form> <pos>a</pos> for a nose to be squat. <i>Ilung ray gadakù ánang putúta kay pungkù kaáyu,</i> Everything is diminutive in that midget except his squat nose. <form>&mdash; ug tútuy</form> <pos>a</pos> for breasts to be firm. <i>Pungkù ug tútuy ang babáyi basta dì pa manganak,</i> A woman's breasts are firm before she has a baby. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> for breasts to become firm.

<p><form>&dagger;puphu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2a</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> acquire, get s.t. exclusively of the sort several people would normally share. <i>Ang bugtung anak mauy nakapuphu sa pagkabutangs tigúlang,</i> The only son inherited the old man's estate.

<p><form>purbisung</form> <xr>= <sc>PRUBISUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>purmas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Host</tr>, the bread of the Eucharist.

<p><form>pusdit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> <tr>postdate</tr>. <i>Way dipusitu. Átù na lang ipusdit (pusdítun) ang tsíki,</i> There is no money in the bank so we'll just postdate the check. <form>-id</form> <pos>a</pos> post-dated.

<p><form>pusisit</form> <xr>= <sc>PURIRIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puspurit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>match</tr> (humorous).

<p><form>&dagger;putru</form> <pos>a</pos> a man who is a devil when it comes to women. <i>Putru kaáyu nang tawhána kay maibúgun kaáyug babáyi,</i> That man is a real devil because he easily falls for women.

<p><form>puyuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>assuming</tr> and <tr>pretentious</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become assuming and pretentious. <i>Napuyuk siyang namaistra,</i> She has started to put on<note>F1 put on airs?</note> now that she has become a teacher.


<p><form>ráking tsir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rocking chair</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, obtain a rocking chair.

<p><form>&dagger;rakrak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give s.o. a good cussing out.

<p><form>ránir</form> <pos>n</pos> one who is sent on errands. <i>Aku ang ílang ránir,</i> I am their <tr>errand boy</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a]</itype> be an errand boy.

<p><form>rapid páyir</form> <pos>a</pos> doing things <tr>rapidly</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do s.t. <tr>hurriedly</tr>, rapidly. <i>Nagrapid páyir kug panglimpyu kay mulakaw ku,</i> I'm cleaning the house rapidly because I'm going out.

<p><form>ríban</form> <xr>= <sc>RAYBAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ribili</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>reveille</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> have reveille.

<p><form>ridyistr&acaron;r</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>registrar</tr> in school. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; b6]</itype> be, become a registrar.

<p><form>rikuhir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; c1]</itype> mind idle talk. <i>Makunsumisiyun ka ug rikuhirun (irikuhir) nímu ang tanan nímung madungug bátuk nímu,</i> You'll get sick at heart if you pay attention to all the things they say against you.

<p><form>&dagger;rikúla</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>objection</tr>, <tr>complaints</tr> about s.t.

<p><form>rikulítu</form> <pos>n</pos> name of a church, run by the Recollect Fathers. <form>rikulitánu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Recollect priest</tr>. <form>-s</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>Recollect order</tr>.

<p><form>rili</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>relay race</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> have a relay race. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> relay commands, orders. <i>Wà makarili ang awutpus sa urdir,</i> The outpost did not relay the order.

<p><form>&dagger;rilu</form> <form>&mdash; dipalsu</form> <pos>n</pos> a wristwatch that gives incorrect time (from <ix>palsu, 1</ix> &mdash; humorous).

<p><form>riluhiríya</form> <corr><pos>n</pos> </corr><tr>watch-repair shop</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> establish a watch-repair shop.

<p><form>rimurímu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> try to fix s.t. with only a small knowledge of how to do it. <i>Hidakan giyud ku sa mikaniku ug dì nákù rimurimúhun ning ákung dyíp,</i> The mechanic is going to charge me too much so I'll fix my jeep myself.

<p><form>rindirp&icaron;s</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rinderpest</tr>.

<p><form>ringlit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ringlet</tr> curls of hair. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> wear ringlet curls; form the hair into ringlets.

<p><form>riprap</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>riprap</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make riprap.

<p><form>rípu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>faucet</tr>.

<p><form>ritílir</form> <pos>n</pos> retailer of rice or corn to the consumer from a government agency. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> be, become a retailer of this sort.

<p><form>&dagger;rusaryu</form> <form>&mdash; kantáda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sung rosary</tr>.

<p><form>&dagger;rúsas pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for a woman to beautify herself.

<p><form>&dagger;ruska di-</form> <pos>n</pos> attached with a screw.

<p><form>&dagger;rúyal</form> <form>&mdash; blu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>royal blue</tr> color.


<p><form>&dagger;sábak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>5</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> give s.o. on-the-spot <pb n=1159>instruction on how to do s.t. <i>Ayaw pagunauna kay sabákun tikawg dráyib,</i> Don't try to drive on your own. Wait till I show you how.

<p><form>&dagger;sabat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> for muscles to react or respond. <i>Musabat ang tiil kun tikdúlan ang túhud,</i> The foot will react if you knock the knees.

<p><form>&dagger;sab-it</form> <form>1 a</form> <form>kasab-ítag kawit ang simud</form> for the lips to be pouting (lit. one could hook a toddy container over them).

<p><form>&dagger;sábud (&rarr;)<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>3</number> <tr>rice seedlings</tr>.

<p><form>&dagger;sagang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1a</number> <tr>shield</tr>.

<p><form>sag-ang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>cook</tr> s.t. on the stove. <i>Wà ku makasag-ang ug sud-an kay way gás,</i> I have not cooked our meat and vegetables yet because there's no kerosene.

<p><form>&dagger;sakramintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> <tr>sacrament of matrimony</tr>. <number>2a</number> wife, wedded in the Roman Catholic Church. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> be wedded in the Roman Catholic Church. <i>Gihuwis úsà mi, úsà mi masakramintu,</i> We had a civil marriage before we were wedded in the church.

<p><form>&dagger;salà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1a</number> <form>&mdash; nga ikamatay</form> <tr>mortal sin</tr>.

<p><form>&dagger;salamà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[B1256; c6]</itype> for s.t. which is supposed to be a secret to slip out. <i>Nasamà ku kay nakalimut ku nga dì diay untà tu ipatug-an,</i> I let it out because I forgot that it was supposed to be a secret. <i>Ayawg isalamà pagsulti nang mga pulúnga ha?</i> Don't let those words slip from your mouth.

<p><form>salamagan</form> <xr>= <sc>SALUMAGAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>salig-ang</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hips</tr>. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> of s.o. having big hips. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> get to have big hips.

<p><form>&dagger;sálud</form> <form>&mdash; sa gábà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S]</itype> be the recipient of <i>gábà</i> (a divine curse). <i>Magsalud tas gábà ug musúkul ta sa átung ginikánan,</i> We will earn heaven's wrath if we defy our parents.

<p><form>salumagan</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) exclamation of mild anger shouted at s.o.

<p><form>sambágul</form> <xr>= <sc>BÁGUL</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>BAGUL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;sambul</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>2</number> s.t. new which causes whoever has it to feel uneasy. <i>Sambul kaáyu ang antiyúhus basta bag-u pa,</i> Eyeglasses are uncomfortable until you get used to them.

<p><form>&dagger;sampul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> take a bite or taste of s.t. (humorous). <i>Sampúlan ta nang ímung kík,</i> Are you giving away free samples of your cake?

<p><form>samsi</form> <pos>n</pos> a Chinese dish of pork cut in thin long slices with shredded cabbage and sauteed.

<p><form>&dagger;sámuk</form> <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> be <tr>bothersome</tr>. <i>Dì mu magsinamuk ug náay bisíta,</i> Don't be bothersome when there are visitors around. <form>sinamuksamuk</form> <xr>= <sc>-IN-</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>san-antun</form> short for <tr>San Antonio</tr> <tr>Saint Anthony</tr>. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> light a candle and implore St. Anthony's help in sending punishment to a person who wronged one. <i>Íyang ipasan-antun ang nangáwat sa íyang kwarta,</i> She'll implore St. Anthony's help to bring retribution on the one who stole her money.

<p><form>sánaw<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> having an uncomfortable feeling of inferiority. <i>Sánaw kaáyung iságul sa punduk sa mga dátù,</i> I feel so uncomfortable when I am thrown together with rich people.

<p><form>&dagger;sansan</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> fill the <ix>sansan</ix> stove with sawdust. <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>stove</tr> composed of a tube stuffed tightly with sawdust. A hole is left in the center and underneath into which firewood is inserted, causing the sawdust to catch fire a little at a time and burn with intense heat for a long time. <form>-an</form> <xr>= <sc>SANSAN</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>santunína</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>santonin</tr>, a k.o. anthelmintic in candy form.

<p><form>&dagger;sápaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2b</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> stake a mining claim on land where s.o. has already made a stake, uprooting the stakes. <i>Duguun ang mahitabù ug sapáwan ang klím,</i> S.t. bloody will happen if s.o. stakes a claim on the same land s.o. else has staked previously.

<p><form>&dagger;sapinday</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>staggering</tr>, unsteady in footing.

<p><form>sapud<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>APLUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sapunul</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>rough</tr> and not smooth to feel or swallow. <i>Sapunul kaáyu tunlun ang kan-ung mais,</i> Corn grits are very rough to swallow. <i>Sapunul kaáyu ang ímung nawung tungud sa bugas,</i> Your face is very rough with your pimples. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become rough.

<p><form>saringsáring</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b]</itype> go about in front or in full view of a group of people where one has no business being. <i>Magsaringsáring (magpasaringsáring) giyud ning batáa atubángan sa mga bisíta,</i> This child prances up and down in front of the visitors when he should stay out of the way.

<p><form>satù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>dip up</tr> or <tr>scoop</tr> out solids or liquids. <i>Satui kug usa ka luwag nga linúgaw,</i> Give me a ladleful of porridge. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>scoopful</tr>. <number>2</number> action of <tr>scooping</tr>.

<p><form>sayantipiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>scientist</tr>. <pos>a</pos> <tr>scientific</tr>.

<p><form>sayis<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>size</tr>, measurement of s.t. to be worn. <i>Unsay sayis sa ímung sapátus?</i> What size of shoes do you wear?

<p><form>sayitsíing</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> go <tr>sight-seeing</tr>. <pos>n</pos> action of sight-seeing.

<p><form>saytid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125]</itype> be <tr>in sight</tr>. <i>Nasaytid na ang átung swildu,</i> Our salary is already in sight. <i>Nagkasaytid na ang átung kadaúgan,</i> Our victory is already in sight. <pos>a</pos> be in sight.

<p><form>síb</form> <pos>a</pos> be freed in a game of hide-and-seek or saved from punishment in other kinds of <pb n=1160>games. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> set s.o. free. <pos>v</pos> <form>&mdash; bay da bil</form> <tr>saved by the bell</tr>, i.e. just barely escape getting punished. <i>Nasíb bay da bil ku sa kasábà ni Nánay kay may mga bisítang nangabut,</i> I was saved by the bell. Mother didn't get to scold me because some visitors arrived.

<p><form>&dagger;siba</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> load a firearm.

<p><form>sibag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> change a course, turn off. <i>Dì ta makasibag dihà kay náa may du nat intir,</i> We can't turn off there because there is a do-not-enter sign. <number>2</number> for the voice to go off key. <i>Musibag ka man sa túnu ug ipataas na ang tíngug,</i> You'll be off-key if you go off on a higher pitch. <number>3</number> deviate from one's topic. <i>Dì ka makasibag ug sulti sa kurti,</i> You can't get off your topic of conversation in court. <pos>a</pos> off-key, deviating from the topic.

<p><form>&dagger;sibat</form> <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. taken without permission. <i>Dílì nà íyang sinínà. Íya nang sinibat,</i> That dress isn't hers. She snuck off with it from s.w.

<p><form>síbay</form> <xr>= &dagger;<sc>*TSÍBAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;sidbaks</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> sow in a <tr>seedbox</tr>. <i>Talagsa ray nabúhì sa gilúyung níyang lísu kay wà man isidbaks,</i> Only a few seeds germinated because they were not sown in the seedbox.

<p><form>sig-ang<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SALIG-ANG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;sigarilyu</form> <form>&mdash; sa ilung</form> <xr>= <sc>INHÍLIR</sc> (humorous).</xr>

<p><form>sigarilyu<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>BUDBURUN</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>BUDBUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>síkan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> boxer's second. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>2</number> act as boxer's second. <i>Siyay misíkan ni Ilurdi,</i> He acted as Elorde's second.

<p><form>sikpat</form> <xr>= <sc>SIPLAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;síngu dì, wà ma-</form> for an offensive odor to be unbearable. <i>Dúnay patayng ilagà dinhi kay dì masíngu ang báhù,</i> There is a dead rat here because the odor is unbearable.

<p><form>&dagger;sinsilyu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>3</number> for a woman to be careless in her ways and deportment. <i>Sinsilyu kaáyung bayhána, magpahungaw lang nga maglingkud,</i> That woman is careless. She sits in such a way that one can see her private parts. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; c1]</itype> <number>3</number> for a woman to act without proper reserve.

<p><form>sintimínga</form>w <xr>= <sc>SINTIMINT&Acaron;L</sc>, <pos>v</pos> (humorous).</xr>

<p><form>sintimiruy</form> <xr>= <sc>SINTIMINT&Acaron;L</sc>, <pos>v</pos> (humorous).</xr>

<p><form>sintimiyut, sintimiyuy</form> <xr>= <sc>SINTIMINT&Acaron;L</sc> (humorous).</xr>

<p><form>sintins</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sentence</tr> in a language.

<p><form>sinturíra</form> <pos>n</pos> loop attached to the waist of trousers through which the belt is passed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> provide belt loops.

<p><form>&dagger;sinyúra</form> <form>Nwistra Sinyúra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Our Lady</tr> (the Virgin).

<p><form>sipara, siparar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> <tr>separate</tr>, part ways. <i>Ang mudyul musiparar sa rákit,</i> The module separates from the rocket ship. <i>Nagsiparar ang magtiáyun,</i> The couple parted ways. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> set s.t. aside. <i>Magsiparar kug isúd sa bangku,</i> I set s.t. aside to deposit in the bank.

<p><form>siparasiyun ligal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>legal separation</tr>, a couple with separate bed and board, but not divorced. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; a12]</itype> have a legal separation.

<p><form>&dagger;sípung(&mdash;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> corner s.t. <i>Tulu ka simána siyang nasipung sa lángub,</i> He was trapped inside the cave for three weeks. <i>Sipunga ang manuk sa kwartu,</i> Chase the chicken into the room to entrap it.

<p><form>sirù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for the eyebrows to be set close to each other at the center. <i>Sirù kaáyu ang ímung kílay,</i> Your eyebrows are very close to each other. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b6]</itype> for the eyebrows to be set close to each other at the center.

<p><form>&dagger;sirung</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>SIRÙ<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>SIRÙ<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>síu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the C.O., acronym for the Commanding Officer in a military headquarters. <number>2</number> anyone in charge of an establishment (humorous). <i>Aku na karuy síu sa ámù kay túa sa Mindanaw si Pápa ug Máma,</i> I'm the C.O. at home now because Dad and Mom are in Mindanao. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> get to be the C.O.

<p><form>siúdi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> C.O.D., acronym for cash on delivery. <number>2</number> get s.t. on credit. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> get s.t. on credit. <i>Ug wà kay kwarta karun siudía (isiúdi) na lang,</i> If you don't have any money just get it on credit. <pos>n</pos> debt.

<p><form>&dagger;síug (&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>budge</tr>, <tr>move</tr> s.t. heavy. <i>Batu nga dì masiug ug tulu ka táwu,</i> A rock that cannot be budged by three persons. <number>2</number> move one's emotions. <i>Ang lúhà sa dalága wà makasiug níya,</i> The tears of the maiden did not move him.

<p><form>siyuk, síyuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> for the eyes to <tr>squint</tr> in bright light. <i>Misíyuk (nagsiyuk) ang íyang mga mata nga nagtan-aw sa kaláyu,</i> He squinted as he looked at the flame.

<p><form>&dagger;subrikáma</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make, use as a <tr>bedspread</tr>.

<p><form>&dagger;súgat</form> <form>sugatsúgat</form> <pos>v</pos> [A; a 12] accompany a song or melody with make-do chords. <i>Sugatsugátun lang sa magduduyug ang kanta nga dì kaáyu níya sinátì,</i> The accompanist uses make-do chords if he is not very familiar with the song.

<p><form>&dagger;súgid</form> <form>sugilánun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> <tr>conversation</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2]</itype> <tr>converse</tr>. <i>Dì úsà ta mangat[=ú]g kay magsugilánun usà ta,</i> Let's not go to sleep yet. Let's <tr>talk</tr> for a while. <i>Ayaw úsag lakaw kay makigsugilánun pa ku nímu,</i> Don't leave yet because I want to talk with you.

<p><form>sulisitar</form> <xr>= <sc>SULÍSIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>súlu</form> <form>&mdash; alún</form> <xr>= <sc>SÚLU</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr>

<p><form>&dagger;sul-ung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[B246]</itype> for heat or temperature to rise. <i>Ug musul-ung ang kaínit sa ímung <pb n=1162>láwas, hilantan ka,</i> If your body gets hot, you have a fever.

<p><form>&dagger;súma</form> <form>pag- (inig-) pa</form> but when it comes to a test. <i>Ingun kang kamau ka. Pagsúma (pagsumáda) pa, dì diay,</i> You said you knew how, but when it came to a test, you didn't.

<p><form>sumu<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> the first litter of piglets a sow has. <i>Sa karáang tinuhúan dì kunu maáyung buhiun sa tag-íya ang bábuyng sumu,</i> According to folk belief the owner should not raise the first litter of piglets a sow has (for they will die under his care).

<p><form>sung-ad</form> <xr>= <sc>SUN-AD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sungkat</form> <xr>= <sc>SUNGKAD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sunlut</form> <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a3]</itype> prepare <ix>sunlutan</ix> to eat.

<p><form>supukar</form> <xr>= <sc>SIPUKAR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;sur<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>4</number> <tr>south</tr>. <i>Lánaw Sur,</i> South Lanao.

<p><form>&dagger;surambaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>3</number> a large square or rectangular lift net operated with a scareline at night, using a lantern. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> go fishing with a surambaw.

<p><form>súrù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> start <tr>sizzling</tr> or <tr>bubbling</tr> with heat. <i>Magsurù gánì ang tumuy sa agipu kanà timailhan kunu nga may bisíta,</i> If the end of a firebrand starts to exude bubbling juice, it is a sign that visitors are coming. <pos>n</pos> the sizzling or bubbling of s.t. liquid.

<p><form>suspindir</form> <xr>= <sc>TIRANTI</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr>

<p><form>suy bins</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>soy beans</tr>.

<p><form>swáb</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>swab</tr> s.t. with medicine or to clean it. <i>Tunlang giswában,</i> A throat that was swabbed. <pos>n</pos> swab.

<p><form>swáing</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C13; c5]</itype> <number>1</number> to get tired of s.o.'s unpleasantness. <i>Dílì ikaswáing nang tigulánga kay huyù,</i> You don't get tired of that old man because he is tender. <number>2</number> have a misunderstanding and hurt feelings. <i>Nagkaswáing ang mga magsúun tungud sa kabílin,</i> The brothers and sisters had a misunderstanding over the inheritance.

<p><form>&dagger;swirti</form> <pos>n</pos> <form>&mdash; dikasáhus</form> <tr>bad luck</tr> or <tr>misfortune</tr> of a sort that shouldn't normally be happening to the person. <i>Tituláda nga naminyug buguy. Mu na nay nganlag swirting dikasáhus,</i> A girl with a degree marrying a no-good. That's what they call jerked-meat luck.

<p><form>&dagger;syákuy</form> <number>2</number> grades in the eighties (so called from the rough similarity of the figure 8 to a <ix>syákuy</ix> &mdash; slang).

<p><form>syatdáwun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> shut down operations in a factory, mine, logging, and the like. <i>Musyatdáwun ang mína ug wà nay úr,</i> The mine will shut down operations when the ore is gone.

<p><form>syúgar dádi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sugar daddy</tr>, a man who keeps a woman.

<p><form>syurthan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shorthand</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> write s.t. in shorthand.

<p><form>tabagak</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish similar to the <ix>malangsi</ix> but with a broader body, esp. around the abdomen.

<p><form>tabatsuy</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>obese</tr> (humorous &mdash; from Tagalog <ix>tabà</ix> &lsquo;fat&rsquo;).

<p><form>&dagger;tagud<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> <tr>seeds</tr> of any fruit or vegetable used for seedlings.

<p><form>taháda</form> <pos>n</pos> toast made from sliced, stale <ix>pansu</ix> bread, shaped into an oval. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make <ix>taháda</ix> tidbits.

<p><form>tahíru</form> <xr>= <sc>BYATILIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>takdas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> jump onto s.t. <i>Mutakdas ang mga bátà sa ílang inahan inig-abut,</i> The children will jump on their mother when she comes home.

<p><form>takdul<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>TIKDUL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>takiling, takíling</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <tr>tilt</tr>, <tr>turn over</tr> on the sides. <i>Dalia ang masitíra kay nagtakiling na,</i> Hurry and fix the flower pot because it is tilting to one side. <i>Ug takilíngun (itakiling) sa pilútu ang iruplánu, mahadluk ang mga pasahíru,</i> If the pilot tilts the airplane to the side the passengers will be afraid.

<p><form>taklaba</form> <xr>= <sc>TAKABA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>takmù<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>TAKMUL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>taksip</form> <xr>= <sc>TAGSIP</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;taktak</form> <form>pa- sa bukbuk</form> <xr>= <sc>PAÚYUG</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ÚYUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>talagtag</form> <note>missing p.o.s.: a</note> be <tr>thinly spread</tr> or distributed. <i>Talagtag kaáyu ang mga balay sa búkid,</i> The houses in the mountain are very <tr>sparse</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be thinly spread or distributed. Mitalagtag ang íyang buhuk nga nanglarut, His hair is sparse because it is constantly falling out.

<p><form>&dagger;tali</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>2</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> just be <tr>weaned</tr> from one's mother's breast and too young to do s.t. (humorous). <i>Magminyù ka nga bag-u ka pa gáning natali?</i> You're getting married when you're just weaned?

<p><form>talíngab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make a <tr>sharp</tr> point on s.t. <pos>a</pos> <tr>sharpened</tr> to a point.

<p><form>tampikas</form> <xr>= <sc>TAMPIHAK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tampird</form> <pos>a</pos> radio that has been poorly repaired. <i>Dì ku makagarantíya ánang radiyúhag patíngug kay tampird,</i> I can't guarantee that radio will play because it has been repaired once and not very well.

<p><form>&dagger;tampuk<sub>1</sub></form> <form>&mdash; sa, ang luyu, likud</form><note>? F1</note> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>betray</tr>, stab s.o. in the back. <i>Kun wà ku dinhi libakun kunuku<note>spacing unclear</note> ninyu. Ngánung inyu man kung tampukun sa likud?</i> You say mean things about me when I'm not around. Why do you stab me in the back?

<p><form>tamudlaw</form> <xr>= <sc>LAMUDLAW</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=1162>

<p><form>&dagger;tangantángan</form> <form>panahun pa sa &mdash;</form> in the olden times, when people still used castor oil for lamps. <i>Ang ílang gigámit nga libru panahun pa sa tangantángan,</i> The books they are using go back to the days of the horse and buggy.

<p><form>&dagger;tanggu<sub>1</sub></form> <form>&mdash; kriminal, makapíang</form> <pos>n</pos> tango dance characterized with difficult and fancy steps (humorous).

<p><form>tanggu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> slow in understanding simple things, incompetent in doing simple things (from <ix>tangà</ix> and <ix>gágu</ix>). <i>Tanggu kaáyung tawhána, dì lang gihápun kamau ug ása pirma,</i> He is an idiot, because he still doesn't know where to sign his name. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become stupid in this way.

<p><form>&dagger;tangtang</form> <form>&mdash; útang</form> <pos>n</pos> the state or condition where one pays off debts and incurs debts again. <i>Mau giyud ning pubri ta, tangtang útang,</i> This is the way it is when you are poor. You pay off one set of debts and incur another.

<p><form>&dagger;tapang</form> <pos>n</pos> successfully executed or <tr>accomplished</tr> out of sheer luck rather than due to skill or ability.

<p><form>tardi</form> <pos>a</pos> arrive <tr>late</tr> at a time set for s.t. <i>Tardi ka na kaáyu sa klási,</i> You are very late for the class. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> get to a place late.

<p><form>&dagger;tarípa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rate</tr>, schedule of charges, esp. <tr>fare</tr>. <i>Naumintu na karun ang tarípa sa mga salakyanan,</i> The fares on transportation have gone up. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>charge</tr> according to a certain schedule.

<p><form>tibak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> make a killing, make a lot of money (slang). <i>Nakatibak silag maáyu sa pag-ismágul ug sigarilyu,</i> They made a fortune in smuggling cigarettes.

<p><form>tígì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> pour all the remaining portion of liquid from a container. <i>Tigía ang patis sa butilya,</i> Drain the last drop of soy sauce from the bottle.

<p><form>tikarul<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>TINGKARUL<sub>1</sub></sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;tikì</form> <form>&mdash; nga kwanggul</form> <pos>n</pos> a stupid gecko (so called because of the fact that he hides but shouts to let the world know where he is).

<p><form>tik-ibis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <i>1</i> in baseball, <tr>take a base</tr>. <i>Mitik-ibis ang bátir,</i> The batter took a base. <number>2</number> for a teacher of long service to take an easy test to give her official eligibility. <i>Dì untà ku mailidyibul ug wà pa ku makatik-ibis,</i> I wouldn't have made eligible status if I hadn't taken the promotional examination.

<p><form>&dagger;tikwì</form> <number>3</number> euphemism for <i>wakwak<sub>1</sub></i> or <i>unglù.</i> <i>Mga tikwì nang pamilyáha,</i> That is a family of vampires.

<p><form>&dagger;timáan (&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>TIMÁAN</sc>, <i>v1,</i> <i>2.</i></xr>

<p><form>&dagger;timbri<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> <tr>booby trap</tr> or any scheme or device for catching s.t. unaware. <i>Gibutangan sa mga Múrus ug mga timbri ang agiánan padulung sa ílang kampu,</i> The Moros placed booby traps on the trail that <corr sic=lead>leads</corr> to their camp. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>2</number> place, catch with a booby <tr>trap</tr> or a similar tricking device. <i>Nakatimbri silag bábuy ihálas,</i> They trapped a wild pig.

<p><form>tingkarul<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>TIKARUL<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;tiniblas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> ceremony held on the Wednesday before Easter.

<p><form>&dagger;tipas</form> <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>charm</tr> that renders one bullet-proof.

<p><form>tipli</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>soprano</tr> voice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> sing the soprano voice.

<p><form>tiriring</form> <pos>a</pos> having a slight mental <tr>derangement</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B123]</itype> be slightly <tr>deranged</tr>. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> slightly deranged.

<p><form>tirminisyun pí</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>termination pay</tr>.

<p><form>trakítu, trakítuk</form> <xr>= <sc>TALAKÍTUK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;trangka</form> <form>trangkilya</form> <pos>n</pos> small fastening stick or bar. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> attach, make a small fastening bar or stick. <i>Nagtrangkilya kus paradur sa sud-an,</i> I am making a small bar to lock the food cabinet.

<p><form>trúnu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>3</number> <tr>toilet</tr> (humorous). <i>Naghingári lang kug lingkud sa trúnu kay gihibús,</i> I keep sitting on the <tr>throne</tr> because I have diarrhea.

<p><form>tsariti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>charity ward</tr> in a hospital. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> be placed in the charity ward.

<p><form>*tsíbay</form> <form>insik &mdash;, &mdash; wákang</form> phrase said to insult a Chinaman. <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>WÁKANG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tsit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chit</tr>.

<p><form>&dagger;tubà</form> <form>&mdash; nga balintung</form> <pos>n</pos> tuba mixed with an adulterant that will cause one to get more drunk than normal.

<p><form>&dagger;túbù</form> <form>&mdash; sa kunhud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b7]</itype> for a thing to diminish when it should grow (humorous). <i>Sa ímung binaligyaan mutúbù sa kunhud ang ímung nigusyu,</i> The way you do business it will grow&mdash;but downwards.

<p><form>&dagger;túhud (&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> have <tr>pains</tr> in the knees. <i>Abi nákug tigúwang ray tuhurun,</i> I thought only old people had <tr>rheumatism</tr> in the knees.

<p><form>túka</form> <pos>n</pos> one's part in doing s.t., one's <tr>turn</tr> to do. <i>Ímu na rung túka sa panghúgas,</i> It's your turn to do the dishes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> for one's turn to come to him. <i>Dì makabalíbad ang táwu ug mutúka na níya ang kagul-ánan,</i> When it is a man's turn to have sorrows he cannot refuse. <form>tukatúka</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; abc]</itype> do s.t. by turns. <i>Gitukatukáhan mig hátag,</i> We were given some in turns.

<p><form>tukistukis</form> <pos>n</pos> illegal <tr>cockfight</tr> on a small scale (slang). <i>Dúnay tukistukis sa ílang baryu káda adlaw,</i> There is a small-scale illegal cockfight in their barrio every day. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> hold a small illegal cockfight (slang).

<pb n=1163>

<p><form>&dagger;tumuy sa</form> <form>&mdash; sa dílà</form> be at the tip of one's tongue, but still one cannot quite remember it. <i>Dì giyud kung kahinumdum ug kinsa tu ka apan nía ra giyud sa tumuy sa ákung dílà,</i> I cannot quite remember who you <corr sic=were>are</corr>, but you are so familiar, it is right at the tip of my tongue.

<p><form>túpung</form> <number>3</number> <form>dílì, wà mag- ang tudlù</form> not everybody is the same. <i>Wà magtúpung ang tudlù sa táwu,</i> Some people are rich and some are poor. (Lit. A man's fingers are not the same.)

<p><form>tusínu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>salt pork</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make salt pork.

<p><form>&dagger;túud</form> <form><r>[<ix>plant name</ix>]</r> nga &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> the most common variety of [such-and-such a plant]. <i>Kamúting túud,</i> The common sweet potato.

<p><form>úa</form> <xr>= <sc>ÚI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>&dagger;ubus</form> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <form>pa- kay laylay pa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be humble because one is at the bottom of society (<ix>laylay, a 2a</ix>). <i>Mau giyud, magpaubus kay laylay man,</i> I should be humble because I am poor. (Lit. A matured leaf is naturally found in the lower part of the plant.)

<p><form>úi</form> <pos>a</pos> acronym for <tr>over-acting</tr>: putting on airs, engaging in exaggerated actions uncalled for by the situation. <i>Úing muhílak arun tugtan,</i> Putting on a big show of crying so she would be allowed to go. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> <tr>overact</tr>. <i>Naúi siya arun himatikdan sa ulitáwu,</i> She started to put on a big act so the young man would notice her.

<p><form>úiks u</form> <pos>n</pos> OXO, a gang of Visayan toughs in Manila.

<p><form>&dagger;ulan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>3</number> diamond with some yellowish coloration. <i>Bubaratu ang brilyanting ulan,</i> A yellowish diamond brings a lower price.

<p><form>&dagger;ulípun (&mdash;)</form><note>?</note> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>enslave</tr>.

<p><form>&dagger;unà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>4</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> be oozing with dirt. <i>Hubúa nang ímung sinínà kay nag-unà,</i> Take off your dress because it is oozing with dirt.

<p><form>&dagger;únat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>3</number> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> do s.t. in a leisurely manner. <i>Dì ta makaúnat sa átung trabáhu kay mag-apas ta sa úras,</i> We can't dilly-dally with our work because we are rushing things.

<p><form>unir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>own</tr> s.t. <i>Maáyu nákung pagpahalúnà sa kutsi sa ákung higála, mu rag nakaunir,</i> I made myself comfortable in my friend's car as if it belonged to me. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>UNAY</sc>, <pos>v</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>urihinal</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>4</number> <formx>salà nga &mdash;</formx> <number>a</number> <tr>original sin</tr>. <number>b</number> <tr>adultery</tr>.

<p><form>&dagger;úrus</form> <form>pa-, pina-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> prepare s.t. by <corr sic="sautéeing">sautéing</corr>, usually said of preparing s.t. special (by people who don't normally prepare food that needs to be sautéed). <i>Ákù siyang paurúsan (pinaurúsan) run kay Duminggu man,</i> I'll sauté some food for him today because it is Sunday.

<p><form>&dagger;útak</form> <form>&mdash; brin</form> <pos>n</pos> one's <tr>brains</tr> as a means of thinking (humorous). <i>Gamíta ang ímung útak brin,</i> <tr>Use your head</tr>! <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> do s.t. from memory, not written. <i>Inutukun (iinutuk) sa mga ispíya ang ílang mga kúd,</i> Spies memorize their codes.

<p><form>&dagger;utut</form> <form>&mdash; ug bapur</form> <pos>n</pos> dark-complexioned.

<p><form>&dagger;uwak</form> <form>(&larr;) gibalikas</form> <pos>n</pos> a person who is such a nuisance that he keeps coming to a place he knows he is unwanted (like a crow that keeps coming back the more it is cursed). <i>Mu rag mga úwak gibalikas ning mga batáa. Dì patúu ug badlung,</i> These children are like crows you shout at. They just won't listen when you try to get rid of them.




<p><form>wan-a</form> <xr>= <sc>WALÀ NA</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>WALÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>wap-a</form> <xr>= <sc>WALÀ PA</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>WALÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>wásu</form> <xr>= <sc>HUWÁSÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>wáway</form> child talk for <ix>áway</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> quarrel with (child talk).

<p><form>&dagger;wiliwili</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> <tr>lure</tr> s.o. to stay s.w. <i>Ang mga bag-ung bisyu sa ákung bag-ung naglakaw mauy magwiliwili nákù,</i> My toddler has so many cute tricks it lures me to stay home.




<p><form>yá</form> word shouted simultaneously with the execution of a karate chop, blow, or kick.

<p><form>&dagger;yamu</form> <form>&mdash; ug</form> <tr>never</tr> did, do, does. <i>Yamug midúaw ang ákung binaláyi pagkauspital nákù,</i> Never did my daughter-in-law visit me when I was hospitalized. <i>Yamug muhátag nákù,</i> He never gives me any. <pos>n</pos> <number>2</number> <tr>none</tr>. <i>&lsquo;Duna kay kwarta?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Yamu,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Do you have money?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;(I have) none.&rsquo;

<p><form>yatap</form> (from <ix>patay</ix>&mdash;slang) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>kill</tr>. <i>Ang kriminal nga nagyatap sa gitulísan,</i> The criminal that killed the robbery victim.

<p><form>yíma</form> <pos>n</pos> candied yolk. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make yolk candy.



</body>
</text>
</TEI.2>
