<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN" [

<!ENTITY larr       CDATA "&#x2190;"            -- leftwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY rarr       CDATA "&#x2192;"            -- rightwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY glots      CDATA "&#x0294;"            -- glottal stop -->

<!ENTITY amacr      CDATA "&#x0101;"            -- a with macron -->
<!ENTITY imacr      CDATA "&#x012B;"            -- i with macron -->
<!ENTITY umacr      CDATA "&#x016B;"            -- u with macron -->

<!ENTITY amacrgra   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0300;"    -- a with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY imacrgra   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0300;"    -- i with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY umacrgra   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0300;"    -- u with macron and grave -->

<!ENTITY amacracu   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0301;"    -- a with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY imacracu   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0301;"    -- i with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY umacracu   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0301;"    -- u with macron and acute -->

<!ENTITY acaron     CDATA "a&#x030C;"           -- a with caron -->
<!ENTITY ucaron     CDATA "u&#x030C;"           -- u with caron -->
<!ENTITY icaron     CDATA "i&#x030C;"           -- i with caron -->

<!ENTITY schwa      CDATA "&#x0259;"            -- schwa (turned e) -->

]>

<!--

Step one

[X] Run pgpp.pl
[X] Fix page-breaks
[X] Fix hi tags (back to i tags)
[X] Insert p tags
[X] Run catpars.pl

Step two

[X] tag pos: n v
[ ] tag pos: a
[ ] tag sense numbers (split of from b tags, look for /<b>word [0-9]</b>/ case
[X] verify 'real' italics (not samples), look for /[a-z] italics>/ case
[ ] verify meaning numbers followed by sub-head-word or phrase <b>[0-9] word</b> case
[ ] italics and bolds midword. E.g. A<i>ng</i>
[ ] remove redundant tags near commas.
[ ] handle sup tags
[ ] verify starred entries (sub-entry immediately after headword)
[ ] handle [**proofer notes]
[ ] handle quotes. look for " '", etc.
[ ] Renumber pages.

Step three

CHECKS UPTO sulud

Iterate:
    [ ] Run WCED-uptag1.pl
    [ ] Run uptag.pl
    [ ] Verify output for anomalies and fix in source

Step four

[ ] Run WCED-uptag1.pl
[ ] Integrate result into WCED-body-0.3

-->

<TEI.2 lang=en>
<teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
        <titleStmt>
            <title>A Dictionary of Cebuano Visayan</title>
            <author>John U. Wolff</author>
        </titleStmt>
    </fileDesc>
    <profileDesc>
        <langUsage>
            <language id=en>English</language>
            <language id=en-US>English (United States)</language>
            <language id=ceb>Cebuano</language>
        </langUsage>
    </profileDesc>
</teiHeader>
<text>
<pb n=880>
<body>

<!-- Starting midway p 880 -->

drinking the wine of love.

<p><form>saruk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a wide-brimmed hat with a sharp metal point at the center, tapering to the brim, usually made of buri palm leaves and black climbing fern (<ix>nítù</ix>), used as a protection against the sun. <number>2</number> hat in general (usage in areas which call the sun hat <ix>salukut</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>wear</tr>, make into a hat of this sort. <form>saruksaruk</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible limpet, from 1&Prime;&ndash;3&Prime;, so called because of its resemblance to the <ix>saruk</ix>.

<p><form>sarul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> hoe with a short handle used for breaking up soil. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> loosen the soil with a hoe.

<p><form>sarul<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>TSARUL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sarung, sárung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sarong</tr>, worn by Muslim men and women. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> wear, make into a sarong.

<p><form>sarunsuy</form> <pos>n</pos> sweet made of white rice cake wrapped in banana leaves, steamed and shaped like a canoe. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make into <ix>sarunsuy</ix>.

<p><form>sása</form> <xr>= <sc>SALASA<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sàsà</form> <pos>v</pos> [A; a12| crack and flatten bamboo stems so as to make them resemble and serve as boards for walling. <pos>n</pos> sheet of cracked and flattened bamboo for walling, or the walling of this sort of material.

<p><form>sasag</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. exterior walling made of bamboo slats and palm thatch, nailed to wooden studs.

<p><form>sásing</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible, white worm of the mud near the seashore.

<p><form>sasirdúti</form> <pos>n</pos> priests of other religions than the Roman Catholic. <form>labaw nga &mdash;</form> <tr>High Priest</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12P]</itype> be a priest.

<p><form>sastri</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>seamstress</tr>, dressmaker. <number>2</number> <tr>tailor</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be, become a tailor or seamstress. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> go into the tailoring or dressmaking business. <form>-ríya</form> <pos>n</pos> dress or tailor shop.

<p><form>sátan</form> <xr>= <sc>SALÁTAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>satanas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>Satan</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>devil</tr>.

<p><form>satgan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shotgun</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> fire at with a shotgun.

<p><form>satin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>satin</tr>.

<p><form>satispitsu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> satisfied with the way s.o. does s.t. <i>Satispitsu ku sa íyang ági,</i> I'm satisfied with his work. <number>2</number> satisfied, convinced by an argument or explanation. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be satisfied with work or an explanation. <i>Kadtung íyang iksplikasiyun walà makasatispitsu (makapasatispitsu) ug diyútay kanákù,</i> His explanation did not convince me a bit.

<p><form>satsat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; c1]</itype> <tr>slurp</tr>, eat or drink in a noisy sucking way. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c3]</itype> <tr>gossip</tr>, engage in idle talk. <i>Ayawg isatsat ang átung gisultíhan,</i> Don't go blabbing around what we <pb n=881>have been talking about. <pos>n</pos> idle talk, esp. <tr>gossip</tr>. <form>-ay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> engage in idle gossip. <form>-íra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gossip</tr>.

<p><form>sátu, sátum</form> <pos>n</pos> children's game played with two sticks, in which one is flipped in the air and struck a distance. The one who hits his stick the shortest way is punished by being made to run a certain distance shouting <ix>sátu</ix> (<ix>sátum</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> play this game.

<p><form>satung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> rush off and do s.t. <i>Napáwul ang ránir nga misatung ug dágan sa wà pay butu,</i> The runner who started before the go-signal was declared foul. <number>2</number> do s.t. straight without pausing for breath. <i>Dì ku makasatung ug inum ug usa ka búl tubà,</i> I cannot drink a whole jarful of palm toddy straight.

<p><form>sátung</form> (from <ix>satung</ix>) <xr>= <sc>SÁTU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>saud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B256C3; c]</itype> press s.t. hard against s.t. <i>Walà nay kasibúgan ang lamísa kay misaud (nasaud) nas bungbung,</i> You can't move the table any further because it is already pressed against the wall. <i>Nagsáud ang katri ug ang síya,</i> The bed and the chair are pressed against each other. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> knock s.t. hard against s.t. <i>Ákung gisaud ang lubi sa batu,</i> I knocked the coconut against the stone.

<p><form>saudsaud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do, occur one after another in rapid succession. <i>Misaudsaud ang dimálas níya,</i> He was hit by bad luck without letup. <i>Labihang nakasaudsaud sa mga pumapálit niánang buntag,</i> The buyers came steadily all morning long.

<p><form>saudsáud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23C]</itype> be on friendly, cooperative terms, help each other when help is needed. <i>Nagsaudsáud ang mga managsúun sa buluhatun sa balay,</i> The brothers and sisters cooperated with one another in doing the household chores.

<p><form>sáug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> drag a boat ashore or back to the sea. <i>Tabangan tag sáug ang barútu,</i> Let's all help drag the boat ashore. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> <tr>move</tr>, carry away by an emotion (literary). <i>Gisáug siya sa usa ka tawhánung pagbátì,</i> She was carried away by an ecstatic feeling. <form>-l-an(&rarr;), -l-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> place where one usually drags a boat in going ashore or back to the sea.

<p><form>sául</form> <pos>n</pos> highest point of pain in labor when the baby is expelled. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> reach this point in labor. <i>Gisaúlan na ang babáying nagbatì,</i> The woman in labor is in acute pain now.

<p><form>saulì</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ULÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>saulu</form> <xr>= <sc>SAG-ULU</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ÚLU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>saúlug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> celebrate the memory of some event. <i>Dílì ku musaúlug sa ákung adlaw,</i> I will not celebrate my birthday. <i>Magsaúlug mi sa ámung pyista rung dúsi ning bulána,</i> We will celebrate our fiesta on the twelfth of this month. <pos>n</pos> <tr>celebration</tr>.

<p><form>sáun</form> short for <bx>unsáun</bx>. <xr>see <sc>UNSA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>saup<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sharecropper</tr>. <i>Dílì ni ákung yútà, saup lang ku dinhi,</i> This is not my land. I'm just a sharecropper here. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> work a piece of land by sharecropping. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> earn one's living as a sharecropper. <pos>n</pos> <tr>sharecropping</tr>.

<p><form>saup<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> be in an angry mood. <i>Gisaupan ku kay gilabtan ag ákung butang,</i> I was in a bad mood because s.o. touched my things.

<p><form>sáup</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> for a liquid or water level to be above the surface of s.t. <i>Kinahanglang musáup ang túbig sa karning lat-an,</i> If you boil meat, the water level should be above it. <i>Gisaúpan (gisáup) sa túbig ang dakung pátag,</i> The vast plain was flooded with water. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> flood with feelings. <i>Misáup sa íyang dughan ang hilabihang kamíngaw,</i> She was overwhelmed with feelings of loneliness. <i>Gútum nga misáup sa balángay,</i> A famine which overwhelmed the village.

<p><form>sáuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> for all sorts of people to move around in all directions in a certain place. <form>sauysáuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> go back and forth over a place. <i>May táwu nga misauysáuy tungud sa átù,</i> There was a man who was going to and fro in front of our house. <i>Mga mamistáhay nga nagsauysáuy sa kadalánan angat sa pyista,</i> People passing back and forth in front of our house during the fiesta.

<p><form>sawa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>large snake</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>python</tr>. <form>&mdash; nga baksan</form> banded python.

<p><form>saw-a</form> <pos>a</pos> feeling uneasy when one stops doing things he usually does. <i>Saw-a kaáyu ug dì ku maggirdul,</i> I feel uneasy if I don't wear a girdle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> get this feeling of uneasiness.

<p><form>sawad</form> <pos>n</pos> the measure of corn (usually basketful) left over after the crop has been divided. <i>Sawad nga tungà sa bukag,</i> A remainder of half a basketful after the crop had been divided.

<p><form>sawáli</form> <xr>= <sc>AMÁKAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sáwan</form> <pos>a</pos> giving a dizzying feeling from looking down from heights. <i>Sáwan ang walug gíkan sa tumuy sa búkid,</i> It is dizzying to look down into the valley from the top of the mountain. <pos>n</pos> intense fear or shock. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> get a dizzy feeling. <number>2</number> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> be intensely frightened. <i>Gisáwan ku sa butu sa bumba,</i> I was terribly frightened by the explosion of the bomb. <form>-anan(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> prone to intense fright.

<p><form>sáwang</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>town proper</tr>, the part of the town where the people are concentrated.

<p><form>sawásid</form> <xr>= <sc>SALUWÁSID</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=882>

<p><form>saway</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; a1c]</itype> speak disparagingly about s.t., mention bad qualities of s.t. <i>Kadtung magsaway áning panaptúna dílì swítu sa panaptun,</i> Whoever speaks disparagingly of this cloth doesn't know anything about cloth. <i>Walà kuy ikasaway (ikapanaway) sa íyang panglíhuk,</i> I have nothing to criticize about his deportment. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> <tr>disapprove</tr>, consider s.t. improper. <i>Nakasaway ku sa íyang gisulti sa íyang diskursu,</i> I think it's improper what he said in his speech. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b4(1)]</itype> <tr>disapprove</tr>, consider s.t. as improper. <i>Unsa may nahinawayan nímu níya?</i> What do you disapprove of in him? <form>-l-un(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> worthy of condemnation. <i>Ang paglibak usa ka búhat nga salawáyun,</i> Speaking ill of others is a contemptible act. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become contemptible. <form>hiN-un(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of criticizing or disparaging. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be given to criticizing.

<p><form>sawi</form> <pos>a</pos> giving a feeling of uneasiness when s.t. is new. <i>Sawi kaáyu ang antiyúhus basta bag-u pa,</i> One doesn't feel comfortable wearing glasses for the first time. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> feel uncomfortable with s.t. new. <i>Sawihan kaáyu kus marpil,</i> I don't feel comfortable with my new false teeth.

<p><form>saw-id</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23C3; a2]</itype> join two strands by winding them around each other, hook the fingers together. <i>&lsquo;Matay pa, tinúud lagi,&rsquo; nanumpà siya nga gisaw-id ang duha ka tudlù,</i> &lsquo;So help me it's true,&rsquo; she insisted, hooking her two fingers together. <i>Nagkasaw-id ang hukut sa duha ka bábuy,</i> The tether ropes of the two pigs got tangled up in each other.

<p><form>sáwil</form> <pos>n</pos> children's game wherein objects are placed in a circle for the players to hit out of the circle using a piece designated to hit other pieces. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; a2]</itype> play this game.

<p><form>sawilik</form> (from <ix>wilik</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> <tr>flick</tr> s.t. away with the back of the hand. <i>Ayaw ug isawilik ang úlud diri nákù,</i> Do not flick the worm off on me. <number>2</number> <itype>[c]</itype> push or move aside or away, as if flicking. <i>Isawilik lang unyà ang hábul ug galhaan ka,</i> Just push the blanket aside if you feel warm.

<p><form>saw-it</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b8]</itype> be caught or snagged by s.t. <i>Walà masaw-iti ang kabli sa sáhid,</i> The grapnel did not catch on the cable.

<p><form>sawpan</form> <xr>= <sc>SALÚPAN</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>SALUP</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sawsaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c6]</itype> dunk s.t. into s.t. else and shake it around. <i>Kinsay nagsawsaw áring túbig nga nahúgaw man?</i> Who dunked (his hand) into the water (and swished it around)? It is dirty. <i>Karing sukáa sawsáwi sa sinugbang bábuy,</i> Dunk your roast pork and swish it around in this vinegar. <i>Isawsaw ang nuug sa túbig,</i> Swish the rag around in the water.

<p><form>sawsyung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a player who inadvertently gets more cards than the required number. <number>2</number> a player who announces mahjong on a false alarm, penalized if the other players have displayed their hands.

<p><form>sawu-</form> for words with <ix>sawu-</ix> see also <xr><sc>SALU-</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sáwun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sound system of a movie. <i>Kláru ug sáwun nang sinihána,</i> That movie house has a clear sound system. <number>2</number> <formx>way &mdash;</formx> saying nothing in a group conversation (humorous). <i>Tíngug bay, wà ka may sáwun dihà,</i> Say s.t., pal. You haven't said a word yet. <form>&mdash; sirbis, sistim</form> <tr>public address system</tr>.

<p><form>sáwut</form> <xr>= <sc>SUR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sawuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> feel weak and sickly from bad health. <i>Magsawuy giyud ku ug musakit ang ákung ngípun,</i> I feel ill whenever I have a toothache.

<p><form>sáya</form> <pos>n</pos> skirt of the native dress, usually ankle-length and generally having a tail, wound around and tucked in front. <form>di-</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ABAB</sc></xr> <ix>and</ix> <xr><sc>ANDIR</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> wear, make into a skirt of this sort. <i>Ayaw kadispirádu. Siya ra bay nagsáya?</i> Don't get desperate. Is she the only fish in the sea (lit. only one wearing a skirt)? <form>&mdash; sa búnga</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> for trees to bear fruit in abundance. <i>Nagsáya sa búnga ang mangga nga maáyung pagkagalam,</i> A mango tree that is well taken care of bears fruit in abundance.

<p><form>sayà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> being in a merry or joyful mood. <i>Ang dag-an sayag panagway,</i> The winner had a joyful expression on his face. <number>2</number> engendering good feeling. <i>Hílum ug sayà nga kabuntágun,</i> Quiet and pleasant morning. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13B1]</itype> be, make merry. <i>Magsayà ta kay Pasku run,</i> Let's be merry because it's Christmas. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mirth</tr>, <tr>gaiety</tr>. <form>ka-an(&larr;), kasayáhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>entertainment</tr>. <i>Kasayáhan (kasayáan) sa karnabal,</i> Entertainments at the carnival. <form>ma-un(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> gay and lighthearted.

<p><form>*sayà<sub>2</sub></form> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> leave, <tr>expose</tr> s.t. carelessly for others to be able to see or touch it. <i>Nagpasayà silag háluk sa parki,</i> They kissed openly for all the world to see in the park. <i>Ayaw ipasayà nang sundang sa agiánan,</i> Don't just leave that bolo carelessly in the passageway. <form>sayàsayà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> expose s.t. carelessly or for public view. <i>Musamut ang ímung ubu kun isayàsayà mu ang ímung láwas sa tun-ug,</i> Your cold will persist if you expose yourself in the draft.

<p><form>say-a<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> for s.t. that fell to be caught atop s.t. <i>Nasay-a sa sandayung ang búlang gilábay,</i> The ball that was tossed landed in the gutter. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b8]</itype> <tr>wind up s.w.</tr> <i>Ang táwung maantígung mutrabáhu makakaun <pb n=883>bisag ása musay-a,</i> A man who knows how to work can eat wherever he winds up. <number>2a</number> stay in s.o. else's home temporarily. <i>Makasay-a kahà mi sa inyu ug magabin-an mi?</i> Can we stay at your place if we are overtaken by night? <i>Kamurúsan ang nasay-ahan sa mga bakwit,</i> The evacuees happened to stay among the Muslims. <form>say-asay-a</form> <xr>= <sc>SAY-A</sc>, <i>2,</i> <i>2a.</i></xr>

<p><form>say-a<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)6; b6]</itype> <tr>overflow</tr> from a container. <i>Nagsay-a ang isdà sa íyang sakayan,</i> His boat is filled to overflowing with his catch. <i>Napáwung ang káyu sa abúhan nga gisay-ahan sa sabaw,</i> The fire went out when the soup spilled over on it.

<p><form>sayab</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. disease affecting chicks making them droop. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13P]</itype> get this sickness. <i>Magsayab ang mga pisù basta tinginit,</i> During the hot season the wings of newly-hatched chicks droop.

<p><form>sayad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for the hem of a dress or robe to touch the ground. <i>Ang sidsid sa sutána mauy únang mabuling kay mau may musayad sa yútà,</i> The hem of a soutane gets dirty first because that is what touches the ground.

<p><form>sayag</form> <pos>a</pos> cheerful or bright of countenance: bright and clear. <i>Sayag na ang lángit kay gipálid na man ang dag-um,</i> The heavens are bright again because the clouds have been blown away. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be, become cheerful or bright and clear. <i>Musayag ang dagway sa mga maistra ug muabut ang tsíki,</i> The teachers get a bright look on their faces when their paychecks arrive. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having a happy and cheerful countenance or disposition.

<p><form>sayal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>skirt</tr>. <i>Sayal ug bláwus ang íyang sinínà,</i> She wore a skirt and blouse. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear a skirt. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a skirt.

<p><form>sáyang</form> expression of regret at s.t. wasted or an opportunity missed. <i>Sáyang lang ang ákung pag-anhi kay wà mi magkítà,</i> I came for nothing because we didn't meet. <i>Sáyang wà nákù madá ang ákung báting sut. Mangalígù tà ta,</i> Too bad I didn't bring my bathing suit. We could have gone swimming. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> for s.t. to be a waste, consider it so.

<p><form>sáyans</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>science</tr>. <i>Tungud sa sáyans nakaabut ang táwu sa búlan,</i> Science has allowed man to reach the moon. <number>2</number> <tr>science course</tr>.

<p><form>sayantis, sayantist</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>scientist</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be, become a scientist.

<p><form>sayaw</form> <pos>n</pos> general name for <tr>swifts</tr>: <bio>Collocalia spp</bio>. <form>-in-</form> <pos>a</pos> having the form of a swift in flight or of its tail.

<p><form>sáyaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> <tr>dance</tr>. <i>Dì ku makigsáyaw ug hubug,</i> I won't dance with a drunk. <i>Isáyaw ta kag makaduha ug mamaúlì na ta,</i> I will dance with you twice, and then we'll go home. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> by extension, any movement likened to dancing. <i>Misáyaw ang mga dáhun sa hángin,</i> The leaves danced in the breeze. <form>&mdash; ang kasingkásing</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> be gladdened (literary). <i>Misáyaw ang íyang kasingkásing dihang gisugut siya,</i> His heart danced when the girl accepted him. <pos>n</pos> <tr>dance</tr>. <i>Sáyaw sa mga karáan,</i> The dance of the old-*timers. <i>Pistang way sáyaw,</i> A fiesta with no dance. <form>sayawsáyaw</form> <pos>n</pos> dance presentation, esp. folk dance. <form>-an(&rarr;), -anan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dance hall</tr>, <tr>dance floor</tr>. <form>hiN-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of dancing. <form>-in-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> way of dancing. <form>maN-r-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dancers</tr>.

<p><form>sayhanan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rack</tr> or anything flat on to which or over which s.t. can be laid. <i>Gibutang níya ang awditíbu sa sayhanan,</i> She put the receiver down on the cradle.

<p><form>sayid-áwut</form> <pos>n</pos> in volleyball, the situation where the serving team makes an error and loses the serve.

<p><form>sayid bit</form> <pos>n</pos> an extra bet with an individual in addition to the main bet of the game. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> make a <tr>side bet</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> for a husband to play around with other women. <i>Daug kaáyu siya sa asáwa. Dì giyud makasayidbit,</i> He is such a hen-pecked husband he can never fool around.

<p><form>sayid layin</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sideline</tr>, s.t. one does in addition to his usual occupation. <number>2</number> a married man's <tr>mistress</tr> (humorous). <i>Dílì nà asáwa uy, sayid layin lang nà,</i> That's not his wife. That's his mistress. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> have a sideline. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> maintain a mistress.

<p><form>sayid tru</form> <pos>n</pos> throw-in in basketball. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make a throw-in.

<p><form>sayidwuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sidewalk</tr>, as the place where things are sold. <i>Didtu nákù palita sa sayidwuk,</i> I bought it from a sidewalk vendor. <form>&mdash; bindur</form> <pos>n</pos> one who sells items displayed on the sidewalk or the stand or stall selling things on the sidewalk. <!-- <tr>sidewalk vendor</tr> -->

<p><form>sayin<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> shine, polish the shoes. <form>&mdash; syús</form> expression uttered by shoeshine boys in asking s.o. if he wants his shoes shined. <form>&mdash; syu buy</form> <pos>n</pos> shoeshine boy.

<p><form>sayin<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>sign</tr>. <i>Gisaynan na nákù ang tsíki,</i> I have signed the check.

<p><form>sayinburd</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>billboard</tr>. <number>2</number> sign indicating where a vehicle is going.

<p><form>sayintist</form> <xr>= <sc>SAYANTIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sayin-up</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> terminate a broadcast, sign off for the day. <pos>n</pos> action of signing off for the day.

<p><form>sayis<sub>1</sub></form> <ix>number</ix> <tr>six</tr>. <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>TRIS</sc> for verb forms.</xr>

<p><form>sayit<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>cite</tr> s.t. in reference or evidence. <i>Musayit ka sa urdinansa pabur sa ímung <pb n=884>pitisiyun,</i> You quote the ordinance in favor of your petition.

<p><form>sayit<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>sight</tr>, aim a firearm. <pos>n</pos> <tr>sight</tr> of a weapon.

<p><form>sayit<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> eyesight (humorous).

<p><form>saylà</form> <xr>= <sc>SUYLÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>saylins&icaron;r</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>silencer</tr>, muffler of a combustion engine or silencer of a weapon.

<p><form>saylu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2C3; c]</itype> <tr>pass</tr>, bring by beyond s.w., pass s.o. by. <i>Musaylu ka man lang, mu rag dì ta kaíla,</i> You just pass me by as if we didn't know each other. <i>Musaylu ning karsadáha sa Talísay?</i> Does this road go beyond Talisay? <i>Atras. Nasayluan nátù ang ámù,</i> Back up. We passed by our house. <i>Isaylu lang ku sa unáhan sa taytáyan,</i> Just drop me a little way beyond the bridge. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> do s.t. beyond a certain point in space and time. <i>Ug musaylu sa alas utsu ímung pagpaúlì, dílì ka ablíhan sa pultahan,</i> If you come home after eight o'clock, they won't open the door for you. <number>3</number> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> <tr>omit</tr>, leave s.t. out. <i>Ayawg saylui ang rúsas ug magtubig ka sa mga tanum,</i> When you water the plants, don't forget the rosebush. <pos>a</pos> farther up, beyond, or into. <i>Ang íla saylu pa kaáyu sa ámù,</i> Their place is way beyond my place. <form>saylusaylu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3C]</itype> pass s.w. or each other repeatedly. <i>Musaylusaylu ka man lag ági sa balay. Dì ka man giyung kahapit,</i> You just keep going by our house, but you never drop in. <i>Nagsaylusaylu ang mga trák,</i> The buses kept passing each other. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> overlap each other in alternating motion. <i>Saylusaylúa (isaylusaylu) ang mga tiil igsáyaw nímu,</i> When you dance make your left go over your right and then your right over your left. <number>3</number> <itype>[b]</itype> <tr>bypass</tr>. <i>Gisaylusaylúan lang ang ákung mga papílis kay wà man ku muhátag ug bigay,</i> My papers were just bypassed, because I didn't give any grease money. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>forgive</tr>, <tr>pardon</tr>. <i>Ang prisidinti nagpasaylu ug dúsi ka binilanggù karung Pasku,</i> The president pardoned twelve prisoners this Christmas. <pos>n</pos> <tr>forgiveness</tr>. <form>mapa-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>forgiving</tr>.

<p><form>saylub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3C3; aP]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>overlap</tr>. <i>Ang duha ka tumuy nagsaylub ug mga dus purgádas,</i> The two ends overlap by about 2&Prime;. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>SAYLU</sc>, but not with <ix>pa-</ix>.</xr>

<p><form>saynus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sinusitis</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> have sinusitis. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> having sinusitis.

<p><form>saysay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>narrate</tr>, <tr>relate</tr>. <i>Saysáyan ta ka unsay tinúud nga nahitabù,</i> Let me tell you what really happened. <i>Isaysay níya nímu ang mga paági sa pag-aplay,</i> He will tell you the procedure for applying. <pos>n</pos> <tr>narration</tr>, <tr>declaration</tr>. <i>Nakumbins&icaron;r siya sa mga saysay sa mga bakákun,</i> He was convinced by the false declarations. <form>lakbit &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>synopsis</tr>. <form>sagbat &mdash;</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> relate s.t. by cutting in on a conversation. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>history</tr>, chain of events. <i>Mau tuy talagsaung hitabù sa kasaysáyan sa ikaduhang gúbat,</i> That was an unusual event in the history of the Second World War. <number>2</number> <tr>legend</tr>, story handed down by tradition. <i>Kasaysáyan sa amù ug sa bau,</i> The tale of the monkey and the turtle. <form>-l-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>eventful</tr>. <i>Ang ílang kasal usa ka salaysáyung hitabù sa ámung baryu,</i> Their wedding was an event of great moment in our village. <form>maka-anun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>historic</tr>, full of history. <i>Manúaw sila sa makasaysayánun nga pulù sa Kurihidur,</i> They will visit the historic island of Corregidor.

<p><form>saysinta</form> <ix>numeral</ix> <tr>sixty</tr>. <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>DISIUTSU</sc></xr> for verb forms.

<p><form>sayu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>early</tr>. <i>Sa sayung kabuntágun,</i> In the early part of the morning. <i>Sayu ming míabut. Dúgay pa ang prugrámang magsúgud,</i> We arrived early. The program won't begin for some time. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB5; c1]</itype> be or do s.t. early. <i>Sayuhun (isayu) nímu ug híkay ang pamáhaw arun makasayu ka sa iskuylahan,</i> Prepare breakfast early so you can get to school early. <form>sayusayu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> do s.t. a little early, or a little too early.

<p><form>sáyud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256; b4(1)]</itype> <tr>know</tr>; have cognizance or awareness of s.t. <i>Nasáyud aku nga usa ninyu namutbut,</i> I know that one of you is telling a lie. <i>Wà ku masáyud kun háin ang ílang balay,</i> I don't know where their house is. <number>2</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> tell s.o. about s.t., give information, news, etc. <i>Sayran ta kang dáan nga si Binduy usa ka minyù,</i> Let me inform you beforehand that Bendoy is a married man. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> hold the sáyud ceremony. <i>Human na mi makasáyud. Kasal na lay kúwang,</i> We have already held the formal betrothal ceremony. Now only the wedding is left. <pos>n</pos> the ceremony held after the <ix>pamaláyi</ix> (in which the marriage proposal is made) in which the prospective groom returns to the bride's family to find out whether or not they accept. In this ceremony all formal agreements and terms are stated, and the couple is engaged. <pos>a</pos> be thoroughly acquainted with s.t. <i>Sáyud aku sa mga kinaíya sa mga táwu dinhi,</i> I'm thoroughly acquainted with what the people here are like. <form>paki-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> ask information about s.t. <i>Magpakisáyud tag unsay nahitabù,</i> Let's ask what happened. <pos>n</pos> request for information. <form>sinayúran</form> <pos>n</pos> a girl who is engaged and has gone through the <ix>sáyud</ix> ceremony. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be formally betrothed. <form>kasayúran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>information</tr>. <pb n=885><form>masinayúrun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>informative</tr>.

<p><form>sayukmù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B5; c1]</itype> for the chin and lower jaw to jut out, esp. when one is pouting or sulking. <i>Musamut kag kangil-ad ug musayukmù ang ímung suwang,</i> You look more ugly if you let your chin protrude. <i>Ug way marpil musayukmù ang suwang,</i> If you do not have false teeth your chin will jut out. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for the chin to be sticking out. <number>2</number> for the face to be squat and wide.

<p><form>sayun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>easy</tr>. <i>Sayun kaáyu ang iksámin,</i> The test was very easy. <i>Sayun man gung bayhána maung pirming paangkan,</i> That woman is easily had. She has had several children out of wedlock. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12B125; a2]</itype> be or make s.t. easy. <i>Sayun nà siya patuhúun,</i> It's easy to make him believe s.t. <i>Ug gisayunan ka sa iksámin, handrid giyud ka,</i> If you consider the test easy, you must have made a hundred. <number>2</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> be too familiar with s.o. so as to take him for granted. <i>Ngánung manggáwì ka man sa ákung mga butang? Mu rag gisayunan ka nákù,</i> Why do you use my things? It seems as though you take me for granted. <form>sayunsáyun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. with great ease or facility. <i>Gisayunsáyun lang níya ug húbad ang &lsquo;Ultimu Adiyus,&rsquo;</i> He just translated the &lsquo;Last Farewell&rsquo; with the greatest of ease. <number>2</number> take s.o. for granted. <i>Sayunsayúnun (sayunsayunun) lang ku ninyu nu, ábi kay minsahíru ra man ku,</i> You give me orders just like that just because I'm a mere messenger here. <form>paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> take s.o. or s.t. for granted. <i>Nagpakasayun ka lag kúhà sa ákung kinawus,</i> You just help yourself to the water I fetched. <i>Gipakasayun lang níla ang kaminyúun,</i> They think marriage is such an easy thing. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> ease, <tr>facility</tr> of doing s.t.

<p><form>sayup</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>wrong</tr>, <tr>erroneous</tr>. <i>Sayup kaáyu tung ímung tubag,</i> Your answer was wrong. <1>n</1> <tr>error</tr>, <tr>mistake</tr>. <i>Náay sayup sa ímung lista,</i> There is an error in your list. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; a2b2]</itype> be wrong, make a mistake. <i>Nasayup ku sa ákung kalkúlu,</i> I am wrong in my calculation. <i>Ug masayup ka bísag kas-a, payir-awtun ta ka,</i> Make just one mistake and you are out. <i>Mau ning prublimáha ákung nasaypan,</i> This is the problem I made the mistake in. <number>1a</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> mistake s.o. for s.o. else. <i>Hisaypan ka unyà sa pagkapampam ug mau nay ímung isul-ub,</i> If that's what you wear they'll mistake you for a prostitute. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> fail to avail oneself of an opportunity. <i>Ayaw ug saypa ang sunud nga yugtù sa maung isturya,</i> Don't miss the next installment of the story. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>escape</tr>, avoid a trap. <i>Kanang lagsáwa dílì na giyud musayup áning balag-únga,</i> That deer will not escape this trap for sure. <form>masalaypun, masaypánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>erring</tr>. <i>Ang íyang masalaypun (masaypánun) nga bána nangáyù na pug pasaylu,</i> Her erring husband is now asking for forgiveness. <form>kasaypánan, ka-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wrong</tr>, moral infractions. <i>Ang kasaypánan nga ímung gihímù sa ímung asáwa,</i> The wrongs you have done to your wife. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>ISTÍPING</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sayúti, sayútis</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. vegetable, similar in appearance to a pear, cooked and eaten like squash, growing on a climbing vine with squash-like leaves: <bio>Sechium edule</bio>.

<p><form>si<sub>1</sub></form> particle before names or titles of persons used in constructions which require the nominative. <i>Si Pidru ákung ig-ágaw,</i> Pedro is my cousin. <i>Si Tátay,</i> Father. <form>&mdash; kinsa</form> who does he think he is? <i>Si kinsa ba siya nga musulti sa ingun?</i> Who does he think he is to say that? <i>Nagmandarmandar siya nákù mau ra ug si kinsa,</i> He was ordering me around as though he were s.o. see also <sc>NI<sub>1</sub></sc> and <sc>KANG<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><form>si<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>letter C</tr>.

<p><form>sí</form> yes, used only in response by people who are influenced by Spanish or jokingly by people who know a smattering of Spanish.

<p><form>sì</form> <pos>n</pos> sound used to drive away dogs and other small animals, but not fowls and pigs.

<p><form>síad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> become distended or burst, as from internal pressure. <i>Misíad ang ligid human bumbáhi,</i> The tire became inflated after air was pumped into it. <i>Nasíad na ang tiyan sa burus,</i> The pregnant mother's abdomen has become distended. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become luxuriant or lush in growth. <i>Misíad ang túbù sa tanum nga nating-ulan na,</i> The plants have become lush in their growth now that the rainy season has set in.

<p><form>siak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> split s.t. along the grain. <i>Masiak ang tabla ug ibulad sa ínit,</i> The board will crack if you leave it under the sun. <number>1a</number> <formx>&mdash; sa úlu</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12B1256]</itype> be a great mental burden. <i>Suliran nga makasiak sa ákung úlu,</i> A problem that can crack <sic corr=my>your</sic> head. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> disturb violently as if to crack. <i>Singgit nga misiak sa kahílum sa kagabhíun,</i> A shout that rent the stillness of the night. <number>3</number> <itype>[b3(1)]</itype> be worried, angry, sad. <i>Masukù lang nà siya bísag way gikasiakan (gikasik-an, gikasilik-an),</i> He gets angry even without cause. <form>kasilik-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>enmity</tr>, <tr>misunderstanding</tr>.

<p><form>siákù</form> short for <ix>unsa bay ákù</ix>. <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>UNSA</sc>, <i>1d.</i></xr>

<p><form>siang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B34]</itype> <number>1</number> come out partly. <i>Misiang na ang adlaw,</i> The sun is partly out now. <i>Nagsiang na ang bátà,</i> The child is now coming out. <number>2</number> for the vaginal opening to dilate. <i>Sa <pb n=886>dì pa makasiang ang pwirtu, tawga na ang midwayip,</i> Call the midwife before the vaginal opening dilates.

<p><form>siátab</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ÁTAB</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>siaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>mischievous</tr>, given to doing irresponsible but harmless fun. <i>Siaw kaáyu ning batáa kay íyang gihuktan ug písì ang íkug sa irù,</i> This child is very mischievous because he tied a rope to the dog's tail. <number>2</number> <tr>misbehaving</tr>. <i>Siaw batáa, way disiplína,</i> A misbehaving, undisciplined child. <form>&mdash; sa babáyi</form> <tr>philandering</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B123; b6]</itype> be, become <tr>mischievous</tr>, misbehaving. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>get worse</tr>; grow more [adj.]. <i>Ug pahilúmun siya, musíaw siya hinúun,</i> If he is told to keep quiet, he gets noisier instead. <number>1a</number> be, become <tr>worse</tr>, more intense. <i>Misíaw ang ilagà sa Mindanaw,</i> The rats are getting worse and worse in Mindanao. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> <tr>joke</tr>, play a <tr>prank</tr> on. <i>Nagsíaw ka tingáli kay láin ang nutisya nga ákung nadunggan,</i> You must be joking because I heard a different story. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> engage in mischief. <i>Ug magpasíaw ka, mabanhà ang klási,</i> If you are mischievous, the class will be noisy. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> characterized with jocularity.

<p><form>siawan</form> <xr>= <sc>AWAYAN</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ÁWAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>síay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3PC3]</itype> for different smells, tastes, atmospheres to be mixed together in one place. <i>Ang tánang báhù nagsíay sa simbahan,</i> All different odors are mixed together inside the church. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23C3]</itype> for different smells or atmospheres to mix and contradict each other. <i>Magkasíay ang ginamus ug kámay ug dungánun pagkáun,</i> Fish paste and brown sugar do not go well if you eat them together.

<p><form>siay-is</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for the Criminal Investigation Service.

<p><form>siba</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> add <tr>fuel</tr> to a fire to increase it or keep it going. <number>2</number> <tr>incite</tr>, get s.o. to do s.t. bad. <i>Siyay nagsiba sa mga istudiyanti pagdimunstrít,</i> He incited the students to demonstrate. [+]

<p><form>síbà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> sip nectar from a flower. <i>Mau niy klási sa búlak nga sibáan sa mga alibangbang,</i> This is the class of flowers the butterflies sip nectar from. <form>-un(&rarr;), -l-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> flowers that are attractive to birds and insects.

<p><form>sibakung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> cook a mixture of rice and corn grits.

<p><form>síbang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>nick</tr> a blade. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> nicked. <pos>n</pos> <tr>nick</tr> in a blade.

<p><form>sibásid</form> <xr>= <sc>SALUWÁSID</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sibat<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> get out of s.w., usually without <tr>leave</tr>. <i>Musibat ta sa prugráma arun dílì ta hingtawgan ug pakanta,</i> Let us get out of this place before we are called upon to sing. <i>Wà ka kinahanglána dinhi. Hala, sibat!</i> You are not wanted here, So, <tr>scram</tr>! <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> take s.t. without permission. <i>Sibatun (isibat) ku ning libru ug walay magtan-aw,</i> I will take this book when nobody is looking. [+]

<p><form>sibat<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> small fishing <tr>spear</tr>, usually made of wire as thick as a man's finger or bamboo pointed at one tip. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> spear using the <ix>sibat</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a <ix>sibat</ix>.

<p><form>síbaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b2]</itype> bounce from s.t. towards s.t. <i>Misíbaw nákù ang búla nga gilábay sa bungbung,</i> The ball was thrown against the wall and bounced toward me. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> for a sound to <tr>reverberate</tr> and be noisy so as to rise above other sounds. <i>Misíbaw ang butubutu sa mga ribintadur,</i> The explosion of firecrackers <tr>resounded</tr>. <number>3</number> <itype>[B246]</itype> rise to an alarming proportion. <i>Misíbaw karun pag-áyu ang pangáwat,</i> Robberies have increased to alarming proportions. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>turmoil</tr>, confused noises, tumultuous sounds.

<p><form>sibay</form> <pos>n</pos> an <tr>extension</tr> room added to an already existing dwelling, with the floor raised some distance from the ground. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> add an extension to a house. <form>sibaysíbay</form> <pos>n</pos> woman maintained by a married man. <i>Ang sibaysíbay sa íyang bána hustis,</i> Her husband's woman is a night-club hostess. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; abc]</itype> for a married man to maintain a woman.

<p><form>sibáya</form> <xr>= <sc>KISIBÁYA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>*sibika, *sibiku kapunúngang &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>civic organization</tr>. <form>hinábang nga &mdash;</form> <tr>civic aid</tr>.

<p><form>sibil</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>civil</tr>, not by the church. <i>Sa sibil lang ta magpakasal,</i> Let's make it a civil marriage. <i>Sibil nga mintiryu,</i> Public cemetery. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>GWARDIYA SIBIL</sc></xr>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> have a civil wedding. <form>gíra &mdash;</form> <tr>civil war</tr>. <form>gwardiya &mdash;</form> Civil Guard of the Philippines during Spanish times. <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>punish</tr> s.o. heavily or make s.o. do a lot of work rapidly (as the Spanish civil guards do). <i>Maáyung musinibil ug súgù sa mga sinuhúlan apan dílì maáyung mupakáun,</i> Knows how to make farmhands work hard but doesn't give them enough food to eat. <i>Dì na run magsinibil ug kastígu ang mga maistra sa klási kay manúkul na man run ang mga istudiyanti,</i> Teachers do not inflict heavy punishments in class any more because nowadays the students fight back.

<p><form>*síbil</form> <form>&mdash; sirbis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>civil service</tr>. <form>&mdash; sirbis tist</form> <tr>Civil Service test</tr>.

<p><form>sibilisar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>civilize</tr>. <form>sibilisádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>civilized</tr>, <tr>well-mannered</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become civilized. <form>sibilisasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>civilization</tr>.

<pb n=887>

<p><form>sibilsíbil</form> <pos>n</pos> game of <tr>hide-and-seek</tr> played in pairs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12C; c1]</itype> play hide-and-seek in pairs.

<p><form>sibilyan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>civilian</tr>. <number>2</number> ordinary clothes as opposed to a uniform or frock. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> wear civilian attire or ordinary clothes as opposed to a uniform or frock. <i>Dì giyud mailhan nga párì kay nagsibilyan man,</i> You'd never know he was a priest because he was wearing ordinary clothes. <number>2</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> become a civilian.

<p><form>síbin<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> wipe s.o.'s face or any other part of the body with a moist cloth. <number>2</number> <tr>shave</tr> hair on the body. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> wipe one's face with a wet cloth. <number>2</number> <tr>shave</tr> one's body hair.

<p><form>síbin<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> be a <tr>hermaphrodite</tr>. <i>Gisibínan ang anak ni Maríya,</i> Maria's child had both male and female genital organs. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> hermaphrodite.

<p><form>sibin-ilíbin</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. dice game. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> play this game. <number>2</number> for males to <tr>masturbate</tr> (slang).

<p><form>síbin pirs</form> <xr>= <sc>SÍTI PÁRIS</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>SÍTI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>síbins gríd</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>seventh grade</tr> of elementary schools. <i>Karun wà nay síbins gríd,</i> They have abolished the seventh grade of elementary schools. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> be or get to be in the seventh grade.

<p><form>sibintiit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>78 rpm record</tr>.

<p><form>sibinti páak</form> <pos>n</pos> grade of seventy-five, the lowest passing grade (humorous slang). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> get seventy-five.

<p><form>sibinti siks</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. rice introduced by the PACD.

<p><form>sibit</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>safety pin</tr>. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>PÁLUD</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> fasten in with a safety pin. <i>Sibta (sibti) ang lampin,</i> <tr>Pin</tr> the diapers. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>PÁLUD</sc>.</xr> <form>-in-</form> <xr>= <sc>PÁLUD</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>sibsib</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> for animals that graze to <tr>nibble</tr> at plants. <i>Hingsibsiban ang rúsas sa kanding,</i> The goat nibbled at my rosebush. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> nibble at s.t. boney to get at the meaty parts. <i>Ákung sibsíbun ang mga bukug kay nía man dinhi ang lamì,</i> I'll nibble at the bones, for that is where the delicious parts are. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>graze</tr>. <i>Didtu sa lagúna nanibsib ang kabáyù,</i> The horse was grazing in the meadow. <form>-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pasture</tr>.

<p><form>síbu</form> <pos>n</pos> fat of bovine and other animals with hooves, except pigs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1245; b6]</itype> put <tr>beef fat</tr>. <i>Nagkasíbu ang linat-an,</i> The stew is full of fat. <i>Sibúhi ang ímung hiraminta arun dílì tay-an,</i> Smear beef fat on your tools so they won't get rusty.

<p><form>síbù</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> fitting precisely, of exact dimension<corr>.</corr> <i>Kining twirkáha síbù kaáyu sa pirnu,</i> This nut fits precisely into the bolt. <number>1a</number> <tr>exactly</tr> [so-and-so] long, at [such-and-such] a time. <i>Síbung duha ka túig,</i> Exactly two years. <i>Síbung alas dúsi,</i> At exactly twelve o'clock. <number>2</number> timepiece <tr>synchronized</tr> with another, musical instrument <tr>tuned to</tr> another. <i>Dílì síbù ang ákung rilu sa íyang rilu. Alas dus nas íya apan walà pa diris ákù,</i> My watch isn't running at the same time as his. He has two o'clock, but I don't. <number>3</number> harmonizing with, fittingly with the personality. <i>Ang íyang papil sa dráma síbù kaáyu sa íyang pagkatáwu,</i> His role in the drama fits his personality perfectly. <number>4</number> <tr>commensurate</tr>, proper in kind. <i>Kadtung ímung tratamyintu níya síbù sa íyang nabúhat,</i> What you did to him is just <tr>appropriate</tr> for what he did to you. <number>5</number> for the moon to be full. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> fit into s.t. <number>1a</number> <itype>[B56; a12]</itype> be <tr>exactly</tr> [such-and-such] a time. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1C3; ac]</itype> tune a musical instrument to another, <tr>synchronize</tr> a watch with another. <i>Sibúun ta ning duha ka sista,</i> Let us tune the two guitars to each other. <number>3</number> <itype>[B2C23; c6]</itype> <tr>harmonize with</tr>, fit a personality or style. <i>Kining kalúa musíbù sa bísan unsang kurti sa nawung,</i> This hat goes nicely with any face. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> borrow a quantity of s.t. and return the same amount or multiples thereof. <i>Musíbù ku ug walu ka gantang mais. Ulían ta ka ug dubli sa tingsanggì,</i> I will borrow eight gantas of corn, and I will pay you back double during harvest time. <number>5</number> <itype>[B245]</itype> for the moon to become full.

<p><form>síbug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB3(1); c1P]</itype> back s.t. up, <tr>move back</tr>. <i>Ug musíbug ka, matambug ka sa kanal,</i> If you step backward, you will fall into the ditch. <i>Kinsay nagsíbug sa lamísa?</i> Who moved the table back? <number>1a</number> <itype>[A23; b6]</itype> <tr>back down</tr> from s.t. <i>Dílì ta ka sibúgan ug sumbagay,</i> I will not back down from you in a fight. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>back out</tr> of an agreement. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> withdraw an application, candidacy, case in court. <i>Dílì ku musíbug sa ákung kandidatúra,</i> I will not withdraw my candidacy. <i>Ug musíbug ka sa ímung kíha, ariglúhun ta lang ni,</i> If you withdraw your case, we will settle it amicably. <i>Isíbug ku ang ákung aplikasiyun,</i> I will withdraw my application. <number>3</number> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> move an event to an earlier or to a later date. <i>Átung isíbug ang kasal ug tulu ka adlaw arun tukmà sa pyista,</i> Let's move the wedding ahead (or <tr>postpone</tr> it) three days so that it will coincide with the fiesta. <number>4</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>visit</tr> (dialectal). <i>Musíbug mis inyu rung pila ka adlaw,</i> We'll visit your place one of these days. <pos>n</pos> action of <tr>moving back</tr>, <tr>backing out</tr>, <tr>retreating</tr>. <i>Pagsábut nga way síbug,</i> An agreement you can not back out of.

<p><form>sibúkaw</form> <pos>n</pos> small tree with scattered prickles, <pb n=888>the wood of which is used for nails in boat building: <bio>Caesalpinia sappan</bio>.

<p><form>sibul</form> <xr>= <sc>SUBUL</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sibut</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. very small dip <tr>net</tr> made of finely meshed cloth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a2b2]</itype> pick out with a small dip net. <i>Sibuta ang isdà. Ayaw ug kab-a sa panaksan,</i> Catch the fish with a dip net. Don't scoop it out with a cup.

<p><form>síbut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a1]</itype> <tr>inspire</tr> s.o. with enthusiasm to do s.t. <i>Ang kanindut sa kahigayúnan sa Amirika mauy nakasíbut (nakapasíbut) nákù paglangyaw,</i> I was inspired to go to America by the attractive opportunities that are available there. <i>Gisíbut mi sa ámung ginikánan pag-iskuyla,</i> Our parents inspired us to study. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>enthusiasm</tr>. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> full of enthusiasm to do s.t.

<p><form>sibúyas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> general name for various kinds of <tr>onions</tr> and <tr>leeks</tr>. <number>2</number> humorous name given to Union cigarettes (where Union is pronounced homophonous with onion in the Philippines). <form>&mdash; amirikánu</form> <tr>leeks</tr> with a slightly larger bulb than the bisayà. <form>&mdash; bisayà</form> <tr>leeks</tr> with tiny red or white bulbs, the tops of which are used. <form>&mdash; bumbay</form> <tr>onions</tr> with large bulbs. <i>-un ug tíngug</i> <pos>a</pos> <tr>squeaky-voiced</tr>.

<p><form>sibuying</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small <tr>onion</tr> or <tr>leek</tr>, smaller than <ix>sibúyas bisayà</ix>, with a small white bulb and a flavor differing from ordinary leeks.

<p><form>sibya</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> peddle fish. <i>Sibyáhan kug lab-as nang mga báy dihà,</i> I peddle fresh fish around to those houses. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>broadcast</tr>. <i>Isibya ang anunsiyu sa tíbi,</i> Broadcast the announcement on T.V. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13; c6]</itype> <tr>announce</tr>, give notice of. <i>Hinagtub nga nagsibya sa íyang pag-abut,</i> Footfalls that announced his arrival. <form>mag-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>radio announcer</tr>.

<p><form>sibyà</form> <xr>= <sc>SIBYA</sc>, <i>v2,</i> <i>3.</i></xr>

<p><form>sída</form> <pos>n</pos> silk cloth. <form>sidasida</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to several grasses with silky tufts.

<p><form>sidbaks</form> <pos>n</pos> box used as a seedbed for germinating seeds. [+]

<p><form>sidhawus</form> <pos>n</pos> shed providing shade for seed beds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> construct such a shed.

<p><form>sidi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> receive favorably, <tr>approve</tr>. <i>Wà sidihi sa huwis ang diklarasiyun sa sinumbung,</i> The judge didn't receive the allegations of the accused favorably.

<p><form>sid-ing</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>look closely</tr> at s.t. by bringing one's face to it or putting it near the face. <i>Nagsid-ing ku áring pínung litra,</i> I am looking closely at this fine print. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> look at s.t. out of the corner of the eyes. <i>Nasakpan ku siya nga nagsid-ing kang Marta,</i> I caught him regarding Martha out of the corner of his eyes.

<p><form>sidlak</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sparkling</tr>, <tr>glittering</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>sparkle</tr>. <i>Diyamanting nagsidlak,</i> A sparkling diamond. <i>Hingsidlakan aku sa adlaw,</i> I woke up after the sun had risen. <number>2</number> be glittering in prominence. <i>Misidlak ang íyang kabantug, He reached glittering fame.</i> <pos>n</pos> ray, beam. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>east</tr>. <i>Layung sidlakan,</i> The <tr>Far East</tr>. <i>Duul nga sidlakan,</i> The <tr>Near East</tr>.

<p><form>sidlit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b2]</itype> squirt out in a stream. <i>Misidlit ang nánà sa dihang gipislit ang hubag,</i> The pus squirted out in a stream when I pressed the boil. <i>Hingsidlitan ku sa íhì sa bátà,</i> The little boy urinated on me. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> for the sun to shine (literary). <i>Sa walà pa musidlit ang primírung bidlísiw sa adlaw,</i> Before the first rays of the sun shone.

<p><form>sidlut</form> <xr>= <sc>SIDLIT</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr>

<p><form>sidsarun</form> <xr>= <sc>SITSARUN</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sidsid</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>hem</tr>, lower edge of dress, curtain, or the like. <number>2</number> <tr>edge</tr>, <tr>border</tr> (literary). <i>Ang sidsid sa kapunawpunáwan,</i> To the outer reaches of space. <form>sidsiran</form> <xr>= <sc>SIDSID</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr>

<p><form>sid-uk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hiccup</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a4]</itype> have the <tr>hiccups</tr>. <i>Misid-uk si Lúlu, unyà miyupyup sa íyang kwáku,</i> Granddad hiccuped and then puffed on his pipe. <i>Inum ug usa ka básung túbig ug sid-ukun ka,</i> Take a glass of water if you have the hiccups.

<p><form>sidula</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the head tax of the Spanish time and now, the <tr>residence tax</tr>. <number>2</number> the <tr>residence certificate</tr>, evidencing the payment of this tax.

<p><form>síga<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> bright, giving off intense illumination. <i>Síga kaáyu ang sugà,</i> The lamp is very <tr>bright</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>bright-eyed</tr> or having big round eyes. <i>Síga ug mata kining batáa paríha sa íyang uyuan,</i> This child has big, round eyes like his uncle's. <pos>n</pos> <tr>flame</tr>, light given off. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S; a2Pb7]</itype> <tr>burn bright</tr>. <i>Nagsiga pa ba ang dáub?</i> Is the fire still burning? <i>Sigái ang linung-ag,</i> Turn up the fire under the rice. <number>1a</number> for the lights to be on. <i>Sigáha (pasigáha) ang sugà kay ngitngit na,</i> Put the lights on because it is dark now. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> for the eyes to be big or bright. <i>Misíga ang mga mata sa kahikugang,</i> Her eyes grew wide in astonishment. <number>2a</number> for the eyes to be wide, <tr>glaring</tr> at s.o. <i>Gisigáan ku níya sa kapungut,</i> He glared at me in anger.

<p><form>síga<sub>2</sub>, sígà</form> <pos>n</pos> notorious <tr>tough guy</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become a <tr>tough</tr>. <form>sigasíga</form> <xr>= <sc>SÍGA<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sigabu</form> <pos>n</pos> continuous, <tr>thudding</tr> sound. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> be thudding, give a thudding sound. <i>Musigabu ang balud ug ting-amihan,</i> Strong waves dash against the shore when the northwind blows. <i>Unsa may nagsigabu sa táas? Mga bátang nagdúlà?</i> What is it that is thudding <pb n=889>upstairs? Children playing?

<p><form>sigamnu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> <tr>care</tr>, give <tr>attention</tr> or <tr>concern</tr> to s.o.'s welfare or needs. <i>Wà siya magsigamnu sa idukasiyun sa íyang mga anak,</i> She doesn't concern herself with her children's schooling. <i>Sigamnúa ang ímung láwas arun dì ka masakit,</i> Take care of your body so you won't get sick.

<p><form>sig-ang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put the pot on the fire. <i>Nagsig-ang na siya sa paniudtu,</i> She is preparing lunch now.

<p><form>sigarilyu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cigarette</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a cigarette. paN- <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>smoke</tr> cigarettes, ask s.o. for cigarettes or cigarette money. <i>Kamau na diay ka nga manigarilyu,</i> So, you already know how to smoke. <i>Panigarilyúhan nátù si Iduy kay nakadaug sa súgal,</i> Let us ask Edoy for cigarette money because he won in gambling.[+]

<p><form>sigarit kís</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cigarette case</tr>.

<p><form>sigaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>confess</tr> or tell s.t. which s.o. wants to be kept secret (slang). <i>Nadakpan ang tanan kay misigaw ang usang nadakpan,</i> All of them were caught because one of them <tr>sang</tr>. <i>Íyang gisigaw ang tinagúan sa íyang inahan,</i> She <tr>revealed</tr> her mother's secrets.

<p><form>sígaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>noisy</tr>, making a disturbance. <pos>n</pos> <tr>shouts</tr> and <tr>noise</tr>. <i>Ang sígaw sa nagsúgal dungug sa ámù,</i> You could hear the shouts of the gamblers as far as our house. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> be <tr>noisy</tr>. <i>Nagsígaw ang mga istudiyanti kay way maistru sa klási,</i> The students are all in uproar because the teacher is not in the room. <form>ka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be very noisy.

<p><form>sig-aw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> make a loud noise at the top of one's lungs. <i>Wà siya makasig-aw kay ákung gikasab-an,</i> He did not dare make noise because I scolded him.

<p><form>sigay</form> <pos>n</pos> general name for small <tr>cowries</tr>.

<p><form>sigbaw</form> formula uttered to prevent one from being struck by lightning when making fun of animals. <i>Ang ungguy mu ra sigbaw ug táwu,</i> The monkey looks like man, may I not be struck by lightning. <i>Sigbaw ug paríha ang táwu sa irù nga magpungutay,</i> May lightning not strike me, how would it feel if people had intercourse like dogs.

<p><form>sigbin</form> <pos>n</pos> animal possessed by and at the service of s.o. It has the power of making itself invisible to a person other than the owner. The <ix>sigbin</ix> can do good to the owner, transport the owner, and will inflict fatal bites on whomever the owner commands it to. It cannot be killed as long as the owner can see it. It is said to have long hind legs and walks with the head looking back in between the legs. Ownership is handed down to relatives when the owner dies. A person who refuses a <ix>sigbin</ix> is said to go mad. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> possessing a <ix>sigbin</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> get a <ix>sigbin</ix> handed down to one.

<p><form>sígi</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> <tr>continue</tr> or go on doing s.t.; do s.t. <tr>always</tr>. <i>Ug magsígi ning ulána háyan mubahà,</i> If this rain keeps on, it's likely to flood. <i>Sigíhun (sigíhan, isígi) nímu ug túyuk ang twirka hangtud muhugut,</i> Continue turning the screw until it gets tight. <i>Ngánung sigíhan man ku nímu ug tan-aw?</i> Why do you always look at me? <number>1a</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> walk or <tr>go on</tr> or <tr>forward</tr>. <i>Inig-abut nímu sa iskína, musígi ka ug mga bayinti mitrus,</i> When you reach the corner, <tr>go ahead</tr> for about twenty meters. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A2; a12P]</itype> proceed with one's studies. <i>Dílì ku makasígi karung sunud túig kay wà kuy kwarta,</i> I cannot proceed with my studies next year because I have no money. <ix>exclamation:</ix> <number>1</number> urging s.o. to do s.t. <i>Sígi, káun na,</i> <tr>Come on</tr>, eat! <number>2</number> expressing acquiescence. <i>Ug walay láin sígi na lang ta áning nía,</i> If there is no other, we will just have to make do with this. <number>2a</number> <tr>O</tr>.K. <tr>Bye</tr>. <i>&lsquo;Adtu na ku.&rsquo; &lsquo;Sígi,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;I'm going now.&rsquo; &lsquo;O.K., Bye-bye.&rsquo; <number>3</number> <tr>always</tr>. <i>Sígi ka lang ug sulti, way búhat,</i> You're always talking. You never do anything. <form>&mdash; lang</form> <number>1</number> never mind, it doesn't matter. <i>Sígi lang ug pubri, basta malipáyun,</i> Never mind if I'm poor as long as I am happy. <number>2</number> Oh, <tr>please</tr>. <i>Sígi lang, tagái lang ku,</i> Oh, please. Let me have some! <form>(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>SÍGI</sc>, <ix>exclamation</ix>.</xr>

<p><form>sig-id</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>vine</tr> used for tying purposes: <bio>Malaisia scandens</bio>.

<p><form>sigídas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>successive</tr>, <tr>frequent</tr>. <i>Lápuk kaáyu sa ámù kay sigídas ang ulan,</i> My place is very muddy because it keeps raining. <number>2</number> automatic, rapid-firing weapons. <number>3</number> <tr>freewheeling</tr>, such that the chain that links the pedal gear to the wheel gear engages only in the forward direction, and not in the backward direction. <i>Sigídas ang bisiklíta nga rísir,</i> A racing bicycle is freewheeling. <number>3a</number> <tr>racing bicycle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> become <tr>frequent</tr> or <tr>successive</tr>; do s.t. <tr>successively</tr> or <tr>frequently</tr>. <i>Nagsigídas ang ákung mga sulat rung mga adláwa,</i> I <tr>keep</tr> getting letters one after another these days. <i>Sigidásun nímu ug tindak ang pidal arun magsígi ug túyuk ang ligid,</i> Keep pumping the pedal so the wheels will keep turning.

<p><form>sigidilyas</form> <xr>= <sc>KARABANSUS</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sígin</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>net</tr> designed for taking out catch from the fish corral. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> get the fish out of the corral with a net.

<p><form>sigingsiging</form> an exclamation uttered together with shaking s.o. emotionally upset by the <pb n=890>shoulders. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> shake s.o. and say <ix><corr sic=siging-siging>sigingsiging</corr></ix>. <i>Sa nagsigingsiging ku sa bátà, mihínay ang íyang paghílak,</i> After I had shaken the child and said <ix>sigingsiging</ix> to him, he began to stop crying. <number>2</number> make s.o. hurry in doing s.t. <i>Kinsa mang kustumíra ang nagsigingsiging ug pagpakúha nímu ug túbig?</i> Who was the customer that made you hurry in getting a glass of water?

<p><form>sigisígi</form> <pos>n</pos> name of a notorious gang of Tagalog hoodlums as opposed to the <ix>uksu</ix> (<xr><sc>OXO</sc></xr>) of the Visayans. <form>&mdash; gang</form> <xr>= <sc>SIGISÍGI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sigkat</form> <xr>= <sc>SIKLAT</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sigking</form> <xr>= <sc>SIKGING</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sigkit</form> <xr>= <sc>SÍKIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>siglu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>century</tr>. <i>Sa Siglu Katursi,</i> In the Fourteenth Century.

<p><form>sigmit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <number>1</number> seize by the arms or legs, usually in a stealthy manner. <i>Nakasigmit kug manuk,</i> I managed to catch a chicken by the legs. <i>Misáwum siya ug gisigmit ang tiil sa dalága,</i> He swam under the water and seized the woman's legs. <number>2</number> <tr>arrest</tr> s.o. wanted by the law. <i>Mga sikríta mauy nagsigmit sa isnatsir,</i> Plainclothesmen <tr>nabbed</tr> the snatcher.

<p><form>sigmuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> <tr>swipe</tr> or <tr>lift</tr> things of small value. <i>Dúnay nagsigmuk sa ákung bulpin,</i> S.o. swiped my ballpoint pen.

<p><form>sigmuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> crave for food that one has not eaten for a long time. <i>Gisigmuk na kug kinílaw tangígi,</i> I crave for raw Spanish mackerel.

<p><form>signal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>signal</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> give a <tr>signal</tr>. <i>Signáli ku sa busína,</i> Blow your horn as a signal to me.

<p><form>signit</form> <xr>= <sc>SIGMIT</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>signus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> in folk belief, the preordained agent through which one meets his death as revealed by fortune-telling. <i>Pagkalúnud sa barku wà siya mamatay kay kaláyu may íyang signus,</i> When the boat sunk he didn't die because his fate was to die by fire. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>AGNUS</sc></xr>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> be saved from unexpected death because it is not one's <ix>signus</ix> to die that way.

<p><form>sigpat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b8]</itype> get a glance stolen at one. <i>Nasigpatan ku siya nga nangupya sa iksámin,</i> I glanced at him copying during the test. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> steal a glance. <i>Ayaw ug pasigpati ang babáyi kay masakpan ka,</i> Don't steal glances at the woman because you might get caught.

<p><form>sigpaw</form> <pos>n</pos> a small dip <tr>net</tr> around 4&ndash;6&Prime; in diameter with a handle used for scooping up wrigglers, small bait, butterflies. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN2; a12]</itype> gather, scoop up with <corr sic=his>this</corr> k.o. net.

<p><form>sigpit</form> (from <ix>sipit</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <tr>narrow</tr>, not affording easy passage. <i>Sigpit kaáyu ang mga kalyi sa ámung lungsud,</i> The streets in my town are very narrow. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125; b6]</itype> be, become narrow.

<p><form>sigsag</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>zigzagging</tr>, <tr>winding</tr> road or course. <i>Sigsag kaáyu ang karsáda paingun sa búkid,</i> The road into the mountains is <tr>zigzag</tr>. <pos>n</pos> zigzag stitches; fancy stitches made at the edge of cloth to keep it from getting unravelled. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> run a zigzag course. <i>Nagsigsag ku ug dágan sa dihang gitirúhan ku,</i> I ran in a zigzag course when they shot at me. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make zigzag stitching. - <form>nga makina</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. <tr>sewing machine</tr> that can make zigzag stitching. <form>-in-an, -in-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> having zigzag stitching sewn in it.

<p><form>sígu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>tight</tr> or precise in fit. <i>Gáhing ablíhan ang pulta kay sígu kaáyu,</i> The door is hard to open because it is very tight in fit. <i>Ang sígu nga sinínà sa mga babáyi dílì ángay nga isimba,</i> Clothes that fit the body too tightly are not appropriate for church. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be, become tight or precise in fit, cause s.t. to be so. <i>Sigúhun (pasigúhun) nímu ang sungsung ngadtu sa bangag arun dílì muhunub ang túbig,</i> Make the stopper fit precisely so the water won't seep through.

<p><form>sígù</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fitting</tr> appropriately as words, action, attire. <i>Ang íyang pakigpúlung <corr sic="sígu">sígù</corr> kaáyu sa ukasiyun,</i> His speech fits the occasion. <number>2</number> <tr>exact</tr>. <i>Sígù na kung usa ka túig sa ákung trabáhu,</i> I'm <tr>exactly</tr> one year in my work. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> be <tr>appropriate</tr> or exact. <i>Dílì musígù ag singsing sa ákung tudlù,</i> The ring doesn't <tr>fit</tr> my finger. <i>Sigúa (isígù) ang ímung linihukan sa ímung idad,</i> Act your age.

<p><form>*sigun<sub>1</sub></form> <form>&mdash; sa</form> <number>1</number> <tr>according to</tr>. <i>Sigun sa ákung hibatian dílì nà mau ang íyang gisulti,</i> According to what I have heard, that is not what he said. <number>2</number> in <tr>conformance</tr> with. <i>Kining ákung gása kanímu sigun sa ákung gisáad,</i> This gift of mine is <tr>just</tr> what I have promised you. <number>3</number> <tr>depends on</tr>. <i>Sigun lang sa unsay náa,</i> It depends on what is available. <i>Mu ra ug dílì nà ikatúgut, apan sigun lang nà sa pagkumbins&icaron;r níya,</i> It seems as if it is not allowed, but actually it is just a matter of convincing him.

<p><form>sigun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a breed of <tr>chicken</tr> raised for meat purposes, referred to for their quality of developing feathers on the neck, thighs, and wings late in life.

<p><form>sigunda</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>second gear</tr>. <number>2</number> the second player in group games played by <corr sic="an "></corr>individuals in succession</b>. <number>3</number> the second voice in group singing. <form>&mdash; mánu</form> <number>a</number> <tr>second hand</tr>. <i>Pridyidir nga sigunda mánu,</i> A second-hand refrigerator. <pb n=891><number>b</number> a woman that has had sexual experiences prior to marriage. <i>Nakaasawag sigunda mánu ang laláking himilì,</i> He was so choosy in the end he had to settle for a <tr>second-hand</tr> woman. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26; b6]</itype> do, happen after the first thing happened, was done. <i>Ang pagkasúnug sa ílang balay nasigunda ang ílang Birtu,</i> After their house burnt, the same thing happened to Berto's. <i>Gisigundahan siya ug pátid human siya matumba,</i> After he fell, they kicked him. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> put in second gear. <i>Isigunda ang makina ug dulhugun,</i> Put the car into second when you are headed downhill. <form>-rya</form> <xr>= <sc>SIKUNDARYU</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sigundu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> second to perform in group games performed by players in a series. <number>2</number> <tr>second</tr>, one-sixtieth of a minute. <form>&mdash; anyu</form> second year of college or secondary school. <form>&mdash; upisyal</form> <tr>second mate</tr>.

<p><form>sigurádu</form> <tr>sure</tr>, [so-and-so] is true without a doubt. <i>Ug mugíkan ka ug alas sayis, sigurádu nga túa ka sa mga alas unsi,</i> If you leave at six, you are sure to be there at about eleven o'clock. <i>Dílì katuhúan nutisyáha! Sigurádu ka?</i> That's unbelievable news! Are you sure? <i>&lsquo;Muadtu kas bayli rung gabíi?<corr>&rsquo;</corr>-&lsquo;Sigurádu!&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Will you go to the dance tonight?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Sure!&rsquo; <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be sure. <i>Nakabayad kug sitinta apan nasigurádu na ang ákung aplikasiyun,</i> I paid seventy, but my application is a <tr>sure thing</tr>.

<p><form>siguridad</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>security</tr>, freedom from danger. <i>Ang gikasabútan naglakbit sa siguridad sa átung násud,</i> The agreement included the security of our country. <number>2</number> assurance of compliance. <i>Kadtung panagsabúta way siguridad sa pagtúman kay walay mga papílis,</i> There is no assurance that they will comply because there are no documents.

<p><form>sigurista</form> <pos>a</pos> inclined to take the greatest possible advantage from an agreement. <i>Sigurista kaáyu ka kay dì ka mupahulam ug kwarta nga dílì kinuháan dáans pátung,</i> You drive too hard a bargain because you take out the interest in advance when you lend money. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> inclined to take undue advantages.

<p><form>sigúru</form> <number>1</number> <tr>sure</tr>. <i>&lsquo;Muadtu ka sa bayli rung gabíi?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Sigúru!&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Will you go to the dance tonight?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Sure!&rsquo; <i>Uu, sigúru kaáyu ku nga mau nay íyang gisulti,</i> Yes, I am very sure that that is what he said. <i>Way sigúru ang ímung kaugmáun,</i> Your future is uncertain. <number>1a</number> <form>butang sa &mdash;</form> <tr>make sure</tr> of s.t. <i>Ug makig-áway ka, ibutang sa sigúru nga náa ka sa bintáhà,</i> If you pick fights, make sure you have the upper hand. <number>2</number> <tr>most likely</tr>, <tr>probably</tr>. <i>Dì lang ku musulti apan muanhi sigúru tu siya,</i> I won't say for sure, but he probably will come. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> do s.t. <tr>without fail</tr>; be sure of doing or obtaining s.t. <i>Musigúru (manigúru) ka ug anhi sa may mga alas unsi,</i> Come without fail at about eleven o'clock. <i>Sigurúun ta ni ug báwì kay makalimut siya nyà ug úlì,</i> Let's be sure to take this back because he might forget to return it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> <tr>take for granted</tr>, that s.t. will happen. <i>Ayaw kug sigurúa, kay wà ka kahibáwu sa ákung abilidad,</i> Don't be too sure of me because you don't know my ability. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2N]</itype> be sure to do s.t. for oneself not minding or considering others. <i>Misigúru (nanigúru) siyag lingkud kay daghang pasahíru,</i> He made sure to get himself a seat because there were lots of passengers. <number>4</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>insure</tr> s.t. <i>Way kumpaníya musigúru sa ímung balay nga dáan kaáyu,</i> No company will insure your house. It's so old. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>insurance</tr>. <i>Sitinta písus mátag túig ang ákung balayran sa sigúru,</i> My insurance is twenty pesos a year. <form>&mdash; dibída</form> <tr>life insurance</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>insurance company</tr>. <i>Ang Pil-am usa sa mga dagkung sigúru dinhi sa Pilipínas,</i> Phil-Am is one of the big insurance companies in the Philippines. <form>kasigurúhan, kasigurúan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>assurance</tr>. <i>Walay kasigurúan tung átung hangyù,</i> There's no assurance that our request will be granted. <number>2</number> <tr>protection</tr>, <tr>safety</tr> from s.t. <i>Álang sa kasigurúan sa pangláwas mu, inum sa Tunikun,</i> For the protection of your health, drink Tonicon.

<p><form>sigwálu</form> (from <ix>walu</ix>) <pos>n</pos> a deadly snake of shallow sea water. A victim is generally given only eight hours to live. If he survives he is given another eight days, then eight weeks, and so forth. <i>Cf.</i> <xr><sc>TAGIWÁLU</sc></xr> <ix>under</ix> <xr><sc>WALU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>*sigwar pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> show s.t. off. <i>Mapagarbúhun kaáyu siyang mipasigwar sa íyang singsing brilyanti,</i> She is proudly <tr>showing off</tr> her diamond ring.

<p><form>sihag</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>transparent</tr> or <tr>translucent</tr>. <i>Sihag kaáyu siyag bláwus,</i> She has a blouse on you can see through. <number>2</number> clearly visible through s.t. <i>Sihag na ang kadaúgan,</i> The glow of victory is visible at the end of the tunnel. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> be, become transparent or translucent. <i>Musihag ang papil ug duhígan ug asíti,</i> Paper becomes translucent if oil is smeared on it. <number>1a</number> <itype>[B5; a]</itype> be, become <tr>apparent</tr>, <tr>clear</tr>, <tr>understandable</tr>. <i>Kalit nga misihag sa ákung panumdúman ang buut níyang ipasabut,</i> It suddenly <tr>dawned</tr> on me what she meant. <number>2</number> be visible through s.t. <i>Misihag ang lángit sa buslut sa atup,</i> The sky shone through the hole in the roof. <form>paN-</form> <pb n=892><pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b5]</itype> read the past, present, or future through some magic article or power. <i>Kahibáwu man kung muabut mu kay gipanihag (gipanihagan) man nákù,</i> I knew that you were coming because I saw it in my crystal ball. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> wear s.t. people can see through. <i>Uy nanihag ka kay wà ka tingáli magkamisun,</i> People can see right through your clothes because you are apparently not wearing a slip. <pos>n</pos> <tr>crystal ball</tr> or power by which one can read the past, future, or a person's thoughts. <form>panihagsíhag ang tutunlan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> be very <tr>beautiful</tr> (lit. for the throat to be white and transparent). <i>Daghang mga laláki ang nabatubaláni sa babáying nanihagsíhag ang tutunlan,</i> Many men became magnetized by that beautiful woman. <form>sihagsíhag, sihagsihágan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. very tiny <tr>fish</tr> made into salted preserves.

<p><form>sihì, síhì</form> <pos>n</pos> nerite <tr>snails</tr>.

<p><form>sihud</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small fish trap made of flexible vines, used to scoop small fish from shallow waters. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> fish with the <ix>sihud</ix>. <i>Kalita pagkabù ang isdà ug magsíhud ka,</i> Pull the trap up with a jerk when you fish with a <ix>sihud</ix>.

<p><form>sii</form> <xr>= <sc>UGUD</sc>, except after <ix>ra</ix>.</xr>

<p><form>siin</form> <number>1</number> <tr>where</tr> did or does? <i>Siin man paingun ag irù?</i> Where did the dog go? <i>Siin man siya iskuyla?</i> Where does he go to school? <number>2</number> <tr>which</tr> (of several)? <i>Siin man íning duha ímung gustu?</i> Which of the two do you like?

<p><form>sik</form>. abbreviation for <ix>sikritaryu</ix>, secretary.

<p><form>sikà</form> <xr>= <sc>SIKÀSIKÀ</sc>.</xr> <form>sikàsikà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> talk harshly and loudly in giving commands. <i>Gisikàsikaan ang suluguun sa dunya,</i> The lady shouted at the maid, giving her one order after another. <form>sikàsikaun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>disrespectful</tr> in speech.

<p><form>síkad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> propel s.t. with the feet, bending the knees and kicking the legs. <i>Sikári ang síya arun dílì na lang nákù kuháun,</i> <tr>Kick</tr> the chair over here so I don't have to get it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>pedal</tr>. <i>Kumpása ug síkad ang makina,</i> Pedal the sewing machine rhythmically. <number>3</number> <itype>[AC2; ac]</itype> have two fighting cocks spar by holding them by the tail and allowing their legs to scratch or kick the ground. <i>Kanúnayng isíkad ang manuk arun lig-un ang tiil,</i> Always have the cock spar to make its legs strong. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <formx>&mdash; ang manuk</formx> for a candidate for a woman's hand to say his piece. <i>Dílì maáyung musíkad ang ákung manuk kay wà sugta,</i> My man doesn't know how to talk to women because he was unsuccessful. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>ANINIKAD</sc></xr>.</xr> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> base an argument or belief. <i>Ayawg ipasíkad ang ímung hukum sa mga tabìtábì,</i> Don't base your decision on gossip. <form>pina-</form> <pos>n</pos> based on. <i>Panglíhuk nga pinasíkad sa maáyung pamatásan,</i> Behavior that is based on good manners. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> push with the feet exerting effort. <number>2a</number> kick the ground, as if eager to fight. <i>Ag túru nagpanikad kay gustu nang muhasmag nákù,</i> The bull is pawing the ground because it wants to charge me. <number>2b</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> be very eager to do s.t. <i>Nagpanikad siya ug adtu sa Manílà,</i> He is very eager to go to Manila. <form>-um-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> originate, start from. <i>Ang ílang áway nagsumikad sa pagbáhin sa irinsiya,</i> Their quarrel started from the apportioning of the inheritance. <form>sikadsikad</form>. <form>aN-r-(&rarr;)</form> <xr>see <sc>ANINIKAD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>síkan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>second</tr> in rank, prize, sequence. <i>Akuy síkan, bayinti ang ákung prayis,</i> I was the second. I got twenty pesos as a prize. <form>&mdash; bis</form> <tr>second base</tr> of baseball. <form>&mdash; grid</form> <tr>second grade</tr>. <form>&mdash; han</form> <tr>second hand</tr>. <form>&mdash; hap</form> second half of a game. <form>&mdash; plís</form> <tr>second place</tr>. <form>&mdash; plísir</form> one who placed second. <form>&mdash; rawun</form> second round in boxing. <form>&mdash; yir</form> second year of high school or college. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> obtain, get to be the second place. <form>&mdash; dimusyun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>second the motion</tr>.[+]

<p><form>sikandir</form> <pos>n</pos> a boxer's second.

<p><form>sikápat</form> (from <ix>upat</ix>) <pos>n</pos> a coin of Spanish times originally worth a quarter of a peso, but ten centavos in the 1900's.

<p><form>sikat<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SIKLAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>síkat</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>cocky</tr>, showing off one's good looks or posture. <i>Síkat kaáyu siya nga mulakaw,</i> He walks in a very flippant and cocky manner. <form>(&rarr;)<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> worthy of praise or envy. <i>Sikat kaáyu siyag kutsi,</i> He has a flashy car. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>show off</tr>. <i>Mupasíkat dáyun siya ug náay mga dalágang nagtan-aw,</i> He shows off if there are girls around.

<p><form>síkaw</form> <pos>a</pos> being in large numbers and moving about noisily. <i>Síkaw kaáyu ang mga táwu didtu sa tabuan,</i> There is a noisy, bustling crowd in the market. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6]</itype> be noisy and moving about in different directions.

<p><form>sikawalu</form> <pos>n</pos> coin worth half a sikápat.

<p><form>sikaysíkay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> strive to make a move. <i>Misikaysíkay (nanikaysíkay) pagbángun ang hubug,</i> The drunk strove to get up. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2N]</itype> strive, struggle for existence. <i>Basta musikaysíkay (manikaysíkay) ang táwu, mabúhì giyud,</i> If a man struggles, he will survive. <number>3</number> <itype>[AN]</itype> buzz about in some activity. <i>Sayu sa buntag nagsikaysíkay (nagpanikaysíkay) nag mga kumpradur,</i> Early in the morning the dealers in produce were already buzzing about.

<p><form>sikbat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a12b2]</itype> for a fierce animal or <pb n=893>an angry person to snarl at s.o. suddenly. <i>Gisikbat ang iring nga midúul sa irù nga nagkaun,</i> The dog snarled at the cat that came near him while he was eating. <i>Hingsikbatan ku siya kay midúul man nákù ug nangáyù ug itan-aw sa sini,</i> I snapped at him when he came to me asking for money to go to the movies.

<p><form>sikbit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>contiguous</tr>, located next to. <i>Sikbit siya nákug lingkud,</i> He sat next to me. <i>Nagsikbit ang ámung lúti,</i> Our lots are adjacent. <form>ka-</form> s.o. who is located next to s.t.

<p><form>sikbut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> cut s.t. with a single stroke toward the agent, esp. with a sickle. <i>Sikbuta lang ang písì arun maputul dáyun,</i> Just cut the rope to get it loose quickly. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> <tr>swipe</tr>. <i>Nanikbut ang bátag lumbuy sa tindíra,</i> The little boy swiped a <ix>lumbuy</ix> from the fruit seller. <number>3</number> pick out with a small dip net. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sickle</tr>. <number>2</number> small dip net. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b1]</itype> finagle s.t. out of s.o. without much fuss and bother. <i>Manikbut siya ug plíti sa mga amígu,</i> He gets his friends to pay his fare for him.

<p><form>sikdu<sub>1</sub>, sikdù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> scoop s.t. up quickly by tossing, flipping up a container. <i>Sikdúha ang binlud. Ayawg iípun sa bugas,</i> Remove the fine meal by scooping it off as you flip it. Don't put it together with the grain. <pos>n</pos> <tr>scoop</tr>. <b><corr sic="(&mdash;)">(&rarr;)</corr>, ig-l-</b> <xr>= <sc>SIKDU</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>sikdu<sub>2</sub>, sikdù<sub>2</sub></form>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> <tr>jab</tr>, <tr>nudge</tr>. <i>Sikdúun ta lang kag makigpamaúlì na ku,</i> I'll just nudge you when I want to get home.

<p><form>sikdù<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SID-UK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sikdul</form> <xr>= <sc>SIKDU<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sikging</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> snatch at s.t. live suddenly to catch it. <i>Biktun pa, pára ituy! Sikgínga lang,</i> You don't have to trap a puppy! Just grab it!

<p><form>siki</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fetlock</tr>, a thumb-like projection above the foot in the legs of animals.

<p><form>sikil</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B3(1)46; bP]</itype> for s.t. long to <tr>jut out</tr>. <i>Misikil ang bukug sa íyang síku sa íyang pagkah&umacracu;g,</i> The bone in his elbow stuck out when he fell down. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> nudge s.o., esp. with the elbow. <i>Musikil giyud siya nákù inig-ági níya nákù,</i> He nudges me every time he passes by me. <number>2a</number> pierce with a horn or tusk. <i>Ang túru nga misikil sa mag-uúma,</i> The bull that gored the farmer. <pos>n</pos> <tr>protuberance</tr>, s.t. that juts out.

<p><form>síkit</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>close</tr>, with least distance. <i>Síkit kaáyu siya nga mubayli,</i> He dances very close. <i>Didtu magtágù ang ilagà, síkit sa busaug,</i> The rat hid close to the floor joists. <i>Síkit silang mga higála,</i> They are close friends. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> be or get close to each other. <i>Sikíta ug butang ang mga misitíra,</i> Put the flower pots close to each other.

<p><form>siklahun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>scarce</tr>. <i>Lisud makatrabahu ang táwung siklahun ug ininglis,</i> It's hard for people whose English is limited to find work. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be scarce. <i>Nagkasiklahun na run ang bábuy ihálas,</i> Wild pigs are getting scarce now.

<p><form>si-klam</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>C-clamp</tr>.

<p><form>siklap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4(1)]</itype> take a quick glance at. <i>Nasiklapan ku siya nga nagbaylu sa baráha,</i> I caught him switching the cards around. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> take a glance at. <i>Mupasiklap siya nákù matag karun ug unyà,</i> She takes a glance at me now and then.

<p><form>siklat</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fence or wall made of bamboo slats woven through or nailed to two or more horizontal slats. <number>2</number> one of the vertical slats of such a fence. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b5]</itype> put siklat fencing. <i>Siklatun (siklatan) ku ang mga manuk,</i> I will enclose the chickens with a fence of bamboo slats.

<p><form>siklib</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sick leave</tr>. <i>Way siklib ang ámung gitrabahúan,</i> There's no sick leave in the company I'm working for. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>take sick leave</tr>.

<p><form>siklista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cyclist</tr>, bicycle rider.

<p><form>siklit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b4(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> get a glimpse of. <i>Nakasiklit ku sa íyang gisulat,</i> I got a glimpse of what he wrote. <number>2</number> come to notice by chance. <i>Hingsiklitan nákung dihay mihíkap sa ákung bulsa,</i> I was suddenly aware of s.o. touching my pocket.

<p><form>siklut</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>BALINSAY</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>BALINSAY</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> flip s.t. with the fingers by holding the middle finger with the thumb and letting it go with a snap. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> obtain s.t. with ease. <i>Usáhay makasiklut siyag mamisus sa pamantayg awtu,</i> Sometimes he gets a peso for watching cars.

<p><form>sikma</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2N2; b6]</itype> <tr>blow one's nose</tr>. <form>&mdash; ug dugù</form> <itype>[A1]</itype> have a nosebleed. <i>Nagsikma intáwun ug dugù ang aláut sa kakusug sa sukmag nga íyang nadáwat,</i> The poor fellow was hit so hard he had a nosebleed. <form>&mdash; ug kusáhus</form> <itype>[A13]</itype> get a good punch in the nose (lit. blow jerked meat out of the nose). <form>&mdash; ug manintimus, trín</form> blow a long column from the nose after crying. <i>Tan-áwa lang unyà ninyu dì ba manikmag manintimus kining búang nga asáwa,</i> Just watch if that crazy wife of mine doesn't blow her nose from crying.

<p><form>sikmat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2N; b6]</itype> snarl at suddenly and without warning. <i>Takwáhaw lang kung gisikmátan sa irù,</i> The dog just suddenly snarled at me.

<p><form>sikmul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac1]</itype> <number>1</number> touch s.t. lightly to the mouth or the mouth lightly to it. <i>Igù lang <pb n=894>misikmul sa kan-unun ang irù ug milakaw,</i> The dog just sniffed at the food and walked away. <i>Sikmúla (isikmul) ang imáhin sa santus,</i> Touch the image of the saint lightly to your lips. <number>2</number> touch s.t. to a child or baby animal's mouth just before he begins to eat or talk, an action which is thought to influence the child's or animal's behavior for life. <i>Sikmúla (isikmul) ug hulmígas ang mga ituy arun maísug,</i> Give ants to the puppies before you wean them to make them become fierce. <number>3</number> hone s.t. by rubbing it back and forth lightly over a sharpener. <pos>n</pos> the thing put to a child's or young animal's mouth to influence its future behavior. <i>Ang sikmul nga tamalà makapalistu sa paniil sa bátà, A small octopus is a good inauguratory feed for the child because it will make him quick on his feet.</i>

<p><form>sikpaw</form> <xr>= <sc>SIGPAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sikrit</form> <xr>= <sc>SIKRIT KANG</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>KANG<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; pákit</form> <number>1</number> <tr>watch pocket</tr>. <number>2</number> pocket sewn in the side of a dress, esp. uniform at the seam. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> in blackjack, take an additional card. <i>Musikrit ku kay layù ra sa bayntiúnu ang ákù,</i> Hit me because I'm miles away from twenty one.

<p><form>sikríta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>plainclothesman</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> be, make one a plainclothesman.

<p><form>sikritári</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> secretary in an office. <number>2</number> an officer of the government who administers a department. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> be, appoint s.o. as secretary.

<p><form>sikritarya</form> <pos>n</pos> lady secretary in an office. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> be, make s.o. a secretary. <form>-l</form> <pos>n</pos> secretarial course.

<p><form>sikritaryu</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>SIKRITARYA</sc> (male).</xr>

<p><form>sikrítu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>secret</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>watch pocket</tr>. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>SIKRIT KANG</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>KANG<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> do s.t. secretly. <i>Sikritúhan ta kag ingun arun ikaw ray mahibalu,</i> I will tell you secretly so that you will be the only one to know.

<p><form>sikrítu diamur</form> <xr>= <sc>AMUR SIKRÍTU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>siksbay siks</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. six-wheeled motor transport with six driving wheels, used by the armed forces. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> travel in a six-by-six.

<p><form>siksi</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sexy</tr>, stimulating erotic feelings. <i>Si Ikang siksi kaáyu nga mamustúra,</i> Ikang is very sexy when she dresses up. <i>Kanang pilikuláha siksi kunu kaáyu,</i> That is supposed to be an erotically stimulating film. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a2]</itype> be, become sexy.

<p><form>siksik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> go over an area in systematic detail to search for s.t., ignoring no inch. <i>Ang kanipáang ílang gisiksíkan sa bátang nawálà,</i> The nipa swamps they combed in search of the lost child. <number>2</number> screen applicants for a post. <i>Átung siksíkun sila ug maáyu arun mapílì nátù ang kinamaayúhan,</i> We will screen them carefully to get the very best. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>HIN-</sc>.</xr> <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for birds and fowls to preen their feathers. <pos>n</pos> research, detailed investigation. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN2; b6]</itype> search for nits in the head by running the strands of hair between thumb and forefinger. <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>researcher</tr>.

<p><form>siksiríkay</form> <xr>= <sc>SITSIRÍKA<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>siksiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> section of a certain grade in school. <i>Duha ka siksiyun ang tirsíru grádu,</i> There are two sections in the third grade. <number>2</number> section in an article, chapter, law, and the like. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> set up sections in school.

<p><form>siksrawundir</form> <pos>n</pos> boxer who fights in six-round bouts preliminary to the main event. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become a six-rounder.

<p><form>sikstináyin</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>sixty-nine</tr> position in sexual intercourse. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> do the <tr>sixty-nine</tr>.

<p><form>sikstin kards</form> <pos>n</pos> a manner of playing mahjong using sixteen pieces.

<p><form>sikstring</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. guitar with six strings. <number>2</number> the particular tuning of such a guitar (D or E, A, D, G, B, E). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> tune a guitar in this way.

<p><form>sikstu grádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sixth grade</tr>.

<p><form>siks-uklák</form> <pos>n</pos> aim at six o'clock&mdash;i.e. slightly below the target.

<p><form>sikswa</form> <pos>a</pos> sexy, said in humorous reference to effeminate boys.

<p><form>siktur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sector</tr>, area appertaining to a certain armed force.

<p><form>siku</form> <xr>= <sc>GWAYABANU</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; karabaw</form> <xr>= <sc>SIKU</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; kapúti</form> <xr>= <sc>TSÍKU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>síku<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>elbow</tr>. <number>2</number> a unit of measurement reckoned from the tip of the middle finger to the elbow, used to measure yarn. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a2]</itype> nudge with the elbow. <i>Ug dì ku nímu paagiun sikhun ta ka,</i> If you do not let me pass, I will hit you with my elbow. <form>sikúhan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> nudge each other with the elbows. <form>sikuhan</form> <pos>n</pos> a needle used for mending nets, made of a flat piece of bamboo about 6&ndash;10&Prime; long with a pointed end that has a U-shaped slot and notch at the opposite end. <form>maN-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>SÍKU<sub>1</sub></sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr>

<p><form>síku<sub>2</sub></form> (from <ix>risíku</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AP; a12P]</itype> boil off water from s.t. as in making syrup. <i>Ikay musíku (mupasíku) sa dugà arun maispísu,</i> Boil the water off from the juice so that it will get thick. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> for s.t. to be cooked until it is thick and hard. <i>Ilúnud ang pilit kun musíku na ang latik,</i> Put in the rice when the syrup gets sticky. <i>Lamì ang humay nga sikúhun paglung-ag,</i> Rice tastes good when boiled hard. <pos>n</pos> s.t. cooked hard or thick.

<p><form>síku<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> rigidly strict with an air of superiority <pb n=895>and unapproachability. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be haughty. <i>Nagkasiku siya sukad makabana ug Katsílà,</i> She has become strict and haughty since she married a Spaniard. <form>sikusíku</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b6]</itype> act haughtily strict towards people. <i>Ayaw kug sikusikúhi kay suhítu ku sa ímung kaági,</i> Don't try to be haughty and stand-offish to me because I know where you came from.

<p><form>sikuláti</form> <xr>= <sc>SIKWÁTI</sc>, <pos>n</pos>, <i>v1.</i></xr>

<p><form>sikuluhíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>psychology</tr>. <number>2</number> the knack of dealing with people to get them to perform in a desired way, read their feelings. <i>Ug may sikuluhíya ka pa wà lang untà nímu palita arun itanyag ug barátu,</i> If you'd had a better knowledge of human behavior, you wouldn't have bought it right away so that you could have gotten it cheap.

<p><form>sikundarya</form> <pos>n</pos> secondary school (grades seven through ten).

<p><form>síkund grid</form> <xr>= <sc>SÍKAN GRID</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>SÍKAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>síkup<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> catch fish or shellfish by running a net or hands along the bottom of the water. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> arrest, usually after a dragnet operation. <i>Ug sikúpun ka sa ipbiay walà kay iskapaturya,</i> If the FBI institutes a dragnet to find you, there is no escape. <number>2a</number> trap an elusive bachelor into marriage. <form>sinikpan</form> <pos>n</pos> fish or shellfish caught by hand.

<p><form>síkup<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. bird of prey. <form>mata ug &mdash;</form> <pos>a</pos> hawk-eyed.

<p><form>sikuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> steal s.t. not of great value (slang). <i>Kinsay nagsikuy sa ákung bulpin?</i> Who swiped my pen?

<p><form>sikwa</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. squash: <bio>Luffa cylindrica</bio>.

<p><form>sikwalu</form> <xr>= <sc>SIKAWALU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sikwáti</form> <pos>n</pos> chocolate, a beverage made of sugar and ground roasted cacao beans, served hot and thick. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make, have chocolate. <number>2</number> <itype>[A123P; a12]</itype> defeat decisively. <i>Sa baskit nasikwáti mi,</i> We were trounced in the basketball game. <number>2a</number> punish severely. <i>Bantay ka lang ug sakpan kang Pápa kay masikwáti ka giyud,</i> Watch out if Daddy catches you. You will get it. <number>2b</number> perform badly. <i>Pisti tung prublimáha. Mau tuy nakasikwáti (nakapasikwáti) nákù,</i> That damn problem was my downfall in the exam. <number>2c</number> be erotically stimulated to a high degree. <i>Ug muuban nang bayhána nákù sa sini, masikwáti giyud,</i> If that woman goes to the show with me, I'll get her all hopped up.

<p><form>sikway</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> shove to the side with a sweeping motion of the arms. <i>Sígi siyang sikway sa mga bugang pagsúut níya sa kalibunan,</i> He kept shoving away the weeds to the sides as he went through the thicket. <i>Hisikwayan nákù ang básu maung nahúlug,</i> I happened to knock my arm against the glass, and it fell.

<p><form>sikyuriti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>security guard</tr>. <form>&mdash; gard</form> <xr>= <sc>SIKYURITI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>síl</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> hold a bargain sale. <i>Nagsíl karun sa Wayitguld,</i> They're having a sale at the White Gold. <form>Krismas, prumusiyun, payir dámids, watir dámids &mdash;</form> Christmas, promotional, fire, water damage sale.

<p><form>sila</form> <tr>they</tr>. <i>Muadtu sila sa Mandáwi,</i> They will go to Mandaue. <b>&mdash; si, -ng <r>[<ix>name</ix>]</r></b> [name] and his friends or family. <i>Túa na sila si (silang) Prid,</i> Fred and his friends have left. <form>silahánun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> townmates. <i>Mutábang giyud si Pidru kang Husi kay silahánun ra,</i> Pedro will surely help José because they are townmates. <number>2</number> <tr>distant relatives</tr>. <i>Silahánun si Piduy ug Baldu kay mag-ágaw ílang isig ka apuhan,</i> Pedoy and Baldy are distantly related because their grandfathers are cousins. <form>níla</form> <number>1</number> <ix>gen.</ix>: of them, by them. <i>Ang awtu níla bag-u,</i> Their car is new. <i>Gibaligyà níla,</i> They sold it. <number>2</number> short for <bx>kaníla</bx>. <form>kaníla</form> <ix>dat.</ix>: them. <i>Wà ku kakità kaníla,</i> I have not seen them. <i>Kanílang duha, kinsay mas taas?</i> Of the two of them, which one is taller? <form>íla, iláha</form> <ix>preposed gen.</ix>: their, by them. <i>Ang ílang amahan,</i> Their father. <i>Ílang gipalit,</i> They bought it. <number>2</number> thing that's theirs. <i>Ang ákung awtu bag-u, ang íla (iláha) dáan,</i> My car is new. Theirs is old. <number>3</number> their home, place. <i>Háin man ang íla?</i> Where is their house? <i>Adtu ku sa ílang (íla ka) Husi,</i> I'm going to José's house. <form>silasíla</form> <pos>n</pos> related to each other<!-- <tr>relatives</tr> -->. <i>Si Anuy ug si Badung? Ah, silasíla ra nà,</i> Anoy and Badong? Oh, they are related to each other. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> do s.t. by themselves. <i>Nagsilasíla ra sila ug pangáun, walà manawag,</i> They just ate by themselves. They did not invite us. <form>ilaíla</form> <xr>= <sc>SILASÍLA</sc>, <pos>v</pos>.</xr> <form>ilahánun</form> <xr>= <sc>SILAHÁNUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>silab<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> set fire to, put s.t. burning close to s.t. else. <i>Ayawg silabi ang ákung balay,</i> Don't set my house on fire. <i>Silaban ku áring sulù nang nawung ánang irúa,</i> I will put this burning torch to that dog's face.

<p><form>silab<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>blade</tr>, the sharpened edge of a cutting tool. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put a blade on, make into a blade. <i>Gisilaban ni Ingku ang kawáyan,</i> Ingko made a cutting edge on the piece of bamboo.

<p><form>sílab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> for the leaves of plants to become reddish. <i>Ang taas nga húlaw mauy nakasílab (nakapasílab) sa dáhun sa lubi,</i> The coconut leaves became reddish because of the long drought.

<p><form>silaba</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>syllable</tr>.

<pb n=896>

<p><form>silabi</form> <xr>= <sc>SULÁBI</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>LABI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>silabun</form> <xr>= <sc>LABUN</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p><form>sílag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b8]</itype> <number>1</number> be, become envious. <i>Kasilágan ka sa mga táwu ug ikaw ray mag-awtu,</i> The people will be envious of you if you are the only one who drives a car. <number>2</number> have an intense hatred for s.o. <i>Nasílag siya sa nagpildi níya,</i> She came to hate the man who stole her chastity. <i>Gikasilágan ku ang tanang Katsílà,</i> I hate all Spaniards. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>enmity</tr>, <tr>hatred</tr>. <i>Kasílag nga lubngánan ray kinutúban,</i> A hatred that will end only in the grave. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>envious</tr>.

<p><form>siláhis</form> <pos>n</pos> low-hanging, light-gray clouds, the movement of which indicate the velocity of the wind. <i>Basta kusug ang siláhis may bagyung muabut,</i> Fast-moving clouds indicate an approaching storm.

<p><form>silak, sílak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shellac</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>shellac</tr> s.t.

<p><form>sílak<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for the sun to be shining clear and bright. <i>Sílak na, ay na lang pagpáyung,</i> The sun is out now. You don't need your umbrella. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> for it to be clear and bright. <i>Masilákun ang kaugmáun sa táwung buútan,</i> One who behaves well has a bright future.

<p><form>sílang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S; b4(1)]</itype> for heavenly bodies to rise. <i>Hingsilangan mi sa adlaw kay dúgay mi nga nangatúlug,</i> We went to bed late and got up after the sun rose. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> appear, become known with fame and honor. <i>Usa ka bantúgan nga magbabalak misílang kanátù,</i> A famed poet is born among us. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> peep, peer through. <i>Nagpasílang sa largabista ang kapitan,</i> The ship captain is peeping through the binoculars. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>east</tr>, general direction where the sun rises. <form>halayù, layù nga &mdash;</form> <tr>Far East</tr>. <form>kinatung-an nga &mdash;</form> <tr>Middle East</tr>. <form>duul nga &mdash;</form> <tr>Near East</tr>.

<p><form>silangga</form> <pos>n</pos> body of water separating neighboring islets.

<p><form>silanis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>celanese</tr>.

<p><form>siláub</form> (from <ix>dáub</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> burst into flame, <tr>flare up</tr> and burn brightly. <i>Tayhúpa ang mga bága arun musiláub,</i> Blow on the live coals so they will burst into flame. <number>2</number> for emotions to flare up. <i>Hináya lang ug sulti. Musiláub ka man lang dáyun,</i> Say it calmly. Don't just flare up suddenly. <number>3</number> <itype>[B246]</itype> for war to break out. <i>Misiláub ang ikaduhang gúbat sa kalibútan sa 1941,</i> The Second World War broke out in 1941.

<p><form>sílaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ray</tr>, <tr>beam</tr> of emitted light. <i>Ang sílaw sa adlaw,</i> The sun's rays. <i>Ang sílaw sa sugà sa trák,</i> The glare from the headlights of the truck. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> <tr>shine</tr>, emit rays of light. <i>Nagsilaw ang ispat sa íyang nawung,</i> The flashlight was shining into his face. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>brilliance</tr>.

<p><form>silbátu</form> <xr>= <sc>SIRBÁTU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>silbi, silbidur, silbidúra</form> <xr>= <sc>SIRBI</sc></xr>, <xr><sc>SIRBIDUR</sc></xr>, <xr><sc>SIRBIDÚRA</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>SIRBI<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>silda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cell</tr> of a prison or convent.

<p><form>silhig</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN2; a]</itype> <tr>sweep</tr> or <tr>rake</tr> a surface to remove dirt. <i>Silhígun mu ang ginabas,</i> Sweep away the sawdust. <i>Silhígan nátù ang tugkaran,</i> Let's rake the grass. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> remove from office in numbers. <i>Kadtung walà mubutar nákù silhígun sa katungdánan,</i> Those who did not vote for me will be removed from office. <pos>n</pos> <tr>broom</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa ngípun</form> toothpick (humorous). <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sweeper</tr>.

<p><form>síli</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pepper</tr>: <bio>Capsicum spp</bio>. <form>&mdash; nga amirikánu</form> a large yellow variety. <form>&mdash; nga ispáda</form> long variety: <bio>Capsicum anuum var. longum</bio>. <form>&mdash; nga kagùkù</form> the large sweet pepper which turns red when ripe: <bio>Capsicum anuum</bio>. <form>&mdash; kulikut</form> tiny, hot, red peppers: <bio>Capsicum frutescens</bio>. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> use, put hot peppers to, into s.t. <i>Musili ka ba?</i> Do you use pepper in your food? <form>&mdash; kay gihángan</form> <itype>[A13]</itype> for s.o. to get hurt by some indirect hints which refer to what he was actually doing (if the shoe fits, put it on). <i>Nahimangud si Líta sa ákung sulti. Nagsili tingáli kay gihángan man,</i> Lita was hurt by what I said. It probably was true. (Lit. She must be putting pepper in her food if she feels it is too spicy.) <form>sinilian, sinilihan</form> <pos>a</pos> spiced with hot peppers<!-- <tr>peppered</tr> -->.

<p><form>silib</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sunray</tr> <number>2</number> place where rain can come in. <i>Silib dihà sa bintánà kun mag-ulan,</i> The rain comes in the window when it rains. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b2]</itype> for the sun to shine from behind s.t., for rain to come in. <i>Maháyag ang kwartu ug musilib ang adlaw gíkan sa kakahúyan,</i> The room will become bright when the sun appears from behind the trees. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> appear as if coming out from hiding. <i>Pahíyum nga misilib sa íyang nawung,</i> A smile that appeared on her face. <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> go and take a look. <i>Ákung silbun ang kábaw nga ákung gitugway,</i> I will go and see the carabao I put out in the pasture. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>peep</tr>, look at while remaining hidden. <i>Ngánung nagpasilib man ka dihà luyu sa kurtína?</i> Why are you peeping from behind the curtain? <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; c]</itype> look furtively out of the corner of the eyes. <i>Dílì siya mutárung ug tan-aw. Mupasílib lang,</i> He doesn't look straight at you. He just looks furtively from the corner of his eyes.

<p><form>silibr&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>celebrate</tr>, observe the memory of an event. <i>Dílì siya musilibr&acaron;r sa íyang adlaw,</i> He will not celebrate his birthday. <form>silibrasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>celebration</tr>.

<pb n=897>

<p><form>silid</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>degree</tr>, a course of study or career. <i>Silid sa pagkadukt&ucaron;r,</i> Medical course.

<p><form>sílid</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bedroom</tr>, <tr>room</tr>.

<p><form>sílik</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dorsal fin</tr> of fishes. <number>2</number> analogous growth on reptiles. <number>3</number> crease along a trouser leg. <number>4</number> in a hip roof, the junction of the lateral and end slope which forms linear edges somewhat in appearance like a dorsal fin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2456]</itype> for a crease to form along a trouser leg. <form>-an</form> <pos><corr sic=n>a</corr></pos> <tr>crested</tr>, having a crest.

<p><form>silik-an</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>SIAK</sc>, <i>3.</i></xr>

<p><form>silin</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. one-stringed musical instrument, played with a bow, resting on the ground, high in pitch. The sound is produced by a trumpet at the bottom.

<p><form>silindru</form> <pos>n</pos> cylinder of an engine.

<p><form>silindrun</form> <xr>= <sc>SALINDRUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>silindrus</form> <xr>= <sc>SILINDRU</sc></xr> (plural).</xr>

<p><form>siling</form> <xr>= <sc>INGUN<sub>2</sub></sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p><form>síling</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> fire shells, <tr>bombard</tr>. <pos>n</pos> act of shelling out.

<p><form>sil-ing</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> look at s.t. closely to study it. <i>Gisil-ing níya ang títik nga milakra sa papil,</i> He studied the letters that appeared on the page. <number>2</number> peep, look hard through a small opening. <i>Gisil-ing níya sa bungbung kung kinsay nahiabut,</i> He peeped through the slit in the wall to see who was coming. <form>-an(&rarr;), -anan</form> <pos>n</pos> opening one can peep through.

<p><form>silíngan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>neighbor</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; c3]</itype> <number>1</number> be, have one for a neighbor. <i>Lisud ikasilíngan ang palaaway,</i> It's difficult to happen to have a quarrelsome person for a neighbor. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>border</tr>, verge on. <i>Ang ílang kinataw-an musilíngan sa biaybíay,</i> Their laughter borders on derision. <form>-an(&rarr;), ka-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>yard</tr>, area surrounding the house. <number>2</number> <tr>neighboring</tr><note> adjective!</note>. <i>Kasilinganan (silinganan) nga lungsud,</i> The neighboring towns. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>neighborhood</tr>, group of people composing a neighborhood.

<p><form>silinsiyu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>silent</tr>, <tr>quiet</tr>. <i>Silinsiyu kaáyu ang kurti pagpakanáug sa hukum,</i> The court became very silent when the decision was handed down. <form>-su(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> for machines to be noiseless. <i>Silinsiyúsu kaáyu ning makináha,</i> This machine is noiseless. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for machines to become noiseless.

<p><form>sílip, sil-ip</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>peep</tr> through a small hole or opening. <i>Misílip si Husi pagsúsi kun kinsay náa sa gawas,</i> Joseph peeped to see who was outside. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. device in box form with one side covered with glass, used to look at s.t. under the water, held with the bottom in the water while the user peers into it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> look at or for s.t. using this device. <form>pa-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> peer slyly or secretly; take a hasty furtive look. <i>Nagpasilip siya sa ákung baráha,</i> He snuck a look at my cards. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>SÍLIP</sc>, <pos>v</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>siliri</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>celery</tr>.

<p><form>silísi</form> <xr>= <sc>SALÍSI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sílit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S; b26P]</itype> flow in a continuous stream from where it is pent up. <i>Misílit ang túbig sa grípu,</i> The water flowed from the faucet. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23P; a12P]</itype> drive, move swiftly forward. <i>Unsa tung awtúha, misílit (mipasílit) man lang?</i> What car was that? It just whizzed on by. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2S; a12P]</itype> for firecrackers to fizzle or sputter. <i>Usáhay ang ribintadur dílì mubutu. Ígù ra nga musílit,</i> Sometimes the firecracker won't explode. It just simply fizzles. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>leaky</tr>. <i>Silit kaáyu ning tangkíha,</i> This tank is very leaky.

<p><form>sil-it</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)6; c1]</itype> come partly into view, be seen or exposed partly. <i>Misil-it na ang adlaw sa ákung pagmata,</i> The sun had already started to rise when I woke up. <i>Wà pa makasil-it ang ngípun sa bátà,</i> The baby hasn't gotten any teeth yet. <i>Ayaw sil-íta (isil-it) ang ímung kwarta sa bulsa,</i> Don't let your money stick out of your pocket.

<p><form>silsil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cold chisel</tr>, a chisel for metal, stone. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> inscribe, work s.t. with a chisel. <i>Kinsay nagsilsil aring mga litra sa simintu<corr sic=",">?</corr></i> Who carved these letters into the concrete? <number>1a</number> <itype>[A13; c6]</itype> fix in one's mind, <tr>inculcate</tr>. <i>Mga sulti nga nasilsil sa íyang kaisípan,</i> Words that were chiseled into his mind. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> remove s.t. with a chisel. <i>Átung silsílun ning kabilyáha,</i> We will remove this reenforcement bar with a cold chisel.

<p><form>silstuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sales talk. <number>2</number> glib talk to win over or convince s.o. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> give s.o. a glib line. <i>Silstúkan na man pud ku sa íyang bakak, mu rag mutúu ku,</i> He is giving me his line again, as if I could be taken in by it.

<p><form>sílu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cello</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> play the cello.

<p><form>silù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126C23; a2]</itype> have hurt feelings. <i>Nasilù ku kay aku ray wà imbitaha,</i> I was hurt because I was the only one not invited. <i>Mga biaybíayng makasilù (makapasilù),</i> Words of derision that can hurt the feelings. <i>Nagsílù ang managtrátu,</i> The lovers are on bad terms.

<p><form>silulúsa</form> <pos>n</pos> bagasse, sugar cane pulp left after the juice has been extracted.

<p><form>sílung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>downstairs</tr>. <i>May duha ka kwartu sa sílung,</i> There are two bedrooms downstairs. <number>1a</number> space underneath the house and including the surrounding yard. <i>Didtu níya ihukut ang kanding sa sílung,</i> He tethered the goat under the house. <form>taas ug &mdash;</form> <pos>a</pos> standing with the crotch comparatively high above the ground (humorous). <i>Kasagáran sa mga Amirkánu taas ug sílung,</i> Most of the Americans are tall. <number>2</number> <tr>protection</tr>, <tr>care</tr>. <i>Lisud <pb n=898>ikíha ang usa ka táwu nga náa sa sílung sa usa ka pulitiku,</i> It is difficult to press charges against a person under the aegis of a politician. <number>3</number> building where domestic animals, esp. cocks are kept. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> take shelter under. <i>Anhi ku musílung (manílung) sa iláwum sa káhuy,</i> I'll take shelter under the tree. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put into shelter in the shade. <i>Isílung ang kanding ug muulan,</i> Take the goat to shelter if it rains. <i>Isílung pagtanum ang mga kakaw sa lubi,</i> Plant the cocoa under the shade of the palms. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> put oneself under s.o.'s influence or protection. <i>Ang ílu misílung sa íyang uyuan,</i> The orphan was put under the care of his uncle. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> plant a crop between the rows of another crop that is taller. <i>Musilung kug mais sa kalubihan,</i> I'll plant corn between the rows of s.t. taller. <form>pa-</form> <xr>= <sc>SÍLUNG</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr> <number>1a</number> <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> <number>1</number> for cocks to go to another chicken yard, not the owner's. <i>Manílung ang sunuy kun way mungà sa íla,</i> A rooster will go to another house if there are no hens in its own place. <number>2</number> for an adolescent to begin or start visiting girls. <i>Manílung na ang íyang anak laláki,</i> His son has started visiting girls. <form>-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shelter</tr> or shade.

<p><form>silungsilung</form> <pos>n</pos> minor recurrence of measles or chicken pox eruptions following a period of quiescence. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23N; b4]</itype> for measles or chicken pox to have a minor recurrence or eruption. <i>Natural giyud nà sa hanggà nga silungsilungan (musilungsilung, manilungsilung),</i> Chicken pox rash normally recurs in a mild way.

<p><form>silupin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cellophane</tr>.

<p><form>sílus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b3]</itype> feel jealous, esp. of a beloved one. <i>Gisilúsan sa asáwa ang sikritarya sa íyang bána,</i> The wife was jealous of her husband's secretary. <form>-a</form> <pos>a</pos> jealous (female). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become jealous. <form>-u<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> jealous (male).

<p><form>silusíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>venetian blinds</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> put up venetian blinds.

<p><form>silúsu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for machine parts to be loose and have too much free play. <i>Piligru ning ímung taksi kay silúsu kaáyu ang manabíla,</i> Your taxi is dangerous because it has a very loose steering wheel. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B123]</itype> get to be too loose.

<p><form>sílut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> penalty for a crime. <i>Ang sílut sa pagpatay kinsi anyus,</i> The penalty for murder is fifteen years. <number>2</number> penalty in a game for an infraction of the rule. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> impose a penalty for a crime or in sports.

<p><form>sílut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> young coconut, the meat of which is harder than the &lsquo;<ix>butung</ix>&rsquo; stage but softer than the &lsquo;<ix>ungul</ix>&rsquo;.

<p><form>silúwid</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>celluloid</tr>.

<p><form>síluy</form> <xr>= <sc>ASUSÍLUY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>silya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chair</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a chair. <form>&mdash; iliktrika</form> <tr>electric chair</tr>. <form>di-</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>DISILYA</sc>.</xr> <form>silyíta</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> saddle of a motorcycle or bicycle. <number>2</number> small bamboo or rattan stool. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> put, attach a saddle. <form>-dur(&rarr;), -dura</form> <pos>n</pos> leader of a group of ten Roman Catholic lay people organized for a devotion to the Most Sacred Heart of Jesus. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B36; a1]</itype> be, become the <ix>silyadur</ix>.

<p><form>silyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> postage or revenue <tr>stamp</tr>. <number>2</number> seal, put on s.t. to show that it has been inspected. <number>3</number> seal to close an envelope. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>seal</tr> or put a postage or revenue stamp on s.t. <i>Gibálik ang suwat kay wà silyúhi,</i> The letter was returned because there was no stamp on it.

<p><form>símà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>barb</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>glans penis</tr> (euphemism). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make, attach a barb. <form>-an</form> <pos><corr sic=n>a</corr></pos> <tr>barbed</tr>.

<p><form>símag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>glow</tr>, brighten up. <i>Musímag ang mga aniníput inigkagabíi,</i> Fireflies glow in the evening. <i>Nagsímag siya sa kaputì,</i> She is very fair. <i>Gisimágan ang bátà sa maistra,</i> The teacher glared at the child.

<p><form>simalúna</form> <pos>a</pos> happening in an alternate fashion. <i>Simalúna ang hárì sa hantak gabíi,</i> In the coin tossing last night it was alternately heads and tails all night long. <i>Simalúna ang úlan sa miáging simána,</i> Last week the rains came on alternate days. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; c16]</itype> do s.t. alternately.

<p><form>simána</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>week</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> get to be a week. <i>Musimána na lang wà mahiulì ang amahan,</i> A week passed, and the father had not returned. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> do s.t. by the week. <i>Simanahun ta ikaw ug suwildu,</i> I will pay you by the week. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> earn [so-and-so much] every week. <i>Gisimanáhan (nagsimána) akug singkuwinta,</i> I earned fifty a week. <form>&mdash; Santa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Holy Week</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13N]</itype> spend one's days during the Holy Week. <i>Ása ka man magsimána Santa (manimána Santa)?</i> Where are you going to spend Holy Week? <form>-in-(&mdash;), -l-(&mdash;), tag-(&mdash;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>weekly</tr>, by the week. <i>Ang ámung swildu sinimana (simanal),</i> Our salary is on a weekly basis. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> do s.t. on a weekly basis. <form>Culu-</form> every week. <i>Duáwun tika sulusimána,</i> I will visit you every week. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b5]</itype> do every week.

<p><form>simang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> change a course, turn off. <i>Inig-abut nímu sa iskína musimang ka sa tuu,</i> Upon reaching the corner, turn off to the right. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> deviate from a previous course, track of conversation. <i>Dílì usáhay siya masabtan kay musimang siya sa unsay gipanagsultíhan,</i> Sometimes you can't understand him because he deviates from what he was talking about. <form>-l-an, -an, -anan(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> fork of a road or path.

<pb n=899>

<p><form>simaníya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chimney</tr> of a house, smokestack.

<p><form>simàsimà</form> <xr>= <sc>SIMÙSIMÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>simba</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> go to attend church services. <i>Musimba ku ugmà,</i> I will attend church services tomorrow. <number>2</number> <tr>adore</tr>, regard with respect and affection. <i>Ang babáying ákung gisimba,</i> The woman I adore. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> know s.o.'s innermost thoughts. <i>Nasimba ku na unsa ang ímung pagtan-aw kanákù,</i> I can read your thoughts of what you think of me. <pos>n</pos> <tr>worship service</tr>. <i>Unsang urása ang simba?</i> What time is the service? <form>simbasimba</form> <pos>n</pos> {<tr>praying</tr> mantis}. <form>simbahan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>church</tr>, church building. <form>simbahan ni Pilátu</form> <pos>n</pos> female genitalia (humorous). <form>-ku</form> exclamation uttered upon remarking about s.t. bad to keep it from happening to the speaker. <i>Simbaku ikaw lang untay mabúang, dílì aku,</i> God forbid that I go crazy, too. <form>-ku lagung</form> <ix>humorous exclamation</ix>: May it not happen to me! <i>Simbaku lagung, paúlì sa namúlung,</i> I'm rubber, you're glue. Everything you say to me bounces back and sticks to you. (Lit. May it not happen to me, but go to the one who said it.) <form>panimbaku</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> say <ix>simbaku</ix>. <form>ig-l-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> what one wears to church. <number>2</number> special girl friend. <i>Daghan kug trátu, apan usa ra giyuy igsilimba,</i> I have lots of girl friends, but I have only one special one. <form>-um-l-</form> <pos>n</pos> about to go to church. <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>churchgoers</tr>. <xr><sc>silimbáhun</sc></xr> <pos>a</pos> worthy of adoration.

<p><form>simbal<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> add a piece of cloth or paper to another piece to make it larger. <i>Ákù lang simbálan ang dapit sa íluk kay kúlang ang panaptun,</i> I'll add a piece of cloth to the armpits because there isn't enough cloth.

<p><form>simbal<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cymbal</tr>.

<p><form>simbu</form> <pos>a</pos> pubescent youngsters, esp. girls who bloom into adulthood, developing curves and stoutness. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be strong and healthy as a result of pubescence. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> grow stout and healthy as one enters adulthood. <i>Maghinimbu na gánì ka dì na madúgay nga madága ka na,</i> If you grow stout and healthy, it won't be long before you're grown up.

<p><form>simbug</form> <xr>= <sc>SAMBUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>simbulu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>symbol</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; c6]</itype> have or use as a symbol. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1456]</itype> <tr>symbolize</tr>. <i>Ang pula nagsimbulu sa pakigbísug,</i> The red symbolizes struggle.

<p><form>simburyu</form> <pos>n</pos> domed roof. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> construct a dome.

<p><form>simhut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>smell</tr>, take a whiff. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b2]</itype> be aware, <tr>get wind of</tr>. <i>Nía tus Baldu ug makasimhut tus átung kumbira,</i> Baldo will be here if he gets wind of the party. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>smell</tr>, <tr>sniff</tr>. <i>Dílì nà mamáak irúa. Manimhut lang nímu,</i> That dog doesn't bite. He will just sniff at you.

<p><form>simik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> for any of a group to fail (usually negative). <i>Way misimik sa ákung kandidátu. Lusut tanan,</i> None of my candidates lost. They all won. <i>Way misimik sa ákung antug. Púlus hárì,</i> None of my tosses of the coin failed. They all came out heads. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> allow a single failure or miss. <i>Ádik nà siyag sini. Way pasimikun ánang salída,</i> He is a movie addict. He won't let a single picture go by.

<p><form>similya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>seedling</tr>, esp. for transplantation. <number>1a</number> seeds used for propagation as opposed to those used for consumption. <i>Ayaw ni ipagaling kay similya ning lisúha,</i> Don't have these seeds milled because we'll use them for planting. <number>2</number> <tr>fingerlings</tr>. <number>3</number> breed of domestic animals used for food. <i>Maáyu ug similya ning babúya kay dagkuun,</i> This pig is of good breed because it is the big kind. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> reserve seeds for planting purposes. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> plant seeds in a seedbed. <form>similyahan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>seedbed</tr>. <form>similyahun ug láwas</form> <pos>a</pos> for a woman to be healthy (lit. a body fit to bear children).

<p><form>siminar</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>seminar</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> hold a seminar.

<p><form>siminarista</form> <pos>n</pos> student in a seminary. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be, become a seminarian.

<p><form>siminaryu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>seminary</tr>.

<p><form>simintiryu</form> <xr>= <sc>MINTIRYU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>simintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>cement</tr>, <tr>concrete</tr>. <i>Balay nga simintu,</i> A concrete house. <number>2</number> the dikes around a rice paddy. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> cement s.t. <i>Simintúhun ang mga karsáda sa prubinsiya,</i> They will cement the highways in the province. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put s.t. in plaster cast. <i>Simintúhun ang íyang buktun arun dílì makalíhuklíhuk,</i> His hand will be put in plaster cast so he can't move it around. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13; b5]</itype> construct a dike for a rice paddy. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> fill the teeth cavities. <i>Gisimintu ang lungag sa ákung ngípun,</i> I had my cavity filled. <form>simintádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>cemented</tr>, <tr>concrete</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>plaster-casted</tr>.

<p><form>simirísir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> medium-sized bicycle tire, larger than a racer but smaller than the wide-tired bicycle. <number>2</number> bicycle with a medium-sized tire.

<p><form>simistir, simistri</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>semester</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b8]</itype> get to be a semester.

<p><form>simpatika</form> <xr>= <sc>SIMPATIKU</sc> (female).</xr>

<p><form>simpatiku</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>charming</tr>, having an attractive personality. <i>Ang ímung anak simpatiku (simpatika) kaáyu nga mupahíyum,</i> Your daughter smiles very charmingly. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become charming.

<p><form>simpatíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sympathy</tr>, the capacity to feel <pb n=900>the problems of others. <i>Dúna giyud na siyay simpatíya sa mga tinun-an nga nagtrabáhu,</i> He has sympathy for working students. <number>2</number> feeling of loyalty and tendency to favor s.t. <i>Ang mga hurn&acaron;l usáhay may simpatíya sa mga kumunista,</i> Day laborers often are sympathetic to communism.

<p><form>simpì</form> <xr>= <sc>SINGPÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>simpig</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>close to</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB6; c]</itype> go, put s.t. s.w. near s.t. <i>Musimpig ku sa bungbung arun musulud ta sa katri,</i> I'll keep close to the wall so we can all sleep on the bed. <i>Kinsay nagsimpig áring parul diri sa baril sa gasulína?</i> Who put the lantern near the barrel of gasoline? <i>Isimpig ang ímung dunggan sa bungbung,</i> Put your ears next to the wall.

<p><form>*simpin</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>SINIMPIN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>simpís, simpiyis</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ornamental fern: <bio>Nephrolepis biserrata var. furcans</bio>.

<p><form>simplan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B246]</itype> be thrown to a distant place after being hit by a strong blow. <i>Musimplan ka run ug butangan ta ka áring kúmù ku,</i> You will find yourself thrown to a distance if I strike you with my fist.

<p><form>simpli</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>simple</tr>, without ornament, artifice, or ostentation. <i>Ang ílang kasal simpli kaáyu,</i> They had a simple wedding. <number>2</number> easy to do, solve. <i>Simpli kaáyung buhátun,</i> It is very easy to do. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> make s.t. simple, become simple. <i>Magsimpli tag káun arun makadagínut,</i> Let's eat simply so we can save.

<p><form>simpul</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>simple</tr>, without affectation and ostentation. <i>Simpul ang ílang kasal,</i> They had a simple wedding. <number>2</number> <tr>easy</tr>, uncomplicated to do. <i>Simpul ra ang suliran sa ámung tíst,</i> We were given simple problems in the test. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2; c1]</itype> do s.t. simply, without ostentation. <i>Simpúla ra nang ákung sinínà,</i> Just make it a simple dress. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make s.t. simple to do. <form>&mdash; líbing</form> <pos>n</pos> a simple way of living. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> live simply. <i>Magsimpul líbing na ta run kay mahal na ang palalítun,</i> We'll have to live simply now that everything is so expensive.

<p><form>simpun</form> <xr>= <sc>SINGPUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>simput</form> <xr>= <sc>SINGPUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>simsim<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. low herb similar in appearance to purslane but with white axillary flowers, soft pilose leaves, and a woody stem.

<p><form>simsim<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. reed found in marshes, used for decorative purposes.

<p><form>simsim<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> taste a liquid in small sips. <i>Ang mga buyug nagsimsim sa dugus,</i> The bees are sipping the nectar. <i>Dì ku makasimsim ug ínit nga sabaw sa luwag nga aluminum,</i> I can't sip hot broth from an aluminum ladle.

<p><form>simtum, simtúma</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>symptom</tr>.

<p><form>simúaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> sound boisterously. <i>Sayu pa gáning buntag nagsimúaw nas Maríya, nakamata lang kug ahat,</i> Maria was talking loudly when it was still early in the morning and I woke up. <i>Unsa man say gisimúaw ni Pidru?</i> What is Pedro going on about again?

<p><form>simud</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>snout</tr> of an animal. <number>2</number> the analogous structure in a person (the lips and the area adjacent that can be pushed forward). <i>Ayaw pabudlut sa ímung simud,</i> Don't pout (stick out your lips).

<p><form>sim-ung</form> <pos>a</pos> dark and <tr>dreary</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become dark and dreary. <i>Musim-ung ang kalibútan basta magdag-um,</i> The world becomes gloomy when there is a heavy overcast.

<p><form>simùsimù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> eat a little, esp. enough to stave off hunger, but not be fully satiated. <i>Musimùsimù lang ta ígù nga isustinir hasta paniudtu,</i> Let's take a little of s.t. enough to sustain us until lunchtime. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> nibble at grass leisurely.

<p><form>simyat</form> <xr>= <sc>SIPYAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sin</form> <xr>= <sc>UG</sc>, <i>1,</i> <i>2a,</i> <i>b,</i> <i>4a,</i> <i>b</i> (dialectal).</xr>

<p><form>sín</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> galvanized sheet-iron roofing. <number>2</number> house with sheet-iron roofing. <i>Balay nga sín,</i> A house with sheet-metal roofing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> put, construct with galvanized sheet-iron roofing.

<p><form>sína<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b3(1)]</itype> be envious. <i>Nasína si Dúdung sa ákung duláan,</i> Dodong is envious of my toy. <i>Ang pagkaadunáhan lagmit kasináhan sa uban,</i> Other people are likely to envy your wealth. <form>sinahan</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to be envious. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>envy</tr>. <form>masináhun, manggisináhun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>envious</tr>.

<p><form>sina<sub>2</sub></form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>MIRYINDA</sc></xr> <ix>and</ix> <xr><sc>SANTA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sinádu</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>senate</tr>. <form>-r(&rarr;)</form> <tr>senator</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be, become a senator. <form>-ra</form> <pos>n</pos> lady senator.

<p><form>sinagúga</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>synagogue</tr>.

<p><form>sinaguylas</form> <xr>= <sc>SIRIGUYLAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sinamay</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>*SAMAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sinampangkung</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>*SAMPANGKUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sinamun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cinnamon</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> flavor with cinnamon.

<p><form>sinaryu</form> <pos>n</pos> scenery as a background for a stage. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> use scenery. <form>sinaryuhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stage</tr>.

<p><form>sinátì</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>familiar</tr>. <i>Daw sinátì nákù kaáyu nang tingúga,</i> It seems that I am very familiar with that voice. <i>Sinátì ku sa trabáhu dinhi,</i> I am very familiar with this job. <number>2</number> <tr>well-known</tr>. <i>Ang paghíngus mauy usa ka sinátì nga tilimad-un sa sip-un,</i> Sniffling is a well-known sign of colds. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1236]</itype> be familiar <pb n=901>with s.t. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> <tr>experience</tr>. <i>Nakasinátì kug kagútum sa gíra,</i> I experienced hunger during the war. <number>3</number> <itype>[C13]</itype> be acquainted with each other. <i>Wà pa kami magkasinátì kaáyu mau nga dapítun ku siya karun,</i> We are not acquainted with each other so I am going to invite her now. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>knowledge</tr>. <i>Wà kuy kasinatían báhin sa panglútù,</i> I have no knowledge of cooking. <number>2</number> <tr>experience</tr>. <i>Halandúmung kasinatían,</i> Memorable experience.

<p><form>sínaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>shiny</tr>, <tr>glossy</tr>. <form>&mdash; ug úlu</form> <tr>bald-headed</tr> or head with the hair shaved off. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26; aP]</itype> be, become shiny. <i>Musínaw (masínaw) ang salug ug bagnúsan ug waks,</i> The floor will become shiny if you wax it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> give an opponent zero. <i>Ang ámung tím nagsínaw sa iláha,</i> Our team gave theirs a zero. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> zero score. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>ISPÍHU</sc>, <i>3.</i></xr> <form>pa- sa lingkuránan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> keep sitting, not doing any work. <i>Ang tapulang asáwa pirmi lang magpasínaw sa lingkuránan,</i> A lazy wife does nothing but sit idly.

<p><form>sindà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. illness which involves pain in a local area, esp. a spot on the back which may move to another area; or a <tr>migraine</tr>, a k.o. recurrent headache that affects the side of the head. <number>2</number> k.o. eye ailment in which the eyes become red and sometimes swollen from too much work. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4b4]</itype> have <ix>sindà</ix>. <i>Pagpalit ug aspirína kay gisindà (gisindáan) ku,</i> Buy some aspirin because I have an attack of <ix>sindà</ix> (headache or eye fatigue).

<p><form>sindalan</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>DÁLAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sindi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> light a pressure lantern. <i>Nagsindi si Tátay sa hásag kay ngitngit na,</i> Father is lighting the pressure lantern because it's getting dark. <form>-dur(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> container from which alcohol is poured to fire up the pressure lantern.

<p><form>sindikátu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>syndicate</tr>, a group of people banded together for business or criminal purposes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become a crime syndicate.

<p><form>sindul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> kick away, nudge s.t. with the toe of one's foot. <i>Akuy musindul sa láta, unyà manágù mu,</i> I will kick the can, and you all go hide. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> find, come across s.t. <i>Unsáun nákù pagbáyad ug dì ku makasindul ug kwarta,</i> How can I pay if I do not happen to find some money. <i>Tabì nga ákung nasindulan sa tyanggihan,</i> Gossip I ran across in the market.

<p><form>sindúrut</form> <xr>= <sc>SANDÚRUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sing-al</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> talk harshly. <i>Ayaw kug sing-áli,</i> Don't shout at me. <number>2</number> sing loudly. <i>Mananaygun nga nagsing-al sa gawas,</i> The carolers singing loudly outside. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> <tr>cry</tr> loudly, <tr>bawl</tr>. <i>Himì ka kay musing-al dáyun ug gutmun,</i> You're a cry-baby because you bawl as soon as you're hungry. <pos>n</pos> harsh talk, loud singing.

<p><form>sing-aling</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shing-a-ling</tr>, a k.o. dance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do the shing-a-ling.

<p><form>singán</form> <xr>= <sc>UNSINGÁLAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>singáni</form> <xr>= <sc>UNSA</sc></xr> (dialectal).</xr>

<p><form>singári</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; abc]</itype> <tr>keep on</tr> [do]ing, <tr>always</tr> do. <i>Ug singaríhun nímu nà ug dukduk mabuak nyà nà,</i> If you keep pounding that, it will break. <i>Ayawg isingárig usar ang bag-u,</i> Don't always wear your new clothes.

<p><form>sing-aw</form> <xr>= <sc>SING-AL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>singba</form> <xr>= <sc>SIMBA</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>singdalan</form> <xr>= <sc>SINDALAN</sc></xr>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>DÁLAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>singgáak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> <tr>shout</tr>, <tr>cry</tr>. <i>Pára gamay rang samad musinggáak ka dáyun!</i> For such a small wound you <tr>scream</tr> bloody murder. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; bc1]</itype> shout, <tr>snarl</tr> loudly at s.o. in anger. <i>Singgaákan níya ang bátà kun kasab-an,</i> He shouts at the child when he scolds him.

<p><form>singgalung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. brownish <tr>civet</tr>.

<p><form>singgapur</form> <xr>= <sc>KAMÚTING KÁHUY</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>KAMÚTI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>singgaráyung</form> <xr>= <sc>SINGGURÁYUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>singgil</form> <pos>n</pos> strong <tr>wire</tr> made of an alloy of copper, tin, and some other metals.

<p><form>singgit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>shout</tr>, <tr>yell</tr> at s.o. <i>Gisinggitan siya sa pulis nga pasurindírun,</i> The police shouted at him to surrender. <pos>n</pos> <tr>shout</tr>. <form>Ang &mdash; sa Balintawak</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>Cry</tr> of Balintawak, the signal for the Philippine Revolution of 1896. <form>&mdash; awhag</form> goading and urging done by shouting. <form>&mdash; pakitábang</form> cry for help. <form>tubag &mdash;</form> answer given by shouting. <form>ka-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> feel like shouting. <i>Kasinggitun ku sa kalágut,</i> I felt like shouting in anger.

<p><form>singgul</form> <pos>a</pos> single-sized, good for one occupant as opposed to a double one. <i>Singgul nga katri,</i> <tr>Single bed</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make s.t. a single rather than double size. <number>2</number> <itype>[C2; ac3]</itype> play <tr>singles</tr>, make it singles instead of doubles. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>goose</tr>. <i>Ilang singgúlun ang mutuwad,</i> They will goose you if you bend over.

<p><form>singgurayung, singguráyung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large Cerith <tr>shell</tr>, 4&ndash;5&Prime; long.

<p><form>singhag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> <tr>snarl</tr>, talk harshly to. <i>Ngánung singhágan man ku nímu nga dílì man ku bátà?</i> Why do you snarl at me? I'm no longer a child. <i>Ayawg isinghag ang ímung gustu,</i> Don't say what you want with a snarl. <pos>n</pos> harsh talk, s.t. said snarlingly. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> goods or articles acquired from inferiors by virtue of one's influential position. <i>Kanang íyang mga ilimnun pulus sininghágan <pb n=902>sa mga Insik,</i> All those drinks were donated free by Chinese businessmen.

<p><form>singhir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>Singer</tr> brand sewing machines and other appliances. <number>2</number> <tr>sewing machine</tr>. <form>báyad nga -in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>installment</tr> payments.

<p><form>singì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> separate or take one piece off from a bunch of fruit. <i>Kinsay nagsingì ug pipila ka dawin sa búlig nga ságing?</i> Who took several pieces from the banana bunch? <pos>n</pos> space between the fingers and toes.

<p><form>singil</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN2; a2N]</itype> <tr>ask for</tr> payment. <i>Singlun (paninglun) na ba nímu ag ákung útang?</i> Are you going to make me pay my debt? <number>2</number> <itype>[A13N; a2N]</itype> exact payment for what one has done, <tr>collect</tr> on a promise. <i>Magsingil na ku sa íyang gibúhat nákù,</i> I will now collect for what he has done to me. <i>Maningil na ku nímu sa ímung gisáad nákù nga pinaskúhan,</i> Now I will ask for the Christmas gift you promised me. <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bill collector</tr>. <form>singlunun, paninglunun</form> <pos>n</pos> amount collectible.

<p><form>singilugun</form> <xr>= <sc>ILUGUN</sc></xr>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ÍLUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>síngin</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fruits, ordinarily separate, joined together in growth with a common continuous skin. <number>2</number> <tr>Siamese twins</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C3]</itype> for fruits to be joined as one.

<p><form>síngir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>singer</tr>, <tr>crooner</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a singer.

<p><form>síngit<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> hand in mahjong and the analogous situation in rummy where a single number is missing to obtain a <ix>siyà</ix>. <number>2</number> the missing number. <form>paN-</form> <xr>= <sc>SÍNGIT</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr> <form>búnut paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> drawing of the <ix>paníngit</ix>.

<p><form>síngit<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> include one's small amount together with a larger amount belonging to s.o. else. <i>Misíngit kug písus sa íyang pusta,</i> I put in one peso together with his bet. <i>Nakasíngit kug lung-ag níla,</i> I put my small amount of rice together with the rice they were cooking. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> go in with a group or with s.o. important to share with their food, fun, etc. without sharing in the expenses. <i>Misíngit ku níla sa sini,</i> I tagged along to the movies with them.

<p><form>sing-it</form> <xr>= <sc>SALING-IT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>*singit pa-, pa-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> give s.o. cause to goad him into a course of action. <i>Pasingitun ka lang níya arun magkaáway mu,</i> He will simply do s.t. to give you cause to quarrel with him. <pos>n</pos> <tr>goading</tr>.

<p><form>singka</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> speak harshly to s.o. <i>Ayawg isingka ang ímung tubag kay nangutána lang ku,</i> Don't shout your answer at me because I was just asking. <pos>n</pos> s.t. said in a curt and harsh way. <form>siningkáhan</form> <pos>n</pos> things s.o. obtains from people under him by virtue of his position.

<p><form>singkamas</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>vine</tr> cultivated for its fleshy and juicy turnip-shaped root, widely eaten raw and cooked: <bio>Pachyrrhizus erosus</bio>.

<p><form>singkámut</form> (from <ix>kamut</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b5]</itype> do one's best, <tr>strive</tr>. <i>Musingkámut (maningkámut) ku paglingkawas,</i> I will strive to escape. <i>Singkamútan (singkamútun) kung mabalhin ka,</i> I'll do my best to have you transferred. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>striving</tr>, <tr>earnest</tr>, <tr>hard work</tr>. <i>Milampus siya pinaági sa íyang kaugalíngung paningkámut,</i> He succeeded through his own efforts. <form>mapaN-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>diligent</tr>, <tr>industrious</tr>.

<p><form>singkaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>scythe</tr>. <number>2</number> have the arms bent bow-shaped at the elbow like a scythe. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> for the elbow to get to be this way. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> hit with a scythe.

<p><form>singkiríbut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sexual intercourse</tr> (coarse slang). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> <tr>have sexual intercourse</tr>.

<p><form>singkit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> tie two coconuts together by their husks partly stripped off. <i>Singkítun ta ning duha ka lubi arun dílì magbúlag,</i> We will tie these two coconuts together with their husks so they won't be separated. <number>2</number> <itype>[C3]</itype> for two separate things to be physically <tr>joined</tr>. <i>Gitawag ug sayamis twins kanang kalúha nga magsingkit,</i> Twins that are joined in flesh are called Siamese twins. <pos>n</pos> two separate things joined in flesh. <i>Usa ray ihap sa ságing nga singkit,</i> Joined bananas are counted as one.

<p><form>singku</form> <ix>number</ix> five. <pos>n</pos> a <tr>nickle</tr>. <i>Tagái kug singku,</i> Let me have a nickle. <pos>v</pos> <xr>see <sc>TRÍS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>singkul</form> <pos>n</pos> hard growth on the skin covering bony parts, esp. on the ankles and elbows. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> develop a <ix>singkul</ix>. <i>Sigun sa karáan, singkúlan ka ug musúkul kag ginikánan,</i> In folk belief, one gets <ix>singkul</ix> if one talks back to his parents.

<p><form>singkulyágas</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. sweet table <tr>banana</tr> much stouter than the <ix>tundan</ix>, with dark red peelings and yellow-orange meat when ripe.

<p><form>singkuríbut</form> <xr>= <sc>SINGKIRÍBUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>singkurung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> strike, knock the head hard in a sweeping motion. <i>Tungud sa kalágut íyang gisingkurung ang bátà,</i> He smacked the child on the head in anger.

<p><form>singkurúyung</form> <xr>= <sc>SINGGURÁYUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>singkuung</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> well-curved on the sides. <i>Singkuung nga sanggut,</i> A sickle with a well-curved edge. <number>2</number> for the roof or the bottom of a boat to be curved so that it affords little room. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> for the sides, roof, or bottom to become well-curved.

<p><form>singkuwinta</form> <ix>number</ix> fifty. <pos>v</pos> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>DISIUTSU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>singkuy</form> <pos>a</pos> having the defect of horses where the hocks knock against each other as they move. <i>Dílì maáyu nga mudágan ang ímung kabáyù kay singkuy kaáyu,</i> Your horse doesn't run well because its hocks knock <pb n=903>against each other. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> get this defect.

<p><form>singpì</form> <pos>n</pos> clay cover for clay pots, roughly conical in shape with a knob for a handle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a cover of this sort.

<p><form>singpun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>tightly woven</tr>, with the threads close together. <i>Nipis ang panaptun kay dílì singpun ang mga hílu,</i> The cloth is thin because the threads are not tightly woven. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> get to be tightly woven.

<p><form>singput</form> <pos>a</pos> closely woven or fastened together, not sparsely. <i>Simput nga pagkatágik ang ámung salug nga kawáyan,</i> The bamboo slats in our floor were put down very close to each other. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; a12]</itype> be closely woven, put down; cause it to be so.

<p><form>singsing</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ring</tr>. <i>Singsing nga ingkantádu, kahibulúngan,</i> An enchanted, magic ring. <number>2</number> any metal <tr>band</tr> resembling a ring or small <tr>hoop</tr>. <number>3</number> short rope connecting the whipple-*tree and the plow. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN2; a]</itype> wear, put a ring on s.o. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make into a ring. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> firmly hook an orifice with a finger. <i>Misúkul siya piru dihang gisingsíngan nag iyáha, nagpuyù lagi,</i> She fought back, but when I got my finger hooked into her vagina, she stopped moving. <form>paN-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ring finger</tr>.

<p><form>síngu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a2b2]</itype> inhale a <tr>smell</tr> or aroma. <i>Singúha ning kan-un ug maáyu pa ba,</i> Smell this food whether it is still good. <i>Mu rag gás tung nasinguhan nákù dinhà sa butilya,</i> I smelled s.t. like gas in the bottle.[+]

<p><form>síngud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>observe</tr> intently. <i>Nagsíngud siya kun nagtrabáhu ba mi,</i> He was watching us to see if we were working. <i>Wà ku makasíngud sa uma sa búkid,</i> I did not visit my field in the mountain to see how they were doing. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>listen</tr> intently. <i>Mupaníngud (maníngud) siyag sultíhan apan dì lagi mutúman,</i> He listens intently to what you say, but he won't do it. <form>paningudsíngud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> go get some news. <i>Paningudsíngud ug unsay nahitabù sa nakrás,</i> Go get some news about what happened to the plane that crashed.

<p><form>singulu</form> (from <ix>úlu</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for the child's head to <tr>crown</tr> in childbirth. <i>Sakit sa ngatanan kun musingulu na ang bátà,</i> The pain is most intense when the child's head crowns.

<!-- NOTE: entry probably contained missing sample sentence -->

<p><form>singut</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>perspiration</tr>, <tr>sweat</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>condensation</tr> on an object cooler than the atmosphere. <form>búngag &mdash;</form> <tr>prickly heat</tr>. <pos>a</pos> <tr>annoying</tr>, <tr>irritating</tr> to one's nerves. <i>Gipul-an ku sa íyang mga isturya, singut kaáyung pamináwun,</i> I'm bored with her stories. They're so annoying to hear. <i>Singut kaáyu nà siyang manúgù nátù mu rag hárì,</i> It really irritates me the way she gives orders like a queen. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26; a4N]</itype> <tr>perspire</tr>, <tr>sweat</tr>. <i>Ug musingut ang kabáyù papahuwáya,</i> If the horse sweats, let it rest. <i>Mupahúway ku ug singtun (singutun) ku,</i> I will stop working if I perspire. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a4]</itype> gather condensation. <corr sic="pitcher containing ice will get drops of water on it. "></corr><number>3</number> <itype>[C123P]</itype> have a hard fight. <i>Ug gustu kang makigsíngut (makigpasíngut), hala and&acaron;r,</i> If you want to have a fight, <xr><sc>O.K</sc>.</xr> let's get to it. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>sweat</tr> profusely. <number>2</number> for a sick person to break out in cold sweat. <i>Mukunhud ang hilánat ug paningtun ka,</i> The fever lowers if you break out in cold sweat. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be all covered with sweat. <form>pa-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> do s.t. to make oneself sweat. <i>Wà mi magdúlà, nagpasíngut lang mi,</i> We didn't play, we just had a little workout. <form>kadu-, du-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>sweat</tr> profusely. <i>Undang na ug dúlà kay nagkadusíngut ka lang ug dágan,</i> Stop playing now because you are sweating profusely from running around. <form>singtánun</form> <pos>a</pos> given to sweating easily with the slightest exertion.

<p><form>sini</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>movie house</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>motion picture</tr>. <number>3</number> showing of motion pictures. <i>Way sini run kay Birnis Santu,</i> There are no <tr>movies</tr> today because it's Good Friday. <number>4</number> love-making sight, as seen by peeping (humorous metaphor). <i>Pirmi ming kakità ug sini inigpamisíta sa íyang uyab,</i> We always see a &lsquo;<tr>movie</tr>&rsquo; every time her boy friend comes. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> show a movie. <i>Ang Yuis-ay-is magsíni (magsini) sa iskuylahan karung gabíi,</i> The USIS will show a <tr>film</tr> in the schoolhouse tonight. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> convert into a movie house. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <number>1</number> show a movie. <number>2</number> display lovemaking. <i>Nakakità ang mga bátà nga nagsíni sila gabíi,</i> The children peeped at them necking last night. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> go to the movies. <i>Manini ta,</i> Let's go to the movies. <form>sinihan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>movie house</tr>. <form>kasinihan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>movie houses</tr> collectively. <number>2</number> <tr>movies</tr>, as a source of entertainment and as an art form. <form>maki-, maki-(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of movies. <form>sinisíni</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>slide-show</tr>. <number>2</number> free outdoor movie offered by advertisement panels or mobile units.

<p><form>siniguylas</form> <xr>= <sc>SIRIGUYLAS</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sinílas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>slippers</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, make into slippers. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> hit with slippers.

<p><form>sinimaskup</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cinemascope</tr> or wide-screened movie. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be in cinemascope.

<p><form>sinimpin</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. plain finger <tr>ring</tr> with no gems.

<p><form>sinínà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dress</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>shirt</tr>. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>GÍNIT</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear a shirt or dress. <i>Nagsinínag pula,</i> Wearing a red shirt, dress. <i>Sininái ang bátà,</i> Put a shirt on the child. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get a shirt. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> cloth to be made into a shirt or <pb n=904>dress.

<p><form>sinípit</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>SÍPIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sinisíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ash tray</tr>. <i>Sa sinisíru ninyu ibutang ang inyung upus,</i> Put your cigarette butts in the ash tray.

<p><form>siniyal</form> <xr>= <sc>SINYAL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>siniyur</form> <pos>n</pos> title of address for men of high station. <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>nyur</bx> <number>1</number> <tr>Mr</tr>., <tr>sir</tr>. <i>Si Nyur Pidru muabut rung hápun,</i> Mr. Peter will arrive this afternoon. <i>Andam na ang ímung awtu, nyur,</i> Your car is ready, sir. <number>1a</number> form of direct address between intimate male friends. <i>Kumusta, nyur!</i> How are you, <tr>man</tr>! <number>2</number> in set usage for names of saints (not shortened). <form>&mdash; San Pidru</form> <tr>St. Peter</tr>. <form>&mdash; San Bisinti</form> <tr>St. Vincent</tr>. <form>&mdash; Santu Ninyu</form> the <tr>Holy Child</tr>. <form>pista sa &mdash;</form> <tr>Feast of the Holy Child</tr>.<note>Holy Child necessarily? P2</note> <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> detesting manual work. <i>Ságad sa mga dátù mga sinyurun ug kusug musúgù,</i> Most rich people are too good to do manual work and tell people to do things for them.

<p><form>sinkuwínta</form> <xr>= <sc>SINGKUWINTA</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sinsilyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>small change</tr>. <i>Wà kuy sinsilyu diri,</i> I don't have any <tr>change</tr> on me. <form>wà kuy &mdash;</form> humorous way of answering a compliment (implying one has no money to pay the person for his flattery). <number>2</number> change given back for a bill. <i>Dúna kay sinsilyu áring písus?</i> Do you have change for this peso? <number>3</number> <tr>washer</tr>. <number>3a</number> metal rings found inside the hub of wheels. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>give change</tr> or break s.t. into change. <i>Makasinsilyu ka áring singkuhun?</i> Can you <tr>change</tr> this five peso bill? <i>Wà ku nímu sinsilyúhi (sinsilyúi),</i> You haven't given me my change! <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be broken into fragments. <i>Nasinsilyu ang básu nga natambug sa simintu,</i> The glass was broken to pieces when it fell onto the concrete. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>have children</tr> (humorous). <i>Agad pay tibuuk, nagpasinsíyu giyud,</i> You were doing <xr><sc>O.K</sc>.</xr> single (lit. a whole bill). What did you have to go and have children for (lit. make yourself into small change)?[+]

<p><form>sinsíru</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sincere</tr>.

<p><form>sinsitib, sinsitíbu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sensitive</tr>, easily offended. <number>2</number> for electric equipment to be sensitive. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be sensitive or easily offended and irritated.

<p><form>sinsiya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>science</tr>.

<p><form>sinsíyu</form> <xr>= <sc>SINSILYU</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sinsu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>census</tr>, an official enumeration of population or some other statistics of an area. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> have or hold a census.

<p><form>sinsur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>censor</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> censor s.t. presented to the public. <i>Gisinsur ang báhin sa salída nga dúnay naghúbù,</i> The part where there was a nude scene was censored out. <form>-s</form> <tr>censors</tr> (plural).

<p><form>sinsúru</form> <pos>n</pos> large, deep-sea fishing <tr>net</tr> which encircles the fish. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> fish with this sort of net, esp. in harvesting fish from under the <ix>páyaw</ix>. <form>sinsuradur</form> <pos>n</pos> one who operates this sort of equipment.

<p><form>sinsus</form> <xr>= <sc>SINSU</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sinta</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> for horses to <tr>rear</tr> up. <i>Pagbantay kay musinta ang kabáyù!</i> Watch out! The horse will rear. <number>2</number> <tr>flare up</tr> in anger, raising the head. <i>Ngánung musinta ka man pára sa usa ka gamayng hangyù?</i> Why do you flare up for such a tiny request? <form>&mdash; libanta</form> <pos>n</pos> a dog's trick where the dog can sit or stand on its hind legs on command. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> perform this trick. <form>hi-/ha-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be <tr>taken aback</tr> so as to jerk one's head back. <i>Nahasinta ku sa íyang tinubagan,</i> I was taken aback by the way he talked back.

<p><form>sintà</form> <pos>n</pos> pieces of wood or bamboo slats nailed horizontally across posts as fence <tr>railings</tr>, to which small vertical slats are attached. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put up, make into this sort of fence railing.

<p><form>sintábu</form> <xr>= <sc>SINTABUS</sc></xr> (singular). <i>Usa ka sintábu,</i> One <tr>cent</tr>.

<p><form>sintábus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>centavo</tr>. <i>Singku sintábus,</i> Five centavos. <form>maN-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> one centavo coin. <number>2</number> s.t. costing one centavo apiece. <i>Kining gidak-úna sa agridulsi manintabus,</i> This size of calamondin is one centavo apiece. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> be one centavo apiece.

<p><form>sintak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> pull a fishline or a line attached to a trap with a jerk. <i>Sintákun nímu ang pasul inigkubit sa isdà,</i> The moment the fish bites, pull the line with a jerk.

<p><form>sintas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> strip of silken ribbon or cord with a religious medal worn around the neck as an indication of one's devotion to a particular saint. <number>2</number> <tr>film-strip</tr>. <number>3</number> <tr>story</tr>. <i>Nagsulat siyag sintas nga kawbuy,</i> He wrote a cowboy story. <number>4</number> <tr>shoe laces</tr>. <number>5</number> <formx>&mdash; nga balátung</formx> <pos>n</pos> variety of very long <ix>balátung</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; b6(1)]</itype> wear a ribbon with a saint's picture. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>lace shoes</tr>.

<p><form>sintídu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>meaning</tr>, <tr>implication</tr> of. <i>Laksut ug sangputánan ang sintídu sa íyang púlung,</i> His words carried the implication of unhappy things to come. <number>2</number> final decision. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> have a meaning. <i>Tambag nga nagsintídug kasábà,</i> Advice that was meant as a scolding. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> hit squarely or fatally. <i>Nakasintídu<note> Nakasintidu ?</note> siya sa katapúsan níyang tíra,</i> He made a hit on his last shot. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give one's final, fixed decision or answer. <i>Gisintidúhan na ang ginikánan báhin sa kasal,</i> The parents have given their decision regarding the wedding. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>ask</tr>, find out one's answer <pb n=905>or word. <i>Nagsintídu ku kun mahinayun ba ta,</i> I want to get the final word from you as to whether we are going as planned. <number>3b</number> <itype>[C13]</itype> come to an <tr>agreement</tr>. <i>Nagkasintídu na ang isig ka ginikánan báhin sa kasal,</i> Both parents have come to an agreement about the wedding. <form>&mdash; kumun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>common sense</tr>.

<p><form>sintimintal, sintimint&acaron;l</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sentimental</tr>, arousing tender sensibilities. <i>Pilikulang sintimintal nga nakapahílak,</i> A sentimental picture that made me cry. <number>2</number> having a sad expression on the face. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> be, become sentimental. <number>2</number> <itype>[B456]</itype> put on a sad face. <i>Nagsintimintal siya kay napildi sa madyung,</i> He is wearing a long face because he lost in mahjong. <form>-ista</form> <pos>a</pos> characterized by being sentimental.

<p><form>sintimintu, sintimyintu</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>SINT&Icaron;R</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sintimitru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>centimeter</tr>.

<p><form>sintimus</form> <pos>n</pos> one <tr>centavo</tr>. <i>Bísan sintimus dì ka makaabut?</i> You can't even afford a <tr>penny</tr>? <form>maN-</form> costing one centavo. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>SIKMA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sintinaryu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>centenary</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> have or celebrate a centenary.

<p><form>sintinil</form> <xr>= <sc>SINTINÍLA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sintiníla</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sentinel</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> act as sentinel.

<p><form>sintinsiya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sentence</tr> in court. <i>Ang sintinsiya sa kurti nagpahamtang ug sílut nga lima ka túig sa prisuhan,</i> The judgment of the court imposes a <tr>penalty</tr> of five years in prison. <number>2</number> obvious thing to do under the circumstances. <i>Usa ray sintinsiya ánang bátang maldítu. Latiguha,</i> There is just one thing to do to a mischievous child. Whip him. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> impose a sentence. <i>Gisintinsiyáhan siya ug kamatáyun,</i> He was sentenced to death. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> have one's way as to how s.t. is to be done. <i>Pritúhun lang nà ug akuy musintinsiya ánà,</i> If I am to have the say, we'll just fry it. <form>-du</form> <pos>n</pos> one who has been sentenced.

<p><form>sintinyal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>centennial</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2456]</itype> be a <tr>century</tr>. <i>Musintinyal nákung panguyab níya únà mi magkatrátu,</i> I courted her for nearly a century before we became engaged.

<p><form>sintir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>center</tr> player in games like baseball, soccer, basketball, <ix>tubigtúbig</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> play center.

<p><form>sint&icaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2; b3]</itype> feel <tr>offended</tr> and hurt, <tr>take offense</tr>. <i>Unsa may íyang gisintiran, ang ákung gisulti u ag ákung gibúhat?</i> What did he feel offended at? Was it what I said, or what I did? <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>rise to the bait</tr>. <i>Gidakup ang asáwa ug anak básun musint&icaron;r ang púga,</i> The wife and the child were arrested in the hope that the fugitive would come out of hiding. <form>sintimintu, sintimyintu</form> <pos>n</pos> feeling of <tr>hurt</tr>, <tr>offense</tr>. <i>Naghambin siya ug sintimintu mahitungud sa pagtratar níya,</i> She is nursing a hurt because of the way she was treated. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> harbor a hurt feeling, without rancor. <i>Subù siya kay nagsintimintu sa ímung pagkasábà níya,</i> He is sad because he was hurt by your scolding.

<p><form>sintral</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>central school</tr> of a town. <number>2</number> <tr>mill</tr> for sugar cane. <number>3</number> <b><r>[noun]</r> sintral</b> the dominant, central [noun]. <i>Bangku sintral,</i> <tr>Central Bank</tr>.

<p><form>sintripugal, sintripyugal</form> <pos>n</pos> light <tr>brown sugar</tr> obtained from <tr>sugar</tr> cane, lower in quality than the white refined sugar, but more refined than the <ix>muskubádu</ix>.

<p><form>sintru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>center</tr>, point in the very <tr>middle</tr>. <number>1a</number> <tr>central portion</tr> of an area. <number>2</number> place where certain activities are concentrated. <i>Sintru purikultúra,</i> Puericulture center. <i>Ang Sibu sintru sa kumirsiyu sa Bisáyas,</i> Cebu is the center of commerce in the Visayas. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>SINTIR</sc></xr>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1PB2; a1]</itype> be, put at the center.

<p><form>sintu-</form> (combining form) <tr>one hundred</tr>. <i>Sintudy&icaron;s,</i> One <tr>hundred</tr> ten.

<p><form>sintún</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> push work off on one another. <i>Dì sila makasintún sa pagtrabáhu ug tagáag asaynmint káda usa,</i> They can't push the work off on each other if each of them has his own assignment.

<p><form>sintunádu, sintunáwu</form> <pos>a</pos> for a voice to be <tr>flat</tr>, lacking in tonality and pitch. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> be, become, make flat. <i>Musintunáwu ákung tíngug ug musáka ang túnu,</i> My voice goes flat when the song rises.

<p><form>sinturiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>centurion</tr>.

<p><form>sinturun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>belt</tr> to hold trousers up. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> whip s.o. with a belt. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear a belt.

<p><form>sin-u</form> <xr>= <sc>KINSA</sc></xr> (dialectal).

<p><form>sinulug</form> <pos>n</pos> ritual dance performed at the altar in fulfillment of a vow made to a saint or the Holy Child. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c5]</itype> do or dance the ritual <ix>sinulug</ix>. <i>Maáyu nang sakíta ug isinulug,</i> That disease will be cured if you vow to dance the <ix>sinulug</ix> for it.

<p><form>sinuylas</form> <xr>= <sc>SINÍLAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sinya, sinyas</form> <xr>= <sc>PLURDILIS</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sinyadur</form> (from <ix>sinyal</ix>) <pos>n</pos> in logging, the person who signals the directives of the foreman to the hauling machine operator.

<p><form>sinyal</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sign or mark thought to have significance. <i>Ang alum sa ngábil sinyal sa pagkatabian,</i> A mole on the lip is a sign of being a gossip. <number>1a</number> <tr>storm signal</tr>. <number>2</number> a scheme of scale arrangement on the legs of gamecocks which is thought to indicate the fighting ability. <number>3</number> <tr>birthmark</tr>. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having a freakish or odd physical characteristic. <i>Sinyálan nang batáa kay unsiy tudlù,</i> That child is a <pb n=906><tr>freak</tr> because he has eleven fingers. <number>2</number> having an odd or unusual characteristic (slang). <i>Sinyálan tawhána kay mau ray ituun ug way iksámin,</i> That man is really <tr>odd</tr> because he studies only when there are no exams.

<p><form>sinyas</form> <pos>n</pos> the movement of a part of the body as a sign to indicate s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <form>signal</form> with the body. <i>Sinyásan ta lang ka. Paábut lang,</i> I will give you a signal. Just wait.

<p><form>sinyúra</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>nyúra</bx>. <ix>term of address for a married woman of high position:</ix> <tr>Mrs</tr>., <tr>madam</tr>. <i>Si Nyúra Pilang,</i> Mrs. Pilang. <number>2</number> in set usage before names of saints (not shortened). <form>Nwistra &mdash; sa Patima</form> <tr>Our Lady of Fatima</tr>.<note>. added</note> <form>Nwistra &mdash; sa Lurdis</form> <tr>Our Lady of Lourdes</tr>. <pos>a</pos> for a woman to demand solicitous service. <i>Sinyúra kaáyung bayhána kay patágay pag túbig,</i> She thinks herself a grand dame. She even has to have s.o. come to pour her water. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> call s.o. <ix>sinyúra</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> move with measured and unhurried steps. <i>Makasinyúra nà siyag lakaw kay daghan mag masúgù,</i> She can afford to move <tr>leisurely</tr> because she has lots of servants. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> not do any work. <i>Ayawg pakan-a ug magsinyúra sila,</i> Don't feed them if they don't do any work. <form>sinyurahun, sinyuranhun</form> <pos>a</pos> of the <ix>sinyúra</ix> type.[+]

<p><form>sinyúris</form> <pos>n</pos> <ix>term used in direct address:</ix> <tr>ladies and gentlemen</tr> <ix>or</ix> <tr>gentlemen</tr>. <i>Atinsiyun, mga sinyúris,</i> Attention, ladies and gentlemen.

<p><form>sinyuríta</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>nyuríta</bx>. term of address to an unmarried lady of high station. <i>Si Nyuríta Maríya,</i> Miss Mary. <number>2</number> lady's pistol, small pistol made esp. for ladies to use, usually of .22 caliber. <form>pistula, ribulbir nga &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>SINYURÍTA</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr> <pos>a</pos> wanting solicitous attention, considering oneself too classy to do any sort of work. <i>Sinyuríta kaáyu siya. Paípis pa giyug kapi,</i> She is very <tr>high class</tr>. She even has to have s.o. pour coffee for her. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> call s.o. <ix>sinyuríta</ix>. <form>sinyuritahun</form> <pos>a</pos> of the <ix>sinyuríta</ix> sort.

<p><form>sinyurítu</form> <pos>n</pos> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>nyurítu</bx>. term of address for young boys of high standing. <i>Nía tu run si Nyurítu Haymi,</i> Master James will be here presently. <pos>a</pos> considering oneself too good for any sort of physical work. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> call s.o. <ix>sinyurítu</ix>. <form>sinyurituhun</form> <pos>a</pos> of the <ix>sinyurítu</ix> type.

<p><form>síp</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>safe</tr> in games. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be safe. <i>Nasíp ku kay nabuhian ag búla,</i> I was safe because he dropped the ball. <form>sipsíp</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hide-and-seek</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> play hide-and-seek. <form>-anan(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>home base</tr> in hide-and-seek.

<p><form>sípà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for a voice to be <tr>loud</tr> and <tr>resonant</tr>. <i>Ang magsisibya kinahanglan sípà ug tíngug,</i> An announcer must have a resonant voice. <number>1a</number> loud and <tr>piercing</tr>. <i>Mu rag mukulíkut sa dunggan nang tíngug nga sípà,</i> The loud and <tr>sharp</tr> voice seems to pierce the ears. <number>2</number> <tr>ear-</tr>*splitting, <tr>resounding</tr> and <tr>sharp</tr>. <i>Ang sípang butu,</i> The earsplitting explosion. <i>Sípang sagpà,</i> Resounding slap. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26S; a12P]</itype> be, become loud, resonant. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> give a loud, sharp sound. <i>Musípà ka run ug sagpáun ta ka,</i> You will resound with a <tr>crack</tr> if I hit you. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>loudness</tr>, <tr>resonance</tr>. <i>Ang kasípà sa sista,</i> The resonance of the guitar. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> characterized with loudness, <tr>resounding</tr>. <i>Masipáung haluk,</i> A resounding kiss.

<p><form>sípà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>game</tr> played usually with a woven rattan ball by participants standing in a circle. The ball is kicked with the instep and directed to another player, who in turn passes it on, and so forth. The player who misses the ball incurs a penalty. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> kick s.o. with one's instep as one would do in a game of <ix>sípà</ix>.

<p><form>sipak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2N]</itype> for plants to multiply by developing bulbs, shoots, spreading tubers, and the like. <i>Ayaw kuhái ang sibúyas nga wà pa musipak (manipak),</i> Don't harvest the leeks that haven't developed new bulbs. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> remove new growths, or pieces of tubers. <i>Sipakun mu ang mga sáhà sa ságing,</i> Split off the banana shoots. <pos>n</pos> <tr>shoots</tr>, <tr>bulbs</tr>, pieces of tubers. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shoots</tr>, <tr>bulbs</tr> that have been gathered.

<p><form>sip-ak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> split s.t. lengthwise along the grain. <i>Sip-ákun nákù ning uwáya ug tulu,</i> I will split this piece of rattan into three. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> <tr>disturb</tr> or <tr>destroy</tr> s.t. as if rending it. <i>Kadtung mga pulúnga makasip-ak (makapasip-ak) sa ákung pagtagad níya,</i> Those words can destroy my regard for him. <pos>n</pos> s.t. that has been split lengthwise from a bigger piece.

<p><form>sípan</form> <pos>n</pos> betel nut husk used as a toothbrush. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> brush the teeth with this material.

<p><form>sipat</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>naughty</tr>, <tr>mischievous</tr>, making a <tr>nuisance</tr>. <i>Sipat kaáyu ning batáa kay maghingári ug pabuyag,</i> This child is very naughty because he always makes a nuisance of himself. <i>Sipat ang mga lamuk dinhi kay mamáak bísan ug adlaw pa,</i> The mosquitoes are a real nuisance here because they bite even at daytime. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become naughty or a nuisance. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6]</itype> become <tr>rampant</tr>. <i>Misípat ang panúlis kay krísis sa kwarta,</i> Thievery is becoming rampant because <pb n=907>of the scarcity of money.

<p><form>sípat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2b]</itype> look with a sharp, piercing look. <i>Grábi siyang makasípat mu rag mudulut ang mata,</i> My, how fiercely he looked at me, as if his eyes were piercing through me.

<p><form>siphag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B5; a12]</itype> for a group to <tr>disperse</tr> by running in different directions or for s.t. in a piece to break into smithereens and be thrown in all directions. <i>Sa dihang mibutubutu misiphag ang mga dimunstríturs,</i> When the shots rang out the demonstrators dispersed. <i>Nasiphag ang mga parti sa awtu pagbutu niíni,</i> The car parts flew in all directions when it exploded. <i>Siphágun nákù nang ílang punduk,</i> I am going to break their group up. <form>-ay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> <xr>= <sc>SIPHAG</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sipi</form> interjection used to drive away cats. <i>Sipi! Sámuk ning irínga,</i> <tr>Scat</tr>! What a bothersome cat.

<p><form>sipì</form> <pos>n</pos> hand of bananas, a group of bananas growing in one line in the bunch. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> separate into hands. <i>Sip-a ang búligs ságing,</i> Separate the banana bunch into hands.

<p><form>sipii</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for <tr>CPA</tr>, <tr>Certified Public Accountant</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be a CPA. <form>&mdash; lúyir</form> one licensed as a CPA and as a lawyer.

<p><form>sipilin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>zeppelin</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> do s.t. using a zeppelin.

<p><form>sipilis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>syphilis</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> be affected with syphilis.

<p><form>sipilya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>plane</tr> for smoothing wood. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab]</itype> smooth wood with, make into a plane. <i>Sipilyáhan nátù ning tabláha arun mahámis,</i> Let us plane this board to smoothen it. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> shavings.

<p><form>sipilyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>toothbrush</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> brush s.o.'s teeth. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> brush one's teeth. <i>Manipilyu giyud ta káda human ug káun,</i> We should brush our teeth after every meal.

<p><form>siping</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> gather small bulbs, small shoots for harvest or replanting. <i>Magsiping ku sa sibúyas,</i> I'll get some onions. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2N; b(1)]</itype> reproduce by growing new shoots or bulbs. <i>Misiping (naniping) na ang mga sibúyas,</i> The onions are multiplying. <pos>n</pos> new <tr>shoots</tr> or bulbs growing from a plant.

<p><form>síping<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> <tr>stay</tr>, put close by the side. <i>Musíping ku nímug lingkud inigtís,</i> I will sit <tr>close</tr> to you during the exam. <i>Isíping ning takurì sa linung-ag arun maínit ning kapi,</i> Place the kettle next to the pot of rice to make it warm.

<p><form>síping<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> rudimentary genital organ of the opposite sex in addition to one's own genital organ. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hermaphrodite</tr>.

<p><form>síping<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shipping line</tr>.

<p><form>sípir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>zipper</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> put or attach a zipper. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>zip</tr> s.t. up. <i>Sipíri ra ring ákung likud,</i> Please zip my back. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> zip oneself up.

<p><form>sipit<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>earwig</tr>, a shiny black bug abounding in coconut trees about 1 cm. long with large mandibles. It does not bite. <number>2</number> k.o. small, blackish, scorpion-like <tr>insect</tr> about 1/2&Prime; long which bites, found on furniture.

<p><form>sípit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> carry s.t. between the arm and body. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> hold firmly between the legs. <i>Gisipítan ku níya sa duha níya ka páa,</i> She held me firmly between her legs. <form>&mdash; ug diplúma</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1346]</itype> be a <tr>degree</tr> holder. <i>Nagsípit na ku ug diplúma pagkaminyù nákù,</i> I already had my degree when I married. <form>(&rarr;)<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pincer</tr> of a crab or lobster. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> a simple <tr>anchor</tr> made from a forked branch in between which a stone is tied.

<p><form>siplà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>knock down</tr> s.t. s.o. is holding. <i>Kalita pagsiplà ang gikaptan níyang búla,</i> Knock the ball out of his hand suddenly. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>slap</tr> with the palm or an open hand. <i>Ákù siyang gisiplà kay nagsubìsubì,</i> I slapped her when she talked back.

<p><form>sipláag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB6C3]</itype> <tr>scatter</tr> over a wide area, cause to do so. <i>Kinsay nagsipláag (nagpasipláag) áring mga pasì diri sa kwartu?</i> Who scattered the corn all over the room? <i>Natigwaláan ku siya dihang nagsipláag ang mga táwu,</i> I lost sight of him when people ran away in every direction. <i>Nagkasipláag ang mga magsúun pagkamatay sa inahan,</i> The children were scattered when the mother died.

<p><form>siplágay</form> <xr>= <sc>SUPLÁGAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>siplat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP2N; b]</itype> <tr>glance</tr>, take a furtive look. <i>Nasiplatan (hisiplatan) ta ka nga nanglìlì sa lyabihánan,</i> I caught you peeping through the keyhole. <i>Ákung gipasiplatan siya ug mulíngì ba nákù,</i> I glanced at him to see if he would look my way.

<p><form>siplin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>seaplane</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> travel by, make into a seaplane.

<p><form>siplit</form> <xr>= <sc>SIPLAT</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sipra</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>monogram</tr>, a mark showing ownership. <number>2</number> <tr>sign</tr>, <tr>label</tr>. <i>Sakay sa dyip nga dúnay siprang Lahug,</i> Take a jeep which is marked Lahug. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> put a <tr>monogram</tr> on s.t. <number>2</number> mark a sign, label.

<p><form>sipris</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cypress</tr> tree.

<p><form>sipsáyid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> dock on the side of another ship. <i>Musipsáyid na lang ang barkug wà nay lunang kadunggúan sa pír,</i> A ship docks on the side of another ship if it can't find any other berthing place.

<p><form>sipsip<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> cut s.t. with long sweeping strokes with a bladed implement. <i>Maáyung kasab-an ang nagsipsip sa ákung mga misítas,</i> How I'd love to scold whoever cut <pb n=908>down my ornamental plants.

<p><form>sipsip<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2N; b6N]</itype> <tr>polish the apple</tr> (euphemism for <ix>supsup</ix>). <i>Mupasar siya kay musipsip (manipsip) man sa íyang maistru,</i> He will pass because he licks the teacher's boots. <pos>n</pos> one who polishes the apple. <form>bútù</form> <tr>apple polisher</tr>.

<p><form>Sipt</form>. <pos>n</pos> abbreviation for <ix>Siptiyimbri</ix>, <tr>September</tr>.

<p><form>sipti</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> put s.t. in a place for <tr>safekeeping</tr>. <i>Isipti nà sa sulud kay tingálig sibatun,</i> Put it inside for safekeeping because s.o. might make off with it.

<p><form>Siptimbri</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>September</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ABRIL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>siptimu grádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>seventh grade</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56]</itype> be in the seventh grade.

<p><form>siptinaryu</form> <pos>n</pos> a seven-day devotion, the <tr>Septinary</tr> for the Holy Ghost.

<p><form>sipu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> clean or clear an area of grasses, bushes, and small trees, usually at the borders of a cultivated area to prevent the plants from being in the shade or to afford a good view of the field.

<p><form>sípuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>gather around</tr> s.t. <i>Misípuk ang mga táwu sa lamísa nga gibutangan sa pagkáun,</i> The people gathered around the table where the food had been set. <number>2</number> <itype>[B6; a12P]</itype> for the head to be <tr>awhirl</tr> with too many problems. <i>Sipúkun (pasipúkun) mu ang ákung &umacracu; ning ímung mga binúang,</i> You are driving me mad with your foolishness. <form>(&rarr;)</form> a having the head awhirl and being short-tempered on that account. <i>Ang táwung daghag prublíma sipuk kaáyu ug úlu,</i> A person who has many problems is short-tempered. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> of a short-tempered sort.

<p><form>sipukar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> for work to be <tr>fast-paced</tr>. <i>Maáyung hinayhináyan ang trabáhu arun dílì magsipukar kun hápit na kinahanglána,</i> Do the work little at a time so that you won't have to do it in a great rush when the need arises. <form>sipukádu, sipukáwu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>short-tempered</tr>. <i>Sipukádu ang táwung daghag prublíma,</i> A person with many problems gets to be short-tempered. <number>2</number> requiring a fast pace of work. <i>Sipukádu na kaáyu ning ámung trabáhu kay dúna man miy didlayin,</i> We are working as fast as we can because there is a deadline to meet. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1; a12]</itype> be, become <tr>short-tempered</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> for work or a person to require a fast pace.

<p><form>sipul</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>knife</tr> 3&ndash;5&Prime; long with a somewhat humped back used to cut threads and fibers in weaving. Instead of a handle it has a long tang curved at the end forming an eye. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into, hit s.o. with a weaving knife.

<p><form>sipulkru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sepulcher</tr>.

<p><form>sipultíru</form> <pos>n</pos> caretaker of a cemetery. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; c1]</itype> be the caretaker in a cemetery.

<p><form>sip-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>head cold</tr>. <number>2</number> nasal <tr>mucous</tr>. <i>Pahíri nang sip-un mu,</i> Wipe your nose. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a14]</itype> <number>1</number> have a <tr>cold</tr>. <i>Ug sip-unun ka, inum áring tambal,</i> If you have a cold, take this medicine. <number>2</number> have a <tr>runny nose</tr>. <i>Gisip-un ku tungud sa abug,</i> I have a runny nose from the dust. <form>sip-unun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having a runny nose. <number>1a</number> tender in age, at the age when one has a runny nose. <number>2</number> <tr>awkward</tr> and <tr>ignorant</tr>.

<p><form>sípung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> draw s.t. together, as a net or mouth of a sack. <i>Dílì ku makasípung sa bàbà sa sáku kay punù kaáyu,</i> I cannot <tr>gather</tr> the mouth of the sack because it is very full. <i>Sipúngun níya ang buhuk, unyà pangkúun,</i> She gathers up her hair and ties it into a knot. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>join</tr> two ends or sides together. <i>Sulda ray makasípung sa isig ka tumuy sa alambri,</i> Only solder can join the two pieces of wire. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> finish a weave, terminating it. <i>Magsípung na ku sa kálù,</i> I'll finish weaving the outer edges of the brim of the hat. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> finish harvesting the rice, usually the little remaining part of the last part near the end of the field. <form>-un(&rarr;), -unun</form> <pos>n</pos> last small remaining part of the rice in the field to be harvested.[+]

<p><form>sípur</form> <pos>n</pos> C-4 <tr>rice</tr>, a recently introduced variety of white rice.

<p><form>sip-ut</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>narrow</tr> and <tr>tight</tr>, affording little space or freedom of movement. <i>Sip-ut kaáyu ang agiánan,</i> The passageway is very narrow. <i>Sip-ut nga sayal,</i> A tight skirt. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> be narrow and tight. <form>ma-</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>crowded</tr>, thick with vegetation. <i>Masip-ut nga kalibunan,</i> Thick underbrush.

<p><form>sipuy</form> <xr>= <sc>SIPUL</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sipya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sepia</tr> in photography. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> make a print in sepia.

<p><form>sipyat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> make a <tr>mistake</tr>. <i>Musipyat ka lang ug kas-a, papahawáun ta giyud ka,</i> Just commit one mistake, and I'll fire you. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> <tr>miss</tr> an aim, <tr>fail</tr> in a plan. <i>Dílì ku musipyat ug akuy patirúhun sa langgam,</i> If I shoot the bird, I won't miss. <i>Plánung dílì masipyat,</i> A plan that cannot fail. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>overlook</tr>, fail to do s.t. <i>Ug akuy pabasáhun walay sayup nga musipyat,</i> I won't overlook a thing if I read it. <i>Ayaw sipyáta pagbása ang sunud gulà,</i> Don't fail to read the next issue. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>error</tr> committed. <i>Way sipyat siyang muantug,</i> He never misses in his shots. <number>2</number> failure to do s.t.

<p><form>sír</form> <pos>n</pos> term of address for male teachers and other men of high status. <i>Si Sir<note>Sír?</note> Gabútin dílì makaanhi sa iskuylahan run,</i> Mr. Gabutin cannot come to school today. <i>Náay nagtawag nímu sa tilipunu, sír,</i> S.o. is calling you <pb n=909>on the phone, sir. <pos>n</pos> [<ix>gen.</ix>] <form>&mdash;</form> my, your, etc. teacher. <i>Giingnan mi sa ámung sír,</i> Our teacher told us. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> address s.o. sir.

<p><form>sira</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> close a window or door. <i>Sirhun (sirhan, isira, sirahun, sirahan) ta ning pwirta, ha?</i> Let me close the door. May I? <number>2</number> <itype>[ABN2]</itype> <tr>close</tr>, cease to operate, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Anus-a musira (manira) ang klási?</i> When do classes close? <i>Una lang kay magsira (manira) pa ku sa tindáhan,</i> Just go ahead, because I will close the store. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> <tr>wind up</tr>, make <tr>complete</tr>. <i>Átung sirhun ang nigusyu kay muadtu mi sa Amirika,</i> We will wind up the business because we are going to America. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> lock s.o. or oneself in s.t. <i>Ug magpabuyag ka, akuy musira nímu sa kwartu,</i> If you make a nuisance of yourself, I will <tr>lock</tr> you in your room. <number>5</number> <form>&mdash; ug dugù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4(1)]</itype> miss several menstrual periods, usually for a long span of time. <i>Nagmulù siya kay nasirhan siya ug dugù,</i> She is worried because she has missed several menstrual periods. <number>6</number> <itype>[AB12; c1]</itype> plant fully with; be fully planted. <i>Dì makasira (makapasira) ning tagúra sa basakan,</i> These rice seedlings aren't enough to fill all the rice paddies. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>door</tr>. <number>1a</number> <tr>gate</tr> or anything that closes. <number>2</number> window <tr>shutter</tr>. <number>3</number> end of school. <i>Kanus-a inyung sira sa klási?</i> When do your classes end? <form>&mdash; gána</form> <tr>dessert</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> have for dessert. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>SIRA</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr> <number>2</number> lock oneself in a house or room. <i>Manira ta kay náay púsil sa gawas,</i> Let's close up because there is a gunfight outside. <i>Nanira ku kay naglágut ku,</i> I locked myself in my room because I was angry. <number>3</number> <tr>zipper</tr> or <tr>button</tr> up one's clothes. <i>Walà ku makapanira sa ákung karsúnis,</i> I did not zipper my trousers. <form>karga siráda</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>KARGA</sc>.</xr> <form>sirádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> tightly closed. <i>Sirádu kaáyu ang kwartu kay walay hángin makasulud,</i> The room is <tr>closed tight</tr>, and no air can get in. <number>2</number> <tr>full</tr>, <tr>filled</tr> to capacity. <i>Dì ta makasakay kay sirádu kaáyu ang trák,</i> We can not get on because the truck is completely full. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> be tightly closed, close s.t. tight. <number>2</number> filled to the last seating capacity. <form>panirádu</form> <xr>= <sc>PANIRA</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr> <form>siradúra</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> device to close a door. <number>2</number> a lock for closing jewelry or anything to close wearing apparel.

<p><form>sírà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>venereal disease</tr> infection. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be infected with a venereal disease (slang).

<p><form>siráli</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>fruit</tr> similar in appearance to cherries, green or dark red when ripe, with a single pit, growing in bunches on a small wild or cultivated tree: <bio>Flacourtia jangomas</bio>.

<p><form>sirámiks</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ceramics</tr>.

<p><form>sirapínis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>seraphim</tr>.

<p><form>sirbandu</form> <pos>n</pos> servant (sarcastic usage). <i>Sirbandu ba ku nímu nga ímu kung sugúun niánà?</i> Am I your servant to make me do what you command?

<p><form>sirbátu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>whistle</tr> producing a high shrill noise. <number>2</number> <tr>horn</tr> on a vehicle. <number>3</number> <tr>notification</tr>, word of intimation for an important event (humorous). <i>Nakasal na diay mu? Wà man lang muy sirbátu!</i> Why, you got married without even giving us the slightest hint! <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>sound</tr> a whistle or horn. <i>Gisirbatúhan ka. Padaplin,</i> He blew his whistle at you. Go to the side. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> give word or notification for an important event (humorous).

<p><form>sirbi<sub>1</sub></form> <number>1</number> is <tr>considered</tr>, <tr>reckoned</tr> as. <i>Kining kwartáha sirbi swildu nímu,</i> This money is considered as your salary. <number>2</number> <tr>by way of</tr>. <i>Sirbi ug pasalámat níay ákung gása álang nímu,</i> By way of thanks I have a present for you. <form>walay &mdash;</form> <tr>useless</tr>. <i>Way sirbing pagkaanáka! Tapulan,</i> What a useless son! He's so lazy. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> <tr>make do</tr>, <tr>serve</tr>. <i>Magsirbi kahà ni pára halígi?</i> Will this <tr>do</tr> for a post? <number>1a</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> be of <tr>use</tr>, <tr>service</tr>. <i>Ang ákung kahibalu sa ininglis nagsirbi nákù sa ákung trabáhu,</i> My <corr sic=knolwedge>knowledge</corr> of English stood me in good stead in my work. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>serve</tr> in a household. <i>Adtung nagsirbi pa ku sa íla,</i> At the time when I was serving in their place. <number>2a</number> <tr>work off</tr> a debt by rendering menial service or serve time for a penalty. <i>Sa átù pa, musirbi pa ku sa bayinti písus,</i> In other words, I will work off the twenty pesos by serving you. <number>2b</number> <tr>care</tr>, <tr>attend to</tr>. <i>Ikaw ba tu ang nagsirbi nákù sa huspital?</i> Were you the one who attended to me in the hospital? <number>2c</number> <tr>serve</tr> in the mass. <number>3</number> <tr>serve</tr> food. <i>Isirbi na ang panihápun,</i> Serve supper now. <form>-dur(&rarr;), -yinti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>waiter</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be, become a waiter. <form>-dúra, -yinta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>waitress</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be, become a waitress. <form>mag-l-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>waiter</tr> or <tr>waitress</tr>. <number>2</number> one who assists in saying the mass. <form>-syu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> service, performance of a job in one's line of duty. <i>Sa dinhà pa ku sa sirbisyu sa pulis,</i> When I was working on the police force. <number>2</number> <tr>function</tr>, <tr>purpose</tr> which s.t. serves. <i>Unsa may sirbisyu áning pidála?</i> What is the purpose of this pedal? <number>3</number> <tr>church service</tr>. <i>Sa alas dyís ang sirbisyu,</i> The service starts at ten o'clock. <form>-syu Sibil</form> <tr>Civil Service</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>serve</tr>, perform a job or duty in line of duty. <number>2</number> <itype>[b]</itype> serve or work to pay one's debt. <i>Sirbisyúhan ku lang ang ákung útang,</i> I will just work my debt off. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> hold a church service. <form>-syáwu</form> a having rendered a great service, served well. <pb n=910><i>Gisì na ning payúnga apan sirbisyáwu kaáyu ni kanákù,</i> This umbrella is torn, but it has served me well.

<p><form>sirbi<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>serve</tr> in tennis and other games played with a net. <pos>n</pos> turn to serve, action of serving the ball. <i>Kinsa rung sirbi (sirbisyu)?</i> Whose serve is it? <form>-syu</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>SIRBI</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>sirbilyíta<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>napkin</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a]</itype> make into, provide with napkins.

<p><form>sirbilyíta<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. compact, seedy cooking <tr>banana</tr>, yellow-orange when ripe.

<p><form>sirbis</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. set aside for a certain specific use. <i>Sirbis ning awtúha pára sa mga bisíta,</i> This car is for the special use of the visitors. <i>Maáyug sirbis tung ristawrána,</i> That restaurant gives good service. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b6(1)]</itype> make s.t. available for a specific use. <i>Ayaw ug kabaláka kay sirbísan ta mu ug dakung amplipáyir,</i> Don't worry because I will have a big public system <tr>available</tr> for you. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>service</tr>, provide maintenance for. <i>Kinsa may musirbis sa mga awtu?</i> Who will service the cars? <form>&mdash; diluks</form> <pos>n</pos> service in a de luxe manner. <i>Gihatdan man giyug pamáhaw. Sirbis diluks man giyud,</i> She was served breakfast on<note>in?</note> bed. De luxe service, I should say.

<p><form>sirbísa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>beer</tr>. <form>sirbisahay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> play a game with beer as bets.

<p><form>sirbisyáwu</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>SIRBI<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><form>sirbisyu</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>SIRBI<sub>1</sub></sc> <ix>and</ix> <sc>SIRBI<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><form>sirbyinta</form> <xr>= <sc>SIRBIDÚRA</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>SIRBI<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sirbyinti</form> <xr>= <sc>SIRBIDUR</sc></xr>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <sc>SIRBI<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><form>sirguylas</form> <xr>= <sc>SIRIGUYLAS</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>siriguylas</form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>tree</tr> cultivated for its sweet and juicy fruits, yellow or reddish, similar to plums: <bio>Spondias purpurea</bio>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> gather <ix>siriguylas</ix>.

<p><form>sirikinya</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>flying fish</tr> with a long nose.

<p><form>síril</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> look all around s.w. to find s.t. <i>Nagsíril mi sa mga kasilingánan pagpangítà sa bátà,</i> We were searching all over the neighborhood looking for the child. <form>hasirilsíril</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> go frantically looking for s.t. everywhere.

<p><form>sirimunyas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ceremony</tr>, prescribed procedure. <i>Ang sirimunyas sa pag-inugurar sa tulay,</i> The ceremony for the inauguration of the bridge. <number>2</number> <tr>fuss</tr>, <tr>ado</tr>. <i>Way daghang sirimunyas gipapuyra siya,</i> He was fired without much ceremony. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> hold a ceremony.

<p><form>sirína<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>siren</tr>. <i>Sirína sa bumbíru,</i> Fire engine siren. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> sound a siren.

<p><form>sirína<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a mythical sea creature said to be a woman of some sort.

<p><form>sirináta</form> <pos>n</pos> an <tr>open air concert</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> have, perform an open air concert.

<p><form>síring</form> <xr>= <sc>SYÍRING</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>siringsíring</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> go about in a circular motion seeking or watching s.t. <i>Misiringsíring ang iruplánu úsà mutugpa,</i> The plane <tr>circled</tr> before landing.

<p><form>sirínu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>night watchman</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be a night watchman.

<p><form>sirip<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sheriff</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>attach</tr> property for nonpayment of a debt on it. <i>Ang bangku mauy musirip sa yútà ug dílì kabayran ang lún,</i> The bank will attach the land if the loan is not paid. <number>2</number> <tr>confiscate</tr>. <i>Ákung siripun ang baráha kay dì mu magtuun,</i> I will confiscate the playing cards because you don't study.

<p><form>sirip<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SILIP</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>siripinti</form> <xr>= <sc>SIRPINTI</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>síris</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>Christmas tree lights</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>series</tr> connection of bulbs or batteries. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> connect several batteries or electric bulbs in a series.

<p><form>sírit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2P; a12P]</itype> rush swiftly with a whooshing noise. <i>Mipasírit (misírit) ug padágan sa awtu,</i> <tr>Zoomed</tr> away in the car. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> do s.t. fast and with ease. <i>Misírit siya sa iksámin kay maáyu mang pagkaribyú,</i> He answered the examination <tr>easily</tr> because he had reviewed well. <pos>n</pos> hissing noise of s.t. released under pressure. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> make a hissing noise. <i>Nagsirit nga kaláyu,</i> The hissing flame.

<p><form>sirku</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> fall <tr>headlong</tr>, tumble down into s.t. <i>Misirku siya sa kanal pagkabanggà sa mutur,</i> He fell headlong into the ditch when the motorcycle crashed. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>flip</tr>, do tumbling. <i>Human siya mudágan misirku siya didtu sa túbig,</i> He ran and then <tr>somersaulted</tr> into the water. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for there to be a <tr>circus</tr>. <i>Magsirku didtu sa ámung lungsud karung pista,</i> There will be a circus in our town this coming fiesta. <pos>n</pos> circus. <form>sirkíru, sirkadur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>trapeze artist</tr>, <tr>acrobat</tr>. <form>sirkíra, sirkadúra</form> <pos>n</pos> a lady trapeze artist, acrobat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be, become an acrobat.

<p><form>sirkul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>circle</tr>. <number>2</number> the mahjong piece having the design of a circle. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC23; c1]</itype> <tr>encircle</tr>, form a circle. <i>Magsirkul na ta,</i> Let's form a circle. <i>Nagsirkul ang mga girilya sa kampu sa Hapun,</i> The guerillas encircled the Japanese camp. <i>Gisirkulan ang mga sayup,</i> The mistakes were encircled. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A12; b]</itype> draw a circle in mahjong. <number>2b</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> for the piece drawn to turn out a circle.

<p><form>sirkular</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>circular</tr>, a directive distributed from a head to lower ranking departments.

<p><form>sirkulasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> periodical <tr>circulation</tr>.

<p><form>sirkulu</form> <xr>= <sc>SIRKUL</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sirkumpirinsiya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>circumference</tr>.

<pb n=911>

<p><form>sirkumstansiya</form> <pos>n</pos> specific situation in which s.t. happened. <i>Kining hitabù usa ka sirkumstansiya sa pangágaw sa katungdánan,</i> The happening is a specific instance of usurpation of authority.

<p><form>sirkus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>circus</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> hold a circus.

<p><form>sirmun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sermon</tr> delivered by a clergyman. <number>2</number> <tr>scolding</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> deliver a sermon. <number>2</number> give a scolding. <i>Gisirmúnan siya ni Máma kay tagdugay nga mupaúlì,</i> Mom gave him a scolding because he comes home late.

<p><form>sirpinti</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a mythological dragon or serpent of stories. <number>2</number> a treacherous and malicious person. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> become, consider one a serpent.

<p><form>sirta</form> <xr>= <sc>SIRTU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sirtipay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>certify</tr>, make a written declaration concerning s.t.

<p><form>sirtipikar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> attest to the state or verity of s.t. <i>Musirtipikar ku sa pagkatinúud sa íyang diklarasiyun,</i> I will attest to the truth of his declaration. <i>Gisirtipikahan na ba ang ímung tsiki?</i> Has your check been certified? <form>sirtipikádu</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. certified as true, valid. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be, become certified.

<p><form>sirtipíku</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> certification of having finished a certain course or elementary grades. <number>2</number> a formalized declaration of thanks. <number>3</number> a document evidencing ownership of stock. <form>&mdash; sa kandidatúra</form> certificate of candidacy.

<p><form>sirtu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> <tr>ascertain</tr>. <i>Nakasirtu ka ba unsay íyang súgù nákù?</i> Have you ascertained what it was he wanted me to do? <number>2</number> <itype>[C; a12]</itype> come to final terms on an agreement. <i>Nagkasirtu na mi sa prisyu,</i> We have come to an agreement about the price. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> having come to an agreement. <number>2</number> expression in an auction sale indicating that the bid is closed.<i> Dusintus! Ala úna! Alas dus! Alas tris! Sirtu!</i> Two hundred! Going once! Going twice! Going thrice! Gone!

<p><form>síru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>zero</tr>. <number>2</number> situation of having gotten nothing. <i>Dimálas ang ámung pangisdà run kay síru,</i> We had bad luck in our fishing because we got nothing. <number>3</number> exactly in round figures, no more, no less. <i>Síru giyung kinsi písus ang hálin,</i> The sales was exactly fifteen pesos. <i>Síru nga siyam ka búlan ang íyang pagmabdus way subrang adlaw,</i> Her pregnancy was exactly nine months, not a day more or less. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> give a zero, make s.o. come out with zero. <i>Pagtuun kay musíru giyud nang maistrúha,</i> Study, because that teacher will really give a zero. <i>Gisirúhan mi sa ámung kuntra,</i> Our opponents made us come out with zero. <number>2</number> <itype>[B256; c16]</itype> put into round figures. <i>Hustu nang aníhun ug masíru nang duha ka túig,</i> It's time to be harvested when it gets to be exactly two years.

<p><form>sirù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> feed s.o. who is weak from childbirth or disease. <i>Dì ku makalakat kay nagsirù kug masakitun,</i> I can't leave the house because I'm feeding s.o. that is sick. <i>Sabaw sa báka ang isirù sa nagpatútuy,</i> Give the nursing mother beef broth. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> give a dole or handout (deprecatory). <i>Dì mu mauwaw nga gubyirnu ang magsirù ninyu?</i> Are you not ashamed to receive handouts from the government?

<p><form>siruhánu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>surgeon</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12P]</itype> be, become a surgeon.

<p><form>siruk</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>greedy</tr>, having a strong desire for food. <i>Siruk kaáyu ning irúa kay walà makakaun ug tulu ka adlaw,</i> This dog is very greedy because it hasn't eaten for three days. <number>2</number> fond of, having a strong liking for. <i>Siruk ug bayli ni si Pidru,</i> Peter is crazy about dancing. <number>3</number> one who is present at any event where food is served, invited or not. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become greedy or fond of s.t. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> attend a party or feast uninvited, just to eat the food prepared. <i>Mga bagà ug náwung nga misíruk sa híkay,</i> Those nervy people who went to the party uninvited. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> go s.w. to scrounge for food. <i>Adtu sa mga basúra magpaniruk ang mga irù ug iring,</i> The dogs and the cats scrounge for food in garbage cans. <form>&mdash; buy</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> attending banquets uninvited. <number>2</number> one starved for food, entertainment, or sex without scruples. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become a person of this sort.

<p><form>síruks</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>xerox machine</tr>. <number>2</number> a <tr>xerox copy</tr>. <i>Síruks lay ihátag, dílì ang uridyinal,</i> Just turn in a xerox, not the original. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>xerox</tr> s.t.

<p><form>sirul</form> <pos>n</pos> stomach cramps. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> get stomach cramps. <i>Diyútay ray kan-a sa hilaw nga mangga arun dílì ka sirulun,</i> Don't eat so many green mangoes so you don't get cramps.

<p><form>sirumsirum</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. goby.

<p><form>sirung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; c1]</itype> for the eyebrows to be knitted. <i>Masirung (musirung) ang ímung kílay ug masukù ka,</i> You knit your eyebrows when you are angry. <pos>a</pos> knitted eyebrows.[+]

<p><form>sírung</form> <xr>= <sc>SINULUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sirutsu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hand saw</tr>. <form>&mdash; pára láras</form> <tr>ripsaw</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> cut with a saw.

<p><form>siryal</form> <pos>n</pos> installment in a serialized movie, radio program, published stories. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> have s.t. appear in installments.

<p><form>siryal nambir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>serial number</tr>.

<p><form>siryus</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>serious</tr>, <tr>earnest</tr> in one's attitude to things. <i>Siryus siya kaáyu sa íyang trabáhu,</i> <pb n=912>He is very serious in his work. <number>2</number> seriously ill. <i>Siryus na kaáyu ang masakitun,</i> The patient is very serious. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> be serious and earnest. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> for an illness to get serious. <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> take things seriously.

<p><form>siryúsa</form> <pos>a</pos> serious-minded, not easy-going. <i>Dì siya katiáwan kay siryúsang pagkababáyi,</i> You can't fool around with her because she is the serious type. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> become serious-minded.

<p><form>siryúsu</form> <pos>a</pos> serious and earnest about what one does, not joking. <i>Siryúsu kaáyu ning ákung ig-ágaw, panagsa ra mupahiyum,</i> My cousin is serious. He rarely smiles. <i>Sigúru kang maánur ug siryúsu ka sa ímung pagtuun,</i> You will get honors if you are serious with your studies. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> be serious.

<p><form>sís</form> <number>1</number> short for <ix>Mísis</ix>, term of address for a married woman. <number>2</number> term of address to a sister.

<p><form>sisariyan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>caesarian section</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> perform or have a caesarian section.

<p><form>sisi</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small oysters.

<p><form>sìsì</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make an incision on s.t., rip s.t. open with a long tear. <i>Sìsíun ta ning ímung dintru arun maabut ku ang samad,</i> We'll have to rip your shirt so I can get at your wound. <i>Arun makúhà ang bála sìsían ang dughan,</i> We'll have to make an incision in the chest to get the bullet out. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; a]</itype> for the edge of s.t. hard to have a tear in it. <i>Nasìsì ang kílay sa buksidur,</i> The boxer got a cut on his eyebrow. <i>Sìsíun mu nang kílid sa silya nga ablíhan mu nang kúk?</i> Are you going to rip the edge of the chair by opening a coke on it? <number>2a</number> <itype>[b4(1)]</itype> have a vaginal laceration. <i>Ang bátà nga gilúgus nasìsían,</i> The child that was raped had a vaginal laceration.

<p><form>sisig</form> <xr>= <sc>ALIG-IG</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr>

<p><form>sisik, sísik</form> <pos>n</pos> carapace of a sea turtle, or similar material from a carabao horn, used for making combs. <form>sudlayng &mdash;</form> turtle-shell comb.

<p><form>sisinta</form> <xr>= <sc>SAYSINTA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sisip</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. tapered and thin, used as a wedge to hold s.t. tightly in place. <i>Ayaw ug nipsa ang sisip arun dílì mahalù dáyun ang pul-an,</i> Don't make the wedge thin so the handle will not come loose easily. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put, make into a small wedge.

<p><form>sista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>guitar</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23N; a12]</itype> play a guitar. <i>Kaantígu kang musista (manista)?</i> Do you know how to play the guitar? <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> guitar player. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> art of guitar playing.

<p><form>sisti</form> what really makes it bad is... <i>Walà lang untà tuy kásung gigisìgisì. Ang sisti (nakasisti) kay gisúnug man sab,</i> It really wouldn't have mattered if it had only been torn to pieces, but the thing that really is bad is that it was burnt too. <i>Way kásu kanang samára, ang sisti (nakasisti) lang, ug ímung pasagdan,</i> Don't worry about that wound. It's only s.t. to worry about if you don't take care of it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> <xr>= <sc>SISTI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sistíma</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>system</tr>, way in which s.t. is done. <i>Bag-ung sistíma sa pagtudlug ininglis,</i> A new system for teaching English. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> do s.t. in a sensible or systematic way. <i>Sistimáha nà ug búhat, unáhun ri, isunud tu,</i> Do it in a systematic way: This first, next that, and so forth. <form>-tiku(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> done in a systematic, sensible way.

<p><form>sistu</form> <xr>= <sc>SISTUSUMYÁSIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sistusumyásis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>schistosomiasis</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> be afflicted with schistosomiasis.

<p><form>sísu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>see-saw</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> play on, make into a see-saw.

<p><form>sisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>session</tr>, the meeting of members of a body to transact business. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> hold a session.

<p><form>sít<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> set the hair. <i>Rúla ang ímung buhuk usà isít (síta),</i> Roll your hair on curlers before you set it.

<p><form>sít<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>set</tr> of dishes, furniture, mahjong, and the like. <number>2</number> in mahjong a set of three consecutive numbers (<ix>siyà</ix>) or a set of three pieces of the same number (<ix>tríyu</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain a set of s.t.

<p><form>sít<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> adjust the time of a timepiece. <i>Isít ang rilu inigpítu,</i> Set the clock when the siren sounds.

<p><form>síta</form> <pos>n</pos> letter <tr>z</tr>.

<p><form>sitar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> express or cite s.t. <i>Nausab ang íyang hunàhúnà human ku makasitar sa ákung túyù,</i> He changed his mind after I had expressed my purpose. <i>Bi, sitari ku ug usa ka higayun diin walà ka mapildi,</i> All right, give me an instance where you did not lose. <i>Hala, isitar ang prisyu ug pila man gáling nà,</i> All right, tell me the price. How much could it be.

<p><form>sitasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>summons</tr>, an official order to appear in court.

<p><form>sithaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be embarrassed to the point of blushing in shame. <i>Musithaw ta ug hisakpan tang mamakak,</i> It is embarrassing to be caught cheating. <i>Nasithaw ang duha ka managtrátu nga hinsakpang nagháluk,</i> The couple blushed with shame because they were caught kissing.

<p><form>síti</form> <ix>number</ix> seven. Used only with words of Spanish origin: dates, prices, time of day. <pos>v</pos> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>TRIS</sc>.</xr> <pos>n</pos> k.o. white rice with long and slender grains that ripens in seven months. <pb n=913><form>&mdash; Birnis</form> <pos>n</pos> aged palm toddy. <form>&mdash; duktúris</form> <pos>n</pos> Christmas pageant concerning the life of Christ, especially focusing on the debate between Christ and the seven learned rabbis in the temple. <form>&mdash; palabras</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the seven last words of Christ before He died on the cross. <number>2</number> a Good Friday ritual commemorating the seven last words. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> perform this ritual. <form>&mdash; páris</form> <pos>n</pos> a mahjong hand containing seven pairs (see <ix>karnabal<sub>2</sub></ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B36; c6]</itype> make, get seven pairs.

<p><form>sitihul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>City Hall</tr>.

<p><form>sitinta</form> <ix>numeral</ix> <tr>seventy</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>DISIUTSU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sitlayit</form> <pos>n</pos> man-made satellite. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> have a satellite s.w.

<p><form>sitru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sceptre</tr>. <i>Ang sitru mauy timailhan<note>not sure</note><note>timailhan? P2</note> sa gahum,</i> The sceptre is a symbol of power.

<p><form>sí tru</form> <pos>n</pos> see-through cloth, k.o. lace cloth which one can see through. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> wear s.t. of see-through cloth.

<p><form>sitsaru</form> <pos>n</pos> commercial name for peas or pea pods. The plant (or the vegetable) is called <xr><sc>GISANTIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sitsarun</form> <pos>n</pos> a tidbit made of hog skins fried crisp<note> "<tr>pork rinds</tr>"?</note>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> prepare, have <ix>sitsarun</ix>.

<p><form>sitsiríka<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> gay, vivacious, and friendly. <i>Lagmit makatratu ning bayhána kay sitsiríka kaáyu,</i> This girl will likely get herself a boy friend because she is very vivacious and friendly. <number>2</number> dressing with verve, somewhat wildly. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> get to be vivacious and friendly.

<p><form>sitsiríka<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>KUMINTANG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sitsiríku</form> <pos>a</pos> being vivacious and friendly with the opposite sex, but not necessarily loose.

<p><form>sitsiríya, sitsiríyas</form> <pos>n</pos> miscellaneous goods for everyday use. <i>Namaligyà mi ug sitsiríyas ingun sa asúkar, linata, panaptun, ug uban pa,</i> We sell various goods for everyday use such as,<note>unnecessary ,? P2</note> sugar, canned goods, cloth, and the like.

<p><form>sitsit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b(1)]</itype> attract s.o.'s attention by hissing in short bursts: <ix>sst, sst</ix>.<note>,?</note><note> no, this is an example/demonstration and is at the end of the sentence</note> <i>Mupatúu nà siya ug akuy musitsit,</i> He'll stop if I go sst, sst to him. <i>Sitsíti si Nítu kay nabyaan ang íyang libru,</i> Call Nito back because he left his book behind. <pos>n</pos> a hissing call to attract attention. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> hissing at s.o., call done in this way.

<p><form>situn</form> this, that (nom. and dat.&mdash;dialectal).

<p><form>sitwasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> state of health or well-being. <i>Sa ímung sitwasiyun dílì ka pa makalakaw,</i> In your delicate state of health you should not walk. <number>2</number> <tr>situation</tr>, the circumstances that obtain<note> pertain?</note> at a given moment. <i>Ang sitwasiyun sa pamulitika sa Ilúkus,</i> The political situation in Ilocos.

<p><form>sityu</form> <pos>n</pos> a territorial subdivision of a barrio, having no political signification.

<p><form>síug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> press the abdomen downward in childbirth. <i>Gisiúgan sa mananabang ang babáying nanganak,</i> The midwife pressed down on the abdomen of the woman who was giving childbirth.[+]

<p><form>síut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>crowded</tr>. <i>Síut didtu sa sini kay maáyu ang pilikula,</i> It was crowded in the movie house because it was a good film. <number>2</number> full of weeds or grasses that obstruct. <i>Bungayi ang gardin kay síut na kaáyu,</i> Weed the garden because it is full of weeds. <number>3</number> littered with trash. <number>n</number> trash, weeds. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; ac]</itype><note>c?not sure</note> force one's way with difficulty through a crowd or thicket. <i>Gisíut níya ang katawhan pagpaduul sa intabládu,</i> He forced his way through the crowd to get near the stage. <number>1a</number> for a sound to penetrate. <i>Ang kabanhà musíut sa ákung dalunggan,</i> The noise penetrates into my ears. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> become full of weeds. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> become full of litter. <i>Ginunting papil ang nakasíut (nakapasíut) sa sála,</i> Cut up<note> "Cut-up"?</note> pieces of paper littered the living room. <form>siutsiut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> scatter litter.

<p><form>siwag</form> <pos>a</pos> jutting out inconveniently. <i>Siwag kaáyu nang rúlir ilukluk sa bulsa,</i> The ruler protrudes inconveniently if you stick it in your back pocket. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; c6]</itype> be, become protuberant and inconvenient.

<p><form>siwagkang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> stick out or be crookedly placed. <i>Dakù ang intráda sa ákung sapátus kay nagsiwagkang ang ákung kumagkù,</i> I take a shoe with a very wide vamp because my big toe sticks out to the side. <i>Ayaw siwagkánga (isiwagkang) ang ímung tiil kay malukápa ta,</i> Don't stick your legs out because we'll stumble over them.

<p><form>siwakug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)6]</itype> be cumbersome and difficult to carry due to its long length. <i>Magsiwakug dad-un ang tag-as nga mga lipak,</i> Long bamboo slats are cumbersome to carry. <pos>a</pos> cumbersome to carry because of length.

<p><form>síwang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> cut or split the lips. <i>Siwángun tikaw run ug dì ka magtárung,</i> I'll split your lips open if you don't behave. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>harelip</tr>. <i>Dáan na nà siyang siwang sukad sa gamay pa,</i> She has been a harelip since childhood.

<p><form>siwásid</form> <xr>= <sc>SALUWASID</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>siwil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for long slender things to stick out. <i>Misiwil ang lansang sa píkas bungbung,</i> The nail stuck out through the other side of the wall. <i>Punyal nga nagsiwil sa bulsa,</i> A dagger sticking out of the pocket.

<p><form>siwit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>clitoris</tr>.

<p><form>siwitsiwit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gossip</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> <tr>gossip</tr>; bear <pb n=914>tales. <i>Dì ta makasiwitsiwit ug daghan tag búhat,</i> We can't gossip if we're busy.

<p><form>siwsiw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for blood to flow profusely. <i>Misiwsiw ang dugù sa dakù nga samad,</i> Blood flowed profusely from the wound.

<p><form>siya</form> <tr>he</tr>, <tr>she</tr>. <i>Akù siyang igsúun,</i> He is my brother. She is my sister. <form>kanà, kini, kadtu &mdash;</form> <number>1</number> him, her (used when speaking about s.o., usually saying s.t. unpleasant). <i>Tabian nà siya,</i> She is a gossip. <number>2</number> this, that thing. <i>Kari siya indángan. Kanà siya mamsà,</i> This is a surgeon fish. That is a crevally. <number>2a</number> that umm... (used when one can't think of the name of s.t.). <i>Kanang instrumintu, kanà siyang ibángag sa puthaw gánì,</i> That instrument<note> , ?</note> that thing they make holes in iron with, you know.... <form>siyasíya</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> do s.t. all by himself, herself. <i>Way mitábang níya ug nagsiyasíya lang siya ug tuun,</i> Nobody helped him out and he studied all by himself. <form>níya</form> <number>1</number> <ix>gen.</ix>: his, her. <i>Ang libru níya,</i> Her book. <number>2</number> dat., short for <ix>kaníya</ix>. <form>kaníya</form> <ix>dat.</ix>: him, her. <i>Adtu kaníya ihátag,</i> Give it to her. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>ÍYA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>síya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chair</tr>, <tr>seat</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a chair.

<p><form>siyà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> in mahjong, a set of three consecutive pieces of the same design. <number>2</number> act of obtaining <ix>siyà</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> get <ix>siyà</ix>. <form>&mdash; ditirminális</form> a <ix>siyà</ix> which has a terminal (<ix>tirminális</ix>). <form>&mdash; minay</form> a winning hand which has one of each of the winds (<ix>bintus</ix>), dragons (<ix>drágun</ix>) and terminals (<ix>tirminális</ix>).

<p><form>siyam</form> <ix>numeral</ix> <tr>nine</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>TULU</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; pa sa kamut</form> not completely certain. (Lit. There are still nine when you count it on the fingers of the hand&mdash;from the notion that a newly conceived baby is not certain because much can happen in nine months). <i>Bísag hinug nag humay, siyam pa gihápun ni sa kamut kay nía pa man sa yútà,</i> Our rice is ripe, but we can't be sure of the harvest because the harvest hasn't been done yet. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ninety</tr>.

<p><form>siyap<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> peep, <tr>chirp</tr>. <i>Musiyap ang pisù ug walà dihà ang mungáan,</i> The chick will peep if the hen is not there.

<p><form>siyap<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> shop, an establishment devoted to repairing things or making things. <form>&mdash; sa makina</form> machine shop.

<p><form>siyatsíyat</form> <pos>n</pos> shooting of the ball in basketball for practice or for leisure. <i>Sa siyatsíyat hingígù siya, piru sa dúwà, sus lagyúa,</i> In practice shooting he is a good shot, but when it comes to the actual game, his shots are way off the mark. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> do practice shooting, usually leisurely.<i> Magsiyatsíyat únà ang mga magduduwà sa dì pa sugdan ang baskit,</i> The players do practice shooting before the game starts.

<p><form>siyin</form> one hundred, used only before words of Spanish origin referring to measurements or quantities. <i>Siyin mil,</i> One hundred thousand. <i>Siyin anyus,</i> One hundred years. <pos>v</pos> <xr>see <sc>DISIUTSU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>síyuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S]</itype> <tr>sputter</tr>. <i>Ígù rang nakasíyuk ang ribintadur ug walà makabutu,</i> The firecracker just sputtered and didn't explode. <number>2</number> give a continuous hissing or screeching sound. <i>Ang hángin misíyuk sa mga alambri,</i> The wind hissed through the wires. <number>3</number> have the sensation of being filled with a humming sound, ring. <i>Misíyuk ang ákung dalunggan human sa butu,</i> My ears rang after the explosion. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. stone found in chunks which crackles and sputters when put into a fire. <number>2</number> hissing, sputtering sound. <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>SÍYUK</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr>

<p><form>siyun</form> <pos>n</pos> a way of determining magically who stole s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> practice this sort of magic. <form>maN-r-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> shaman who can help find things that have been stolen.

<p><form>siyung</form> <pos>n</pos> a nickname, often used in address to a hypothetical person in an exclamation to indicate disbelief. <i>Ámut siyung! Ipalit níya ug dulsi sa iskuylahan unyà,</i> My foot he wants the money for school. He wants to buy candy, that's all. <i>Tuntúha siyung. Maáyu mag karun pa ku ánà,</i> Don't you fool me, buddy roe. You think I haven't heard that one before?

<p><form>siyut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> lacking in good judgment or prudence. <i>Siyut kaáyu ning tawhána kay magswítir bísan ug galhà,</i> That man hasn't got a brain in his head because he wears a sweater no matter how hot it is. <pos>v</pos> |B12] be, become lacking in good sense.

<p><form>siyut<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SYÚT<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>siyutsiyut</form> <xr>= <sc>BATIWTIW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>stábus</form> <xr><ix>short for</ix> <sc>SINTÁBUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sts</form>. abbreviation for <ix>sintábus</ix> centavos.

<p><form>sú<sub>1</sub></form> word used to drive chickens away.

<p><form>sú<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>zoo</tr>.

<p><form>s&umacracu;</form> <xr>= <sc>SÚLÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>súag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; b4]</itype> feel nauseated. <i>Musúag ang ákung ginhawaan ug makabahù kug kanal,</i> I feel nauseated if I smell a ditch. <i>Makasúag (makapasúag) sa ákung ginhawaan ang tambuk sa bábuy,</i> Pork fat nauseates me.

<p><form>súb</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>substitute teacher</tr>.

<p><form>súba</form> <xr>= <sc>SÚBAK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>subà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>river</tr>. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> uterine hemorrhage. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> have a uterine hemorrhage. <i>Ang babáying gisubáan sa dugù namatay,</i> The woman who had a uterine hemorrhage died. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> go upstream or to the hinterland. <i>Kadaghánan sa mga táwung nagpuyus ubus misúbà sa panahun sa gúbat,</i> Most of the people living <pb n=915>along the coast went to the mountains during the war. <i>Walà makasúbà ang mga uwang sa pagkagámay sa túbig,</i> As the water receded the shrimps could no longer proceed upriver. <form>suban-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> person living near the river. <number>2</number> the Subano, a non-Christian tribe of Western Mindanao. <pos>a</pos> having dirty habits, like the Subano's.

<p><form>subad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> devour a prey and swallow it. <i>Subarun ka sa dagkung isdà ug mahúlug ka sa dágat,</i> The big fish will devour you if you fall in the sea. <number>2</number> eat (said humorously of oneself or contemptuously of others). <i>Maáyu ka lang musubad ug pagkáun apan tapulan ka,</i> You're good at eating, but when it comes to work you're no good. <i>Musubad kug bisan unsa,</i> I'll eat anything. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23; a12]</itype> be gullible enough to swallow s.t. <i>Musubad dáyun nà siyag hambúgan,</i> She believes any tall story told to her. <form>&mdash; nga way paun</form> <xr>= <sc>KUBIT NGA WAY PAUN</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>KUBIT</sc>.</xr> <pos>n</pos> fish caught by hook and line. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> the period when fish bite. <i>Súbad run sa núkus,</i> This is the time the squids are biting. <form>subadsúbad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> for fish to start to bite. <i>Misubadsúbad na ang isdà run,</i> The fish are starting to bite now. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <number>1</number> for fish to be biting. <i>Dì pa manubad ang isdà kay dì patay ang búlan,</i> The fish are not biting yet because the moon is still out bright. <number>2</number> prey on, upon. <i>Unsa may manubad sa pisù, sawa u iring?</i> What was preying on the chicks? A snake or a cat? <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> wild animal that preys for its food. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>MANBAD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>súbak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give a flavor to vegetables by adding fish or meat. <i>Maáyung isúbak ang bulad sa munggus,</i> Mung beans taste good if cooked with a little dried fish. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> meat or fish used with vegetables for flavor.

<p><form>subang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b8]</itype> for heavenly bodies to rise. <i>Pagsalup sa adlaw misubang ang daktul,</i> When the sun set, the full moon rose. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for it to be the first quarter. <i>Mutári sila sa ílang manuk inigsubang,</i> They will wait for the first quarter to fight their cocks. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> appear, become known as s.o. distinguished. <i>Iládu na siya sa nakasubang na siya sa pamálak,</i> He was well-known after he had distinguished himself in poetry. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> appear as if to rise. <i>Usa ka pahiyum misubang sa íyang dagway,</i> A smile appeared in her face. <pos>n</pos> moon of the first quarter. <i>Primírung subang,</i> First day after the new moon. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>east</tr>. <form>subangsúbang</form> <xr>= <sc>SUBANG</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>subasku</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>squall</tr>. <number>2</number> a surge of emotion. <i>Mu ra siyag malumus adtung subasku sa kamíngaw,</i> It seems as though he would drown in that wave of loneliness. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>squall</tr>. <i>Nabalían mi ug pálu kay hingsubaskuhan mi,</i> We had a broken mast because we were caught in a squall.

<p><form>subasta</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> auction s.t. off. <i>Isubasta ang mga rilu nga walà malukat,</i> They will auction off the watches that were not redeemed. <pos>n</pos> <tr>auction</tr>.

<p><form>súbaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>head cold</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b4]</itype> catch a cold. <i>Gisip-un ku kay gisubáwan ku,</i> I have a runny nose because I have a cold.

<p><form>súbay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S; a2]</itype> follow, go along a certain way. <i>Musúbay ka sa dálan ug likù sa tuu sa may mangga,</i> Follow the path and turn right near the mango tree. <i>Ang karsáda musúbay sa baybay,</i> The road goes along the beach. <i>Subáya ang alambri arun hibaw-an nímug háin ihukut,</i> Follow the wire up so you will know where it is tied. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> imitate s.o. <i>Maáyu siya nga musúbay sa sinultian sa maistru,</i> He is good in mimicking the way the teacher speaks. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> go through the details of an event to learn about it more clearly. <i>Magsúbay ta unsay nahitabù adtung gabhiúna,</i> Let's discuss what happened that night in detail. <number>3a</number> trace a family tree. <i>Subáya ang kagíkan sa kaslúnun kay tingálig paryinti,</i> Trace the engaged couple's family tree, for they might turn out to be related. <number>3b</number> go through accounts in detail. <i>Subáyun ta ang nakúhà gíkan sa Hulyu,</i> Let us review how much you took, starting from July. <number>4</number> <itype>[A12S3; a12]</itype> follow rules, customs, manners. <i>Nagsubay ka ba sa baláud?</i> Are you observing the law? <number>4a</number> be in accordance with. <i>Ug subáyun ang baláud sad-an siya,</i> Under the law, he is guilty. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> along, following a path. <i>Lakaw súbay sa karitíras,</i> Go along the feeder road. <number>2</number> in accordance with. <i>Ang ákung gibúhat súbay man sa baláud,</i> What I did was in accordance with the law. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12S]</itype> <number>1</number> relate in detail. <i>Naghinúbay (naghinubay) si Pidru sa íyang mga kaági,</i> Pedro related his past experiences. <number>2</number> trace relationships. <form>pina-</form> according to. <i>Pinasúbay sa baláud dakù tà kag buhis,</i> According to the law, you should pay a big tax.

<p><form>subdibáyid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> subdivide an area of land into housing lots for commercial purposes.

<p><form>subdibisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>housing development</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make, make into a housing development.

<p><form>*súbid</form> <form>paN-, subidsúbid</form> <pos>n</pos> trolling with a swiftly paddled one- or two-man boat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> fish by trolling. <form>subiran</form> <pos>n</pos> a small and narrow outriggered boat used for trolling of this sort.

<pb n=916>

<p><form>subída</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>upgrade</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> go uphill, on an upgrade. <i>Ug musubída ang karsáda, isigunda,</i> When the road goes into an upgrade, shift into second. <i>Nangínit ang makina samtang nagsubída ang trák,</i> The motor overheated while the truck was negotiating the upgrade. <form>subidahun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>steep</tr>. <number>2</number> difficult, hard to solve. <i>Subidahun kaáyu ning sulirána,</i> This problem is very difficult. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be, become difficult or steep.

<p><form>subing<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> individual stalks of rice not ripe during the harvest and left to be gleaned. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> glean rice that was left to ripen.

<p><form>subing<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a one-string musical instrument made of bagákay bamboo. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> play the <ix>subing</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> make a <ix>subing</ix>.

<p><form>subir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> increase in price or intensity. <i>Misubir ang prisyu sa mais,</i> The price of corn went up. <i>Misubir ang íyanq hilánat,</i> His temperature went up. <form>subídu</form> <pos>a</pos> for prices to be high or s.t. else to be high in numerical quantity. <i>Subídu ang íyang grádu,</i> He got high grades.

<p><form>subirbíya</form> <xr>= <sc>SUBIRBÍYU</sc> (female).</xr>

<p><form>subirbiyu, subirbíyu</form> <pos>a</pos> difficult to discipline, insistent on doing as one likes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become recalcitrant. <i>Masubirbiyu ang prísu ug ímung lugaklugákan,</i> A prisoner will become unmanageable if you show him leniency. <form>pubring &mdash;</form> <pos>a</pos> financially hard-up, but insisting on one's wants. <i>Pubring subirbiyu kaáyu nang tawhána. Gitagáan gánig trabáhu, dílì kay gustung magmanidy&icaron;r siya,</i> That man is a beggar but he won't work except as manager.

<p><form>subìsubì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b5]</itype> answer back when reprimanded. <i>Hílum! Ayaw kug subìsubia (subìsubii),</i> Shut up! Don't you talk back to me.

<p><form>sublì</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> do s.t. twice, again for the second time around. <i>Musublì ku ug káun kay gigútum pa ku,</i> I will eat again because I am still hungry. <number>1a</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> <tr>repeat</tr>, say s.t. again. <i>Sublíun ku lag kas-a ug památig maáyu,</i> I will repeat once. Now listen carefully. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> go over s.t. for errors. <i>Sublíun nákù nà ug makatulu arun walà giyuy mga sayup,</i> I will go over it three times so there will be no mistakes. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13; b]</itype> <tr>reelect</tr> s.o. <i>Sublían nátù si Anduy pagkamíyur,</i> Let us reelect Andoy for mayor. <pos>n</pos> repeated term in office. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> reelection aimed at.

<p><form>submarínu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>submarine</tr>. <number>2</number> bedbug (humorous). <i>Unsáun pagkatúlug nga ayruplánu sa táas submarínu sa ubus,</i> How can you sleep with lots of airplanes (mosquitoes) above and submarines (bedbugs) underneath you? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> travel by submarine. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> sabotage an activity.<i> Walà mulampus ang ákung paági kay ímu man nga gisubmarínu,</i> My procedure did not succeed because you sabotaged it.

<p><form>submasinggan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>submachine gun</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> shoot with a submachine gun.

<p><form>submit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> hand in or over. <i>Kinsay nagsubmit áring blangku nga papil?</i> Who submitted this blank piece of paper? <i>Walà pa ku makasubmit sa ripurt,</i> I have not yet handed in the report.

<p><form>submitir</form> <xr>= <sc>SUMITIR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>subpína</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>subpoena</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> serve s.o. with a subpoena.

<p><form>subra</form> <pos>a</pos> in excess, <tr>too many</tr>, <tr>too much</tr>. <i>Subra ra kaáyu ang túbig nga ímung gibutang sa linat-an,</i> You put much too much water in the stew. <i>Subra ra kaáyu ang ímung pag tabakù,</i> You smoke much too much. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B46]</itype> be excessive. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> be more than a certain amount. <i>Ang íyang swildu musubra ug gatus human ug báyad sa mga útang,</i> His salary will be a bit more than a hundred after he pays off his debts. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get a little extra. <i>Sa ákung pangisdà makasubra ku ug diyútay nga ibaligyà human kuhái sa pagkáun,</i> I get a little extra from my fishing after taking out what we use for food. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> set aside a bit for s.o. <i>Subráhi (subrái) ku ug diyútay nga dulsi, ha?</i> Leave some candy for me, will you? <number>n</number> the remainder left over after what is needed has been taken, the excess. <i>Ang subra gibálik human ku mukúhag tulu,</i> I returned the remainder after I took three. <i>Iúlì ang subra kay kini ray ákung gikinahanglan,</i> Return the extra ones because I only need this one. <form>&mdash; ibasta</form> <pos>a</pos> done in excess. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be given, done in excess. <i>Dì na hinúun makamaung manikaysíkay ang táwu ug magsubra ibasta ra ang átung tábang kaníya,</i> A man won't know how to shift for himself if he is given more help than necessary. <i>Bísag unsay buhátun basta masubra ibasta makadáut,</i> Anything done in excess is harmful. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6P]</itype> be excessive, too much. <i>Naghinubra ang ímung pag-inum,</i> You are drinking too much. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> exaggerate a story. <i>Wà ra tuy kásu piru gipasubrahan ug sugílun,</i> It was nothing serious but he exaggerated when he recounted it. <form>subraánay</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>excessive</tr>, beyond the bounds of good taste. <i>Subraánay pud nga nakapamulbus si Pilang,</i> Pilang powders her face excessively.

<p><form>subri</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>envelope</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> place s.t. inside an envelope.

<p><form>subrikáma</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bedspread</tr>.[+]

<p><form>subrikargu</form> <pos>n</pos> purser on a vessel. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> <pb n=917>be, become a purser. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> make s.o. a purser.

<p><form>subsik</form>. abbreviation for <ix>subsikritaryu</ix> undersecretary.

<p><form>subsub</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>frequent</tr>. <i>Kasubsub nímu nga mutan-aw ug sini!</i> How often you go to the show! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> do s.t. often. <i>Subsúbun nímu ug túbig ang tanum,</i> Water the plants frequently.

<p><form>subu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B23(1)46; b8]</itype> for s.t. boiling to overflow. <i>Ukbi ang kardíru kay misubu ang inínit,</i> Take the cover off of the pot because water is overflowing. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> douse water onto live embers. <i>Subhi ang bága úsà ta manglákaw,</i> Pour water on the embers before you leave. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> temper, harden iron or steel by heating it and then immersing it in oil or water. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> initiate a series of activities or wear s.t. for the first time. <i>Ang prisidinti mauy musubu sa bayli,</i> The president will start the dance. <i>Siyay nakasubu ug sakay sa ayruplánu,</i> He rode the inaugural flight of the airplane. <pos>n</pos> temper of metal. <form>walay &mdash;</form> inexperienced<note> specific to courting, or add @?</note>. <i>Ayawg patugatuga ug pangulitáwung Maríya kay wà kay subu,</i> Don't try to court Mary because you are inexperienced.

<p><form>subù</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sad</tr>. <i>Subù ug nawung,</i> Having a sad countenance. <i>Subù nga palandúngun,</i> Sad to think about. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c5]</itype> be sad. <i>Gikasubù ku ang dílì kalikayan nga hitabù,</i> I very much regret the unavoidable incident. <form>paha-</form> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> extend one's condolences. <pos>n</pos> <tr>condolences</tr>. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sadness</tr>. <form>kasub-ánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>grief</tr>, <tr>sorrows</tr>. <i>Kasub-ánan nga way katapúsan,</i> Sorrows without end. <form>masulub-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> characterized with grief, <tr>mournful</tr>. <i>Usa ka masulub-un nga bakhù,</i> A mournful sob. <number>2</number> <tr>grieving</tr>. <i>Ang masulub-ung kapíkas,</i> The grieving wife. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be, become sad. <form>maka-r-(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>saddening</tr>. <i>Makasusúbung hitabù,</i> A saddening event.

<p><form>súbuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pith</tr>. <form>subuksúbuk sa mais</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> pith of cornstalks or pith-like substance in the middle of a corncob. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> mostly pith. <i>Dílì lig-un ning kahúya kay subúkun kaáyu,</i> The piece of wood is not strong because it is mostly pith.

<p><form>subul</form> <pos>n</pos> sprout from the ground, sprout of hair or feathers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>sprout</tr>. <i>Makasubul na sab ang mga balíli ug uwanun,</i> The grass will sprout if it rains. <i>Gisubulan nag balhíbu ang íyang íluk,</i> Hair has sprouted in his armpits.

<p><form>*subung</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>SUMBAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>súbung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> light a cigar or cigarette from s.o. else's cigarette or cigar.

<p><form>*súbung<sub>2</sub></form> <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> gold alloyed with other metal. <i>Sinúbung ning singsínga,</i> This ring is not pure gold. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be gold alloy.

<p><form>suburnu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bribe</tr>. <i>Madúgay ang papílis ug way suburnu,</i> The papers will take forever if there is no bribe. <number>2</number> crime of bribery. <i>Ang suburnu nabúhat sa panahun sa prisidinti pa si Makapagal,</i> The bribery was done when Macapagal was president. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give a <tr>bribe</tr>.

<p><form>súbut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be pricked, get a splinter in one. <i>Nasúbut siya pagpapha níya sa íyang gisapilyáhan,</i> He got a splinter in him when he rubbed his hands over the board he was planing.

<p><form>subwak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)4; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> for water to burst out of a hole. <i>Misubwak ang túbig sa tuburan,</i> The water gushed out of the source of the spring. <number>2</number> for the contents to overflow a container. <i>Misubwak ang mga pasahíru sa trák,</i> The bus is overflowing with passengers. <i>Nagsubwak ang mga táwu sa sinihan,</i> The moviegoers spilled out of the movie house.

<p><form>súd</form> <xr>= <sc>SULUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>súda</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>soda water</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>soda crackers</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> mix s.t. with soda. <form>&mdash; krákirs</form> <xr>= <sc>SÚDA</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr>

<p><form>sud-an</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>SULÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sud-ip</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1246; b8]</itype> choke on s.t. that went into the respiratory passage. <i>Hingsud-ipan ka ug muinum ka ug dalìdalì,</i> You will choke if you drink too fast. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. sweet potato with reddish peelings and white meat, so called because the meat is moist and tends to stick in the throat.

<p><form>sudiyà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN2; b(1)]</itype> point out to a person that he was wrong or that he failed to do s.t. <i>Walà pa ku makasudiyà (makapanudiyà) níya báhin sa íyang gisáad nákù,</i> I have not reminded him about what he promised me. <i>Sudiyái ku ug mahustu ka kay sigúru ku nga sayup giyud tu,</i> You may point it out to me if it turns out you were right, because I am sure that you are wrong. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> characterized with a remonstrating attitude. <i>Mitan-aw siya nákù sa usa ka masudiyáun nga pagtan-aw,</i> He looked at me with a remonstrating look. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> the action of pointing it out to a person that he was wrong. <form>adlaw sa paN-</form> <tr>Judgment Day</tr>.

<p><form>sudiyang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a cone-like, tapering structure used as an animal or fish trap into the smaller end of which the animal enters with ease, but which has tines, such that the animal cannot back out. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> catch or make into this sort of trap.

<p><form>sudiyang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> large tree of the primary or secondary forest producing hard, dark red <pb n=918>lumber: <bio>Ctenolophon philippinense</bio>.

<p><form>sudlay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>comb</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>harrow</tr>, a raft-like device with toothed undersides pulled by a water buffalo, used for raking off weeds and breaking up the lumps of soil. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>comb</tr> s.o.'s hair. <number>2</number> <tr>harrow</tr>. <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> look at s.t. from one point to the other with deliberate care. <i>Gisudlay níya pagtan-aw ang babáyi gíkan sa úlu ngadtu sa tiil,</i> She <tr>scrutinized</tr> the girl from head to foot. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>comb</tr> one's hair. <i>Wà ka makapanudlay,</i> You haven't combed your hair!

<p><form>sudlut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b2]</itype> <tr>spurt</tr>, <tr>squirt out</tr>. <i>Misudlut ang dugù sa samad,</i> Blood spurted out of the wound. <number>2</number> <itype>[B46; b6]</itype> <tr>bulge</tr> or come partially out of an opening. <i>Nagsudlut na ang bátà sa pag-abut sa mananabang,</i> The infant's head was already out when the midwife arrived.

<p><form>sudsud<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>close together</tr>. <i>Sudsud kaáyu ang kamátis nga pagkatanum,</i> The tomatoes are planted very close together. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> place, or plant close together. <i>Isudsud (sudsúrun) nímu ug butang ang mga silya,</i> Place the chairs close together.

<p><form>sudsud<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>dig up</tr> or <tr>turn up</tr> the earth by shoving with the tip of an instrument or (by animals) with the snout. <i>Sudsúra ning mga balíli,</i> Clear off this grass (with a pushing motion). <i>Ang gisudsúran sa bábuy nga yútà nangalúngag,</i> The place where the pig had dug out the earth with its snout is full of holes. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> push sand lightly with the feet in search of crabs. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> catch fish with a <ix>sudsud</ix>. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> bladed instrument with a blunt end used to remove weeds by shoving under the roots. <number>2</number> k.o. small one-man fishing <tr>net</tr> made of coarse <ix>sinamay</ix> mounted on two poles, pushed through shallow water to catch shrimps or small fish. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> go fishing with the <ix>sudsud</ix>.

<p><form>sud-uk</form> <xr>= <sc>SID-UK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sud-ung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a]</itype> <tr>look</tr> at s.t. or s.o. with interest or intent. <i>Sud-úngun ku ang ímung ritrátu ug abutun ku ug kamíngaw,</i> I will <tr>gaze</tr> at your picture if I feel lonesome. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> allow s.o. to see. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> live long enough to see the fruit of one's labor, foolishness. <i>Gipasud-ung ang amahan nga nagsípit ug diplúma ang tanan níyang mga anak úsà siya mamatay,</i> The father lived long enough to see all his children graduate before he died. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> live only long enough to be seen. <i>Ígù lang nagpasud-ung tung batáa kay usa ra ka búwan sa maháyag,</i> That child lived only long enough to be seen because it died a month after birth.

<p><form>súduy</form> <xr>= <sc>SÚRUY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>suga</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> repolish rice that still has some unhusked grains. <i>Sugaha ang bugas arun hanglas kan-un,</i> Repolish the rice so that it is smooth to eat.

<p><form>sugà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lamp</tr>. <form>alambri sa &mdash;</form> electric wire. <form>-ng dikumbáti</form> <tr>barn lantern</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>electric lights</tr>. <i>Way sugà karung gabíi,</i> There will be no electricity tonight. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>light</tr> lights. <i>Sug-i ang altar kay mangadyì na ta,</i> Light the altar because we're going to pray. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> use s.t. for light. <i>Nagsugà mi ug kandílà pagblak-áwut,</i> We used candles during the blackout. <number>2a</number> <formx>ika- ang íhì</formx> for a woman to be very beautiful (lit. such that her urine could be used to light a lamp). <i>Ikasugà ba ang íhì sa naasáwa sa ímung anak?</i> Is your son's wife beautiful? <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> go fishing using lamps. <i>Manugà mi rung gabíi sa hunásan,</i> We will hunt shellfish in the tidal flats tonight with a lamp. <form>sugàsugà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. marine <tr>crab</tr> usually found inhabiting rocks and shallow water, 3&Prime; across and round with a thick shell. <number>2</number> name given to dried <ix>lagaw</ix>.

<p><form>sugà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for corn plants to develop or grow tassels. <i>Malípay ku kun magsugà na ang ámung mais,</i> I am happy when our corn plants begin to grow tassels.

<p><form>sugabin</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> <tr>add</tr> s.t. to the principal thing. <i>Sugabini ug kamúti ang kan-un,</i> <tr>Supplement</tr> the rice with sweet potatoes. <i>Isugabin sa ímung sulat ang ákung pangumusta kaníla,</i> Give them my regards in your letter. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> have a <tr>sideline</tr>. <i>Nakasugabin kug tudlù magabíi gíkan sa upisína,</i> I got a job part-time teaching at night after office hours.

<p><form>sugábu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; b6]</itype> dive or fall with a splashing or thudding sound. <i>Misugábu sa lunangan ang hubug,</i> The drunk splashed into the mud puddle.

<p><form>sugákud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> be up to doing s.t., keeping up with s.t. <i>Dílì ku musugákud ánang trabahúa,</i> I am not up to that job. <i>Dì ku makasugákud sa instulmin,</i> I cannot keep up with the installments. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> <tr>bear</tr>, <tr>endure</tr>. <i>Dílì siya makasugákud sa katugnaw,</i> He cannot bear the cold.

<p><form>súgal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gambling</tr>. <i>Ang súgal mauy nakapútu níya,</i> Gambling made him bankrupt. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> <tr>gamble</tr>. <i>Ug isúgal nímu ang ímung kwarta, náa ra nà nímu,</i> If you want to gamble your money away, it's up to you. <number>2</number> <itype>[C3]</itype> <tr>click</tr>, be in position to come to an understanding with one another (humorous). <i>Ulitáwu ku ug dalága ka, magsúgal giyud run ta niíni,</i> I'm single and you are unmarried. <pb n=919>We would make an ideal pair. <i>Dì ta niíni magkasúgal kay nagkalainláin ang átung mga iduluhíya,</i> We can't have a meeting of minds because we hold to different ideologies. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23; b6]</itype> go ahead with s.t. come what may. <i>Musugal kag larga bísag bagyu?</i> Are you going to take the risk and sail even though there's a typhoon? <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; c6]</itype> <tr>risk</tr>, expose s.t. of value to loss. <i>Nagsugal ka sa ímung kinabúhì ánang trabahúa,</i> You are risking your life in that work. <number>3</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> pretend s.t. to serve as an excuse or to mollify s.o. <i>Gisugalan níya si Pápa ug hilakhílak arun dì siya hilatiguhan,</i> She treated Daddy to her crocodile tears to escape a spanking. <i>Ayaw kug sugali ánang baráhang dunut,</i> Don't give me those phoney excuses. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gambling den</tr>. <form>sugarul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gambler</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B123]</itype> be, become a gambler.

<p><form>sugála</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> <tr>bother</tr> or <tr>annoy</tr> by doing s.t. at a most inopportune time. <i>Musug&amacracu; (manug&amacracu;) ug sakit ang ákung riyúma ug tingtugnaw,</i> My rheumatism bothers me terribly when the weather is cold. <i>Ngánung magsug&amacracu; ka bag pangáyug kwarta ug wà tay kulirù?</i> Why do you have to annoy me by asking me for money at a time when I'm broke?

<p><form>*sugamak hi-/ha-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b8]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>run into</tr>, <tr>collide</tr>. <i>Ug didtu mahisugamak ang awtu sa paril,</i> And the car ran smack into the stone wall. <number>2</number> run into s.t. to experience, meet. <i>Ug dílì ka mag-amping mahisugamak ka sa kasámuk,</i> If you are not careful, you will run into trouble. <i>Patrulyang íyang hisugamakan,</i> The patrol he ran into.

<p><form>sug-ang</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wood burner</tr> composed of three stones triangularly arranged or a heavy metal ring or a clay <tr>burner</tr> onto which pots are set</b>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> put, make, make into such a burner. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; c6]</itype> set the dinner on the burner. <i>Nagsug-ang ku ug paniudtu kay alas unsi na,</i> I am putting the dinner on the stove because it is eleven o'clock. <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; a12]</itype> be placed in a triangular arrangement like the <ix>sug-ang</ix>. <i>Nag-atúbang silang tulu ug lingkud, nagsinug-ang,</i> The three sat in a circle facing each other. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>SUG-ANG</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>sugapà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a3b4(1)]</itype> <tr>encounter</tr> s.t. by accident. <i>Nakasugapà mig bangkíti paglabay námù sa íla,</i> When we went by their house we came upon them having a banquet. <i>Dílì ka untà masugapà sa kadaútan,</i> I hope you don't meet danger.

<p><form>sugarul</form> <xr>see <sc>SÚGAL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>súgat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; ac3]</itype> <tr>meet</tr>, approach from opposite directions. <i>Dílì ka musúgat samtang maglatay na ku sa tabla,</i> Don't come across in the opposite direction while I am <form>still</form> walking along the plank. <i>Nagkasúgat kami sa Magalyánis,</i> We happened to meet downtown. <i>Sugáta siya sa istasyunan,</i> Meet him at the bus terminal. <number>2</number> <itype>[a1]</itype> <tr>welcome</tr>, <tr>greet</tr> heartily. <i>Sugátun nátù siya sa usa ka masipáung pakpak,</i> Let's welcome him with a resounding applause. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> meet the senses. <i>Usa ka hínay nga hagíyus misúgat sa íyang dalunggan,</i> A low hissing sound met his ears. <pos>n</pos> the Roman Catholic ritual on Easter dawn which represents the meeting of Christ and the Blessed Virgin. Two groups start out from different houses, one group of women, carrying the image of the Holy Mother veiled on a cart, and the other, a group of men carrying an image of Christ on a cart. The two groups meet where an arch has been erected in which a child or several children dressed as angels (<ix>alilúya</ix>) are suspended. Upon the meeting of the two groups the angels are lowered and white pigeons are released, and one of the angels lifts the veil of the Holy Mother. The decorations used in this ceremony are gathered by the spectators for their magical properties. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> presents brought by a visitor.[+]

<p><form>sugatà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; b4(1)]</itype> <tr>meet</tr> accidentally, <tr>run into</tr>. <i>Ayaw ug súruy magabíi kay makasugatà ka ug áway,</i> Don't go around at night because you may just run into a fight. <i>Nasugat-an nákù sila sa may taytáyan,</i> I happened to meet them near the bridge. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> experience, be met with difficulties or misfortune. <i>Nasugatà siya sa usa ka pait nga katalagman,</i> He was met with bitter calamity.

<p><form>sugba</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>broil</tr> over hot coals. <i>Isugba na ba ring karni?</i> Shall I broil this meat now? <number>2</number> put or throw into the fire to burn. <i>Akuy musugba sa ímung duláan ug dì ka maghílum,</i> I will throw your toys into the fire if you aren't quiet. <form>aN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>moth</tr>. <form>sugbaánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> an <tr>open fire</tr> where meat is broiled. <number>2</number> <tr>forge</tr>. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> broiled meat or fish.

<p><form>Sugbu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> name of the island of <tr>Cebu</tr>. <form>syudad sa &mdash;</form> <tr>Cebu City</tr>. <form>Sugbuánun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Cebuano</tr>, from the island of Cebu. <form>sinugbuanun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Cebuano</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> speak Cebuano.

<p><form>sugbu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a3]</itype> <tr>dive</tr> or jump into water. <i>Dì ku musugbu dihà sa mabaw,</i> I won't dive where it's too shallow. <i>Nasugbu siya sa lunangan sa kábaw,</i> He fell into the puddle where the water buffalo wallowed. <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>fishing</tr> with a hand line for fishes that <pb n=920>feed on the bottom, composed of a line, sinker, and a hook with a long leader. The equipment is lowered, and when the sinker touches the bottom, it is raised so that the hook is a couple of inches off the bottom, and the line is held until s.t. bites.

<p><form>sugi</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>halfbeak</tr> with very fine scales.

<p><form>súgid</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN2; c6]</itype> <tr>tell</tr>, <tr>relate</tr>. <i>Kinahanglan nga musúgid ka sa tinúud nga nahitabù,</i> You must relate what really happened. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> <tr>confess</tr> one's sin to a priest to obtain absolution. <i>Human siya makasúgid (makapanúgid) gimaymáyan siya sa párì,</i> After he confessed his sins, the priest gave him words of advice. <number>3</number> <itype>[c3]</itype> <tr>be heard of</tr>. <i>Wà na igsúgid ang nangalúnud sa barku,</i> The passengers of the ship that sank were never heard of again<note>added a</note>. <i>Ikasúgid ka pa kahag nakauban ka pa sa Byitnam?</i> Do you think you would still be alive if you had been sent to Vietnam? <form>paN-</form> <itype>[A2]</itype> <xr>= <sc>SÚGID</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr> <form>walay paN-</form> <tr>wiped out</tr>, <tr>annihilated</tr> (lit. nobody was left to tell the story). <i>Way nanúgid sa inasal nga gidá sa piknik,</i> The roast pig that was brought to the picnic was wiped out. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12S; b(1)]</itype> tell stories at length. <i>Naghinugid siya sa mga primyu nga íyang nadaug,</i> He related in great length the prizes he won. <form>sugilánun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>short story</tr>. <form>magsusugilanun</form> short story writer. <form>ig-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>confession</tr>. <form>kasugíran</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>history</tr>, a related series of past events. <number>2</number> <tr>legend</tr>, s.t. handed down by tradition. <xr><ix>see also</ix> <sc>SUGÍLUN</sc>.</xr>[+]

<p><form>sugígi</form> <pos>n</pos> large <tr>basket</tr> woven out of thin bamboo slatting, used for storing large amounts of grain. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> make, make into a storage basket.

<p><form>sugilagming</form> <pos>n</pos> very short story (coined from <ix>sugilánun</ix> and <ix>gagming</ix>).

<p><form>sugilakbit</form> <pos>n</pos> story in a summarized version of a longer story (from <ix>súgid</ix> and <ix>lakbit</ix>).

<p><form>sugilambung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>novel</tr>.

<p><form>sugilánun</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>SÚGID</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sugílun</form> (from <ix>súgid</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN2; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>tell</tr>, <tr>report</tr>. <i>Hilatiguhan ta ug musugílun (manugílun) kang Pápa nga nangáun ta ug mangga,</i> We'll both get whipped if you tell Daddy that we ate mangoes. <i>Gisuginlan ka na ba sa balità?</i> Have you been told the news? <number>2</number> enumeration of pertinent facts. <i>May mga sugílun nga midagsang diri nga minyù ka,</i> The story is going around that you are married. <form>píla may &mdash;</form> to <tr>make a long story short</tr>. <i>Píla may sugílun gipangasáwa níya ang babáyi,</i> To make a long story short, he married the woman. <form>paN-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> <tr>tell</tr> s.t. around. <i>Nanugilun si Tasyu nga uyab na kunu mu,</i> Tasio is telling people that you're his girl now. <form>hiN-</form> <xr>= <sc>HINÚGID</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>SÚGID</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sugkay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>stir</tr> a mixture that contains some solid. <i>Sugkáya ang linúgaw,</i> Stir the porridge. <number>2</number> for the emotions to be stirred up. <i>Galamhan nga gisugkay sa túmang pagbásul,</i> Thoughts that were <tr>disturbed</tr> by extreme feelings of repentance.

<p><form>suglib</form> <xr>= <sc>SUGNIB</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sugmat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> for a quiescent disease to <tr>recur</tr>, <tr>act up</tr>. <i>Misugmat na sab ang ákung riyúma,</i> My rheumatism is acting up again. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> for criminality to recur or be on the rise. <i>Misugmat na usab ang kúut karun,</i> Pickpocketing is on the rise again. <pos>n</pos> <tr>recurrence</tr> of an ailment.

<p><form>sugmaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3PB26; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> for a body to <tr>plunge</tr> into liquid, as a fly in coconut palm toddy, hot metal in water. <i>Kinsay nagsugmaw sa ákung sapátus sa túbig?</i> Who threw my shoes into the water? <i>Misugmaw ang lángaw sa tubà,</i> The fly plunged into the coconut palm toddy. <number>2</number> plunge into s.t. unpleasant. <i>Nasugmaw siya sa mga útang,</i> She plunged herself into debt.

<p><form>sugmuy</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dejected</tr>, with a slumping body. <i>Sugmuy kaáyung kandidátung napildi,</i> The candidate who lost was quite dejected. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> <number>1</number> become <tr>crestfallen</tr>. <i>Nasugmuy ang ulitáwu kay gibastid,</i> The young man was dejected because he broke up with his girl. <number>2</number> be <tr>assuaged</tr>. <i>Nasugmuy ang ákung kabaláka dihang nakítà ku siya,</i> My worry was <tr>relieved</tr> when I saw him.

<p><form>sugnib</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> set s.t. on fire or touch a flaming brand to it. <i>Ákù na ba ring sugníban ang sagbut?</i> Shall I <tr>set fire</tr> to the trash? <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; b(1)]</itype> <tr>incite</tr> s.o. into action, <tr>enthuse</tr> s.o. for s.t. <i>Usa ka suliran nakasugnib nákù sa pagsulat kanímu ning pila ka púlung,</i> A great problem <tr>goaded</tr> me to write you these few lines. <i>Gisugníban níya ang mga istudiyanti pagdimunstrít,</i> He <tr>goaded</tr> the students into demonstrating.

<p><form>sugnud</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> wood for fuel. <number>2</number> <tr>fuel</tr> for propulsion. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> use s.t. as <tr>firewood</tr> or fuel. <i>Dílì mi makasugnud ug bunut kay kusug muasu,</i> We cannot use coconut husks as fuel because they give off too much smoke. <number>1a</number> use fuel in an engine. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> add <tr>fuel</tr> to s.t. to increase the problem. <i>Ang ímung sulti nagsugnud sa ílang áway,</i> Your statement added fuel to their quarrel.

<p><form>sugpà</form> <pos>n</pos> vomitting or spitting of blood. <i>Sugpà ang namatyan sa gikuláta,</i> The mauling victim died of internal hemorrhage. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1463; b3(1)]</itype> vomit or <tr>spit blood</tr>. <i>Nagsugpà si Tiryu, ang tibíhun,</i> Terio, the TB patient, is spitting blood.

<pb n=921>

<p><form>sugpù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; a1]</itype> put an end, <tr>cut short</tr> s.t. that is flourishing. <i>Akuy musugpù sa íyang dautang batásan,</i> I will <tr>put an end to</tr> her ugly habits. <i>Masugpù ang túbù sa bátà ug pukáwun ug sayu,</i> A child's growth gets <tr>stunted</tr> if he is made to get up early.

<p><form>sugpung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>tie</tr> two ends together, add a span or length to s.t. <i>Aku ray musugpung sa hayhayan nga nabugtù,</i> I'll tie the clothesline that snapped back together. <i>Ákung sugpúngan ang sidsid sa ákung sinínà nga mubù,</i> I'll add a piece of cloth to the bottom of my skirt because it is too short. <pos>n</pos> <tr>knot</tr> formed in a joint. <form>ka- ug tinái</form> <pos>n</pos> one's <tr>sibling</tr>. <i>Kining batáa kasugpung ku ug tinái,</i> This child is my <tr>brother</tr>. <form>ka- ug kasingkásing</form> <pos>n</pos> one's <tr>lover</tr>. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. made at the end of things to join them to s.t. else.

<p><form>sugput</form> (from <ix>suput</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; b8]</itype> <tr>squirt</tr> or <tr>pop out</tr>. <i>Misugput ag kitsup dihang gipikpik nákù ang samput sa butilya,</i> The catsup squirted out when I tapped the bottom of the bottle. <i>Nasugput ang sungsung sa syampín,</i> The cork popped out of the champagne.

<p><form>sugpuy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>calm</tr> s.t. down. <i>Mga púlung nga makasugpuy sa kaínit sa úlu,</i> Words that can calm one's anger. <i>Masugpuy ang hilánat ug butangag yílu ang úlu,</i> It will lower his fever if you put ice on his head. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> <tr>stunt</tr> the growth. <i>Kakúlang sa sustansiya ang nakasugpuy (nakapasugpuy) sa tinubuan sa bátà,</i> Undernourishment stunted the child's growth.

<p><form>sugpuy<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> feverish feeling in which the temperature of the upper part of the body is warm and the lower part is cold, esp. of children during teething. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> have such an affliction.

<p><form>sugpuy<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SUGMUY</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sugsug</form> <xr>= <sc>SALUGSUG</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sugsúg</form> <xr>= <sc>SULUGSÚLUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>súgù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1c]</itype> tell s.o. to do s.t. <i>Sugúun ta ka ug<note>manually stricken?</note> pagpalit ug gasulína,</i> I will send you to buy gasoline. <i>Unsa may isúgù nímu nákù?</i> What do you want me to do? <i>Aku si Husi dila Krus ug dúnay isúgù,</i> I am José de la Cruz at your service. <form>-a ku ninyu</form> forgive me for leaving the table while you are eating (lit. tell me to go fetch s.t. so I may leave the table). <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> in pool, hit a target ball in such a manner that it knocks another ball towards the pocket. <i>Sugúa nang nuybi arung masúd ang kinsi,</i> Knock the number nine ball towards the number fifteen ball to knock it into the pocket (lit. order the number nine ball to make the fifteen go in). <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> use a water buffalo for plowing. <i>Dì pa masúgù ang turíti,</i> You can't use a young water buffalo for plowing. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> things one was told to do. <i>Gitúman ba nímu ang ákung mga súgù?</i> Have you done the things I told you to do? <form>&mdash; sa Diyus napúlù</form> the <tr>Ten Commandments</tr>. <number>2</number> specific <tr>duties</tr> in an organization, group activity. <i>Unsa may íyang súgù ánang kapunungána?</i> What are his duties in that organization? <number>3</number> <ix>in phrases:</ix> <form>&mdash; sa láwas</form> things one has to do out of biological necessity and cannot avoid: urinate, sleep, and the like. &mdash; <form>sa panahun</form> exigency resulting from a state of weather. <form>&mdash; sa pálad</form> decree of fate. <form>&mdash; sa papil</form> according to the script. <form>&mdash; sa pagbátì</form> needs arising from some emotion. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> send s.o. s.w. to convey a message. <i>Pasugúan ta ka ug magsúgud na ang dúlà,</i> I will send s.o. over to notify you when the game starts. <form>balin-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of giving orders, not liking to do things oneself. <i>Balinsuguan bayhána dì mulíhuk sa íyang kaugalíngun,</i> She is fond of giving orders to other people. She does not do things for herself. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be fond of giving orders. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> one sent on an errand. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>orders</tr>, set of <tr>regulations</tr>. <form>-l-un(&rarr;), -l-un</form> household <tr>help</tr>, <tr>servant</tr>. <form>pa-l-un, pa-l-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> hire oneself out as a servant.

<p><form>*sug-u</form> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. with dark looks in order to hurt or put to shame s.o. who ought to do it or at least help do it. <i>Nagpasug-u ang agálun pagpanglaba,</i> The mistress is doing the laundry to put her servant to shame. <number>2</number> do s.t. bad for oneself in order to spite s.o. and make him feel he was the one that led the agent into doing it. <i>Nagpasug-u siyag inum-ínum sukad nímu bulagi,</i> He started drinking for spite since you left him. <form>pahiN-</form> <xr>= <sc>SUG-U</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr>

<p><form>sugub<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)6; b6]</itype> <tr>sprout</tr> from the earth or skin. <i>Misugub (nagsugub) na ang ákung pugas mais,</i> The corn I sowed has sprouted. <i>Gisuguban na ang íluk nga íyang giibtan sa balhíbu,</i> Hair has sprouted in her armpit where she had pulled it out. <pos>n</pos> new growths of hair, feathers, or sprouts from the earth.

<p><form>sugub<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SUGUD</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sugud</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sting</tr> of an insect. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> for poisonous insects to bite leaving a stinger in the thing bitten. <i>Tánga ang misugud sa ákung bábuy,</i> A scorpion bit my pig.

<p><form>súgud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>start</tr>, <tr>begin</tr> s.t.; begin doing s.t. <i>Nagsúgud ug kapakpak ang pintal,</i> The paint is starting to flake off. <i>Sugdun (sugdan) nátù ug limpiyu dinhi,</i> Let us start cleaning here. <pos>n</pos> <tr>start</tr>, <tr>beginning</tr>. <i>Ang hagwà <pb n=922>mauy súgud (sinugdánan) sa áway,</i> Horseplay is the beginning of a quarrel. <i>Súgud ugmà wà nay byáhi sa Buhul,</i> Starting tomorrow there will be no more trips to Bohol. <form>sugudsúgud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> start s.t. with no intention of finishing it. <i>Nagsugudsúgud ka man ug túkud ug balay nga walà ka may kwartang ikagastu,</i> You are starting to construct a house when you don't have money to finish it. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> begin s.t. with a slow start. <form>sinugdan, sinugdánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>start</tr>, <tr>beginning</tr>. <number>2</number> beginning from which s.t. results.

<p><form>súguk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1P]</itype> for liquid to rush and gather s.w. <i>Ang túbig sa mga sapà musúguk ngadtu sa dágat,</i> The water from the streams rushes into the sea. <i>Gipasúguk (gisúguk) níla sa lungug ang túbig,</i> They let the water rush into the hole and gather there. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> for blood to rush to the heart or head. <i>Ang mamatay sa alta prisiyun ingnun nga gisugúkan sa dugù sa &umacracu;,</i> If a man dies of high blood pressure, it is said that he suffered from a rush of blood into the head. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; ac]</itype> go, bring through a dense growth of vegetation. <i>Dì ta makasúguk niánang kalibunan,</i> We can not pass through that underbrush. <pos>n</pos> <form>&mdash; sa dugù</form> rush of blood.

<p><form>sugung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a liquid container fashioned out of a section of a bamboo stem, the node of which serves as the bottom. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make, make into this sort of container. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> get a cutting for propagation and put it in a bamboo section with rooting medium. <form>-in-</form> <number>1</number> <tr>cuttings</tr> propagated in this way, ready for planting. <number>2</number> style of cutting trousers with narrow legs.

<p><form>sugung<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B246]</itype> become more, <tr>grow worse</tr>. <i>Misugung siyag kasukù pagsugsúg námù,</i> He got angrier when we teased him. <i>Kakúlang sa káun ang nakasugung (nakapasugung) sa íyang sakit,</i> Lack of food made his illness worse.

<p><form>sugut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> agree to do s.t., <tr>acquiesce</tr>. <i>Musugut siya ug akuy mupakúhà níya sa libru,</i> He will agree to do it if I will send him to get the book. <i>Ug sugtun nímu nang matánga sa pagbáhin, maalkansi ka,</i> If you <tr>accept</tr> that division, you will be at a disadvantage. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> agree to let s.o. do s.t. <i>Musugut ba si Máma mu nga mutan-aw ka ug sini?</i> Will your mother agree to let you go to the show? <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> accept as one's fiancee. <i>Dì siya musugut ni Pidru kay sugarul,</i> She will not say yes to Pedro because he is a gambler. <pos>a</pos> <tr>willing</tr> to accept or comply. <i>Sugut kag dì ka bahínan?</i> Are you willing not to take a share? <form>masinugtánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>amenable</tr> to requests.

<p><form>súgut</form> <pos>n</pos> edges all around s.t. <i>Gitamnan ug lubi ang súgut sa uma,</i> The farm had coconut trees planted all around the borders.

<p><form>sugwak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>gush</tr> out in large quantities. <i>Misugwak ang asu pag-abli níya sa pultahan,</i> Smoke gushed out when he opened the door. <i>Nagyánang ang dálan human sugwáki sa túbig,</i> The path is flooded after the water gushed out on it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> spread beyond bounds, <tr>spill over</tr>. <i>Sa amatiyur misugwak ang mga táwu didtu sa karsáda,</i> The audience of the singing contest spilled over into the streets. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for emotions to appear with suddenness and intensity. <i>Nagsugwak ang íyang kalípay,</i> He was overflowing with happiness.

<p><form>sugyut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>mention</tr> s.t. in a casual manner. <i>Musugyut lang kung Pidru báhin sa ímung tanyag,</i> I will just mention your offer to Pedro casually. <number>2</number> <tr>suggest</tr>, put an idea into the mind. <i>Gisugyútan ku siya sa paglún sa bangku,</i> I suggested that he get a loan at the bank. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> thing mentioned casually. <number>2</number> <tr>suggestion</tr>.

<p><form>súhà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C; c1]</itype> for objects having length to be in disarray, with the ends pointing in different directions. <i>Nagsúhà ang mga bátà nga nangatúlug sa katri,</i> The children were asleep on the bed with their heads in all different directions. <number>2</number> [A2D; ac] <tr>go against</tr>, <tr>disagree</tr>. <i>Makasúhà ka ba sa gustu sa ímung ginikánan?</i> Could you go against your parents' wishes?

<p><form>suhì</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>contrary</tr>, <tr>opposite</tr>. <i>Suhì sa ímung pagtúu siya hinúuy mitábang kanákù,</i> He helped me, contrary to what you think. <number>2</number> for babies to be born feet first. <i>Suhì nga pagkatáwu ang bátà,</i> The baby was born feet first. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1C; c1]</itype> put s.t. the wrong way around. <i>Kinsay nagsuhì áning bangkù?</i> Who put the bench the wrong way around? <i>Nagsúhì ang ímung sapátus,</i> You have your shoes on backwards.

<p><form>suhid</form> <pos>n</pos> oil extracted on Good Friday from a coconut growing as the only fruit on a tree. It is said to possess magical powers for curing various kinds of skin diseases. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> treat with <ix>suhid</ix>. <i>Suhira (isuhid) nang bun-íha, dì ba muhúnung nag lakaw,</i> Try treating that ringworm with suhid. See if it doesn't stop spreading.

<p><form>súhid</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>copy</tr>, <tr>mimic</tr>. <i>Suhíra ang mápa sa libru,</i> Copy the map in the book. <i>Sayun ra ning baylíha ug suhírun lang nímu ang ákung lákang,</i> This dance is easy if you follow my steps. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> watch s.t. intensely while it recedes out of view. <i>Suhíra <pb n=923>giyud siya arun hibaw-an nátù háin baláya siya misulud,</i> Watch him carefully so we will know what house he went into. <number>3</number> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> retrace a course one has just passed. <i>Nagsúhid ku sa ákung giagian kay nahúlug ang ákung pitáka,</i> I am going back the way I came because I dropped my wallet. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> scan, search thoroughly. <i>Pulis ang nagsúhid sa ílang kalawásan,</i> The police searched their bodies thoroughly. <i>Ílang suhírun ang mga lasang sa Mindanaw,</i> They will explore the forests of Mindanao. <form>suhiran</form> <pos>a</pos> given to copying or imitating.

<p><form>suhildu</form> <xr>= <sc>SWILDU</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>suhítu<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SWÍTU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>suhítu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>unmarried</tr> member in a group of brothers and sisters. <i>Tulu nay naminyù.</i> <i>Usa na lay suhítu,</i> Three are married now. Only one is left unmarried.

<p><form>súhul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>hire</tr> for wages, pay a certain <tr>wage</tr>. <i>Musúhul ku nímu ug písus matag adlaw,</i> I will pay you a peso a day. <i>Nagsúhul ku ug panday,</i> I hired a carpenter. <pos>n</pos> wages. <i>Pílay ímung súhul adtung trabahúa,</i> How much were you paid for that work. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> workers paid on a wage basis. <form>pa-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> work on a hired basis. <i>Kay wà ka may grádu ígù ka lang magpasuhul,</i> Because you don't have an education, all you can do is unskilled labor.

<p><form>suhung, súhung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> for charms and magical powers to become ineffective. <i>Napildi ku kay nasuhung (nasúhung) ang ákung bangil,</i> I lost because my amulet has become ineffective.

<p><form>suhup</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB; a12]</itype> for liquids to <tr>penetrate</tr> or <tr>percolate</tr> into s.t., cause them to do so. <i>Mawálà ang lim-aw ug musuhup (masuhup) na ang túbig sa yútà,</i> The pool will disappear when the water seeps into the ground. <i>Tintà nga suphun dáyun sa barut nga papil,</i> Ink that is readily absorbed by cheap paper. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> for feelings to get into one's being. <i>Dakung kalúuy nga misuhup sa ákung dughan,</i> Great pity that permeated my heart (lit. permeated into my heart). <form>suhupsuhup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3N; b(1)]</itype> permeate throughout. <i>Ang íyang dugù misuhupsuhup (nanuhupsuhup) sa íyang áping,</i> The blood in her vessels penetrated through to the skin so that you could see them in her cheeks. <i>Ang lála sa uhípan nakasuhupsuhup na sa ákung láwas,</i> The poison of the centipede has penetrated through my body.

<p><form>suhut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> clean an area by cutting down trees and weeds. <i>Suhutun ku ning mga tanum nga nakaáwung sa gardin,</i> I'll clear off the plants that are shading the garden. <form>-anan(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> place to be cleared.

<p><form>súhut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> go into or pass through a place, esp. with tall trees or grasses. <i>Pagbantay sa limátuk ug musúhut mu sa lasang,</i> Watch out for leeches when you go through the forest. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> enter a trap under water. <i>Gisuhútan ang búbù ug pawíkan,</i> The fish trap caught a sea turtle. <pos>n</pos> catch from a fish trap. <form>kusug, walay &mdash; (ang báling)</form> having a brisk (slow) business (lit. having lots of [no] catch in the net). <i>Nagmíngaw ílang tindáhan. Way súhut ang báling,</i> Their store is deserted. Business is slow. <i>Kusug kaáyu ang súhut. Nagkapulíkì siyag atindir sa íyang kustumir,</i> Business is good. She is very busy attending her customers. <form>(&rarr;) bágun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.o. whose origin is not known. <number>2</number> <tr>vagabond</tr>, one who just roams about and does nothing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> be, become an idle <tr>wanderer</tr>. <i>Nagsuhut bágun nang tawhána kay tapulan man mangítag trabáhu,</i> That man became a vagabond because he's too lazy to look for work. <form>suhutsúhut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2N; b(1)]</itype> for odors to <tr>diffuse</tr>, be present in a diffuse way. <i>Alimyun sa búlak nga musuhutsúhut (manuhutsúhut) sa huyúhuy,</i> The fragrance of flowers diffused by the breeze. <i>Karning may tambuk nga nanuhutsúhut sa unud,</i> Meat with fat running throughout it. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> muscular <tr>ache</tr> resulting from exposure to damp or draft, esp. during sleep. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23P; b5]</itype> get muscle ache. <i>Lagmit makapanúhut ang pagkatúlug nga dílì maghábul,</i> Sleeping without a blanket can cause muscle ache.

<p><form>suik</form> <pos>a</pos> diagonal, oblique thrust. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> execute a stroke or throw from an angle. <i>Suikun nákù pagbundul arun maigù ang búnga,</i> I will poke at the fruit from an angle so it will fall.

<p><form>súka</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S; c]</itype> <tr>vomit</tr>. <i>Gisúka sa pasyinti ang tambal,</i> The patient vomited out his medicine. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>squeal</tr>, <tr>divulge</tr> a secret. <i>Misúka na ang mangunguut ug nahibalu ta ug kinsay íyang kaúban,</i> The pickpocket <form>squealed</form> and we know who his companions were. <pos>n</pos> <tr>vomit</tr>, the contents expelled from the stomach. <form>&mdash; kalíbang</form> <pos>n</pos> intestinal disorder of vomiting combined with diarrhea. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13P]</itype> be affected with this disorder. <form>kasukaun</form> <pos>a</pos> feel like vomiting.

<p><form>súkà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vinegar</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12B12; a12]</itype> become, make into vinegar. <i>Nagkasúkà na ang tubà,</i> The palm toddy is becoming vinegar. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> season s.t. with vinegar. <form>ka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> get vinegar all over it.

<p><form>sukad &mdash; sa</form> [<ix>dat.</ix>] <number>1</number> <tr>from</tr> s.w. <i>Sukad sa íla nganhi may mga dusintus mitrus,</i> It's about <pb n=924>two hundred meters from their house to here. <number>2</number> <tr>since</tr>, <tr>from</tr> [dat.] on forward. <i>Sukad karun dì na giyud ku makigsulti nímu,</i> <tr>From now on</tr> I will never speak to you again. <i>Sukad niadtu,</i> From that time on. <i>Sukad pa sa alas utsu kung hinulat nímu,</i> I have been waiting for you since eight o'clock. <form>&mdash; mabakì</form> since birth (humorous). <form>&mdash; masukad</form> <number>1</number> <ix>in negative statements:</ix> <tr>never</tr> ever. <i>Wà pa giyud ku makakità ug babáyi ingun kagwápa sukad masukad,</i> I have never, in all my born days, seen a woman so beautiful. <number>2</number> since, far back beyond the reach of memory. <i>Dinhi na ang ílang katigulángan sukad masukad,</i> Their ancestors have been here since the beginning of time. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13N; b6N]</itype> <tr>start</tr>, <tr>originate</tr> from. <i>Tan-áwa ug unsang kuniksiyúna ang gisukaran (gipanukaran) áning alambríha,</i> See where this wire originates. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> <tr>rest on</tr>, be based on a certain support. <i>Dílì untà muun-un ang balay ug didtu pa makasukad (makapanukad) sa batu nga tiúnay,</i> The house would not have sagged had it rested on bedrock. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A13N; cN]</itype> <tr>base</tr>, <tr>found</tr>. <i>Tubag nga gisukad (gipanukad) sa usa ka katarúngan nga dílì malális,</i> An answer based on an indisputable reason. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> start movement from a certain point. <i>Ang prusisiyun adtu manukad sa kapilya,</i> The procession will <tr>begin at</tr> the chapel. <number>2</number> have a <tr>foothold</tr> on s.t. <i>Dílì ka makadusù kay balas ang ímung gipanukaran,</i> You can't push because you are standing on sand. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> get a good foothold, <tr>steady</tr> oneself. <i>Nanukad siya úsà muluksu,</i> He steadied himself before he leapt. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>poise</tr>, standing <tr>posture</tr>. <i>Ang trátu ni Iyay may panukad labi na kay taas ug gwápu,</i> Eyay's boy friend has poise, esp. because he is tall and handsome. <i>Maáyu ug panukad ning manúka háyan maáyung muáway,</i> The cock has a good posture. Most likely it fights well. <number>2</number> way of placing one's feet while standing, action of gaining a foothold. <form>sukaránan, panukaránan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>base</tr>, s.t. which supports or sustains s.t. immaterial. <i>Ang ímung pangatarúngan walay sukaránan (panukaránan) sa baláud,</i> Your reasoning has no basis in law. <number>2</number> <tr>runway</tr> for airplanes.

<p><form>súkad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> take food out of a container or pot and set it on the table. <i>Nagsúkad na si Máma sa pamáhaw,</i> Mother is putting the breakfast on the table now. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> <tr>profer</tr><note>F1 proffer?</note>. <i>Gisukáran siya nákù sa usa ka madaníhung pahiyum,</i> I gave her a very engaging smile. <form>sukaran, sukaránan</form> <pos>n</pos> round platter to hold rice and corn. <form>&mdash; nga bastus</form> <xr>= <sc>SUKARAN</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sukalsukal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> be <tr>overflowing</tr> in fulness.<note>fullness</note> <i>Nagsukalsukal sa kapunù ang húngut sa tubà,</i> The toddy glass is overflowing with toddy.

<p><form>sukalu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> cement <tr>foundation</tr> under a house. <number>2</number> low cement fence surrounding a yard, made to prevent the water from getting inside. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> make a cement foundation or low walling around a house.

<p><form>sukam-ag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1236; b8]</itype> walk or <tr>fall forward</tr> onto. <i>Nasukam-ag ku níya kay napandul ag ákung tiil sa batu,</i> I fell forward onto him because my foot tripped on a stone. <i>Mau ning siyáha ákung nasukam-ágan sa ngitngit gabíi,</i> This is the chair I <tr>bumped into</tr> last night in the dark.

<p><form>sukámang</form> (from <ix>kámang</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> fall forward sprawled on the stomach. <i>Nasukámang siya sa kusug nga sumbag,</i> He fell forward under the impact of the blow he received.

<p><form>sukámud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> <tr>fall forward</tr> on the ground. <i>Nasukámud ku kay nakatunub ku ug pálut sa ságing,</i> I <tr>fell down</tr> on my nose because I stepped on a banana peel.

<p><form>sukárap</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1216]</itype> stagger and then fall. <i>Didtu siya masukárap sa suuk dihang nabunalan ang íyang úlu sa ulísi,</i> He was pummeled by a cane and he staggered and fell into the corner. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12S6]</itype> <tr>grope</tr> around. <i>Nagsukarap ku nga nagsaka sa hagdan sa ngitngit,</i> I groped my way up the stairs in the dark. <number>2a</number> <itype>[B12S6; b8]</itype> <tr>bump into</tr> s.t. in the dark. <i>Silyay ákung hisukarapan sa ngitngit,</i> I bumped into a chair in the dark.

<p><form>súkat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> confront s.o. to make him prove or disprove s.t. which he previously said. <i>Mu ra tag mabastus ug musúkat (manúkat) tag tabì,</i> It makes you cheap when you confront a gossipmonger to prove or disprove his allegations.

<p><form>sukbut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> join by letting the edges touch each other. <i>Nagsukbut kug upat ka síya nga katulgan,</i> I put four chairs together to sleep on.

<p><form>sukdip</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> for the eyes to roll upward so that only the white can be seen. <i>Misukdip ang mata sa bátang gihilantan,</i> The eyes of the child with high fever were turned upward into his head.

<p><form>súki</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for horses to prance and refuse to pull or be ridden. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>defy</tr> a command or authority. <i>Misúki ang mga kadíti kay istriktu ra kaáyu ang sarhintu,</i> The cadets <tr>rebelled</tr> because the commandant was too strict. <i>Misúki na giyud kining ákung láwas sa tambal,</i> My body seems <pb n=925>to be rebelling against the medicine. <form>masukíhun</form> <pos>a</pos> of a <tr>disobedient</tr>, <tr>rebellious</tr> sort. <form>sukihan</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> given to prancing and refusing to pull. <number>2</number> <tr>rebellious</tr> in behavior. <number>3</number> for hair to be unmanageable. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be, become given to rebelliousness.

<p><form>súkì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>steady customer</tr> or seller. <ix>short form in address:</ix> <form>kì</form>. <i>Ákung súking butíka,</i> The drug store I always buy at. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; a2]</itype> be in the <ix>súkì</ix> relation, i.e. that of a seller and buyer. <i>Magsúkì na ta. Dì ku mupalit sa láin,</i> From now on I'll be a steady customer of yours and I won't buy from anyone else.

<p><form>súkib</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lower</tr> in elevation than the surroundings. <i>Anhi magtígum ang túbig kay súkib kaáyu ning lugára,</i> Water collects here because this place is very <tr>depressed</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a12]</itype> be, become depressed.

<p><form>sukip</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>include</tr> s.t. together with s.t. sent. <i>Isukip ring dukumintu sa ímung aplikisyun,</i> <tr>Enclose</tr> this document with your application. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for a legal document to include a special clause. <i>Ang kuntrátu nagsukip sa mátang sa pagbáyad,</i> The contract stipulates the manner of payment. <number>2</number> put closely in between two things or inside s.t. <i>Sukipi nang bulsa ug sápì, dì ba mulusut ang papílis,</i> Put a little money in his pocket and see if the papers don't get processed immediately.

<p><form>sukit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>ask</tr> a question that requires a specific answer. <i>Sukita siya kun háin ang kwarta,</i> Ask him where the money is. <form>sukitsukit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>interrogate</tr>, pester with questions. <i>Sukitsukitun nátù siya básin ug mutug-an sa kadugáyan,</i> Let's keep pestering him with questions in hopes that in the end he talks. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>inquisitive</tr>. <i>Hinukit ning batáa mu ra ug sayun tubagun ang íyang mga pangutána,</i> This child is very inquisitive as though his questions were easy to answer.

<p><form>suklat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4(1)]</itype> be struck accidentally with the end of a stick or finger. <i>Nasuklatan ang ákung tuu nga mata sa íyang tudlù,</i> He accidentally poked his finger in my eye.

<!-- NOTE: odd xr -->

<p><form>suklay</form> <xr>= <sc>SUDLAY</sc>, <i>n, v1, 2, paN-.</i></xr>

<p><form>suklì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>change</tr> given after paying for a purchase with a larger bill. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give s.o. his change. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>answer back</tr>, give back talk. <i>Musuklì ka man ug kasab-an,</i> You <tr>talk back</tr> when you are scolded. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23; c]</itype> do s.t. in return. <i>Gisuklían kug kidhat ang íyang pahiyum,</i> I winked at her when she smiled at me. <form>-in-ay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> do back and forth to each other. <pos>n</pos> action of doing back and forth. <i>Sinuklíay sa binutubutu sa mga pusil,</i> The <tr>exchange</tr> of gunfire.

<p><form>sukmag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> <tr>box</tr> with the fist. <i>Hingsukmagan ang íyang apapángig ug nawad-an siya sa panimúut,</i> He was hit in the jaw and lost consciousness. <pos>n</pos> blow with the fist. <form>-ay(&rarr;), -in-ay(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fistfight</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> have a fistfight.

<p><form>sukmat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>confront</tr> s.o. asking him about s.t. <i>Sukmátan (sukmátun) ku siyag tinúud ba,</i> I'll confront him and ask him if it is true or not. <number>1a</number> ask s.o. whether or not he intends to do s.t. <i>Nagpanukmat siyag muadtu ba giyud ku,</i> He kept asking me if I would really go. <i>Ug sukmátun kag sumbagay, ayaw ug súkul,</i> If s.o. challenges you to a fight, don't take him on. <pos>n</pos> act of confronting s.o. with a question or challenging s.o.

<p><form>sukmil</form> <xr>= <sc>SIKMUL</sc>, <i>n, v2.</i></xr>

<p><form>suknà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>press</tr> a person for an answer on whether or not he intends to do s.t. <i>Ayaw kug suknáa. Ingnun ta ra kag mupalit ku,</i> Don't press me. I'll tell you if I intend to buy one. <pos>n</pos> question ascertaining the permissibility or feasibility of s.t.

<p><form>suknib</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> set s.t. on <tr>fire</tr>. <i>Akuy misuknib sa mga sagbut sa baul,</i> I <tr>set fire</tr> to the pile of grasses in the field. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>incite</tr> s.o. to do s.t. bad. <i>Ikaw bay nagsuknib sa íyang kalágut?</i> Did you incite him to anger?

<p><form>suksuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c]</itype> go or put s.t. into or in between s.t. else. <i>Misuksuk ang bátà sa bilahan sa íyang inahan,</i> The child snuggled between her mother's legs. <i>Kinsay nagsuksuk sa kálù luyu sa pyánu?</i> Who stuck the hat behind the piano?

<p><form>sukù</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>angry</tr>, <tr>mad</tr> but not such that one is impelled to take action. <i>Labihang sukúa níya pagkadungug sa balità,</i> He got real mad when he heard the news. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; ab3(1)c5]</itype> be, get angry. <i>Masukù ku ug mamakak ka,</i> I will get angry if you tell a lie. <i>Gikasuk-an ku ni Pápa kay nawálà ang libru,</i> Daddy got mad at me because I lost the book. <form>masuk-*ánun</form> <pos>a</pos> full of anger. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be angry. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>anger</tr>. <i>Dílì magdúgay ang íyang kasukù,</i> His anger won't last.

<p><form>súkub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C12]</itype> for s.o. who ought to receive less to try to get an equal share. <i>Ang anak sa gawas nakigsúkub sa mga tinúud anak báhin sa irinsiya,</i> The illegitimate child wanted to have a share of the inheritance equal to that of the legitimate children.

<p><form>sukud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> take <tr>measurements</tr>. <i>Nagsukud kug pila ka dupa ring písì,</i> I am <tr>measuring</tr> how long this piece of rope is. <i>Gisukdan akug karsúnis,</i> I had the measurements taken for my pants. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13C; a12]</itype> test ability against each other. <i>Nagsukud lang tu <pb n=926>siya sa ímung pasyinsiya,</i> He was just <tr>trying</tr> you to see how patient you were. <i>Magsúkud ta ug kinsa giyuy ísug nátù,</i> Let's <tr>have it out</tr> which of us is the bravest. <i>Sukdun nákù ang ímung ginháwa ug muagwanta ka ba,</i> I will test your mettle to see if you can take it. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12SN; b6]</itype> distribute <tr>land grants</tr>. <i>Nanukud ang gubyirnu ug yútà álang sa mga bitiránu,</i> The government is distributing parcels of land to the veterans. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> receive a land grant. <number>4</number> <itype>[C3; b6]</itype> be of the same size of fit. <i>Nagsúkud ang ámung sapátus,</i> Our shoes are of the same size. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the <tr>measurements</tr> of s.t. <i>Unsay sukud sa ímung sapátus?</i> What <tr>size</tr> of shoes do you wear? <number>2</number> extent to which s.t. is done (literary). <i>Way sukud sa báwus,</i> Revenge that knows no limit. <number>3</number> {land grant} distributed by the government. <form>sukdanan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> thing on the basis of which other things are measured: stick, cup, and the like. <i>Ang kaangáyan mau untay sukdanan sa átung panglíhuk,</i> We should use fairness as the <tr>yardstick</tr> for our actions. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>SUKUD</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr> <form>mag-r-(&larr;), maN-r-(&larr;) sa yútà</form> <pos>n</pos> land <tr>surveyor</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>meter</tr> of verse. <i>Ang íyang mga bálak kanúnay nga naghambin sa panukud,</i> His verses are always with meter. <form>-in-</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>measured</tr>, <tr>slow</tr> and <tr>deliberate</tr>. <i>Sa sinukud nga lákang,</i> With measured steps. <form>hiN-, kahiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> for s.t. to be <tr>properly</tr> done. <i>Dílì magkahinúkud ang ákung káun ug náay maghilak,</i> I can't eat properly if there is s.o. crying.

<p><form>sukul</form> <pos>n</pos> young <tr>mushroom</tr> that has not opened yet. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> gather young mushrooms. <number>1a</number> add or mix young mushrooms to s.t. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN]</itype> have body growths protruding on the skin. <i>Nanukul na ang íyang dughan,</i> Her <tr>breast</tr> has developed now. <i>Gisuklan ang íyang nawung sa dagkung bugas,</i> She has big <tr>pimples</tr> on her face. <i>Way limpiyu ang nakasukul (nakapasukul) nímu,</i> Your unsanitary habits caused you to have <tr>pustules</tr>.

<p><form>súkul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> <tr>fight back</tr> against, stand up. <i>Sa sumbagay musúkul siya kang bisan kinsa,</i> He will <tr>stand up to</tr> anyone who challenges him to a fight. <i>Pagsúkul sa ginikánan kanang pagtubagtubag,</i> You are rebelling against your parents when you talk back. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> react, <tr>snap back</tr> into place as if offering resistance. <i>Bísan ug unsáun ug dukduk musúkul,</i> No matter how much I pound it, it snaps back into place. <number>1b</number> <tr>play against</tr> or engage in any activity where people are pitted against each other. <i>Suklan ta kag tínis bisan anus-a,</i> I'll take you up on tennis any time. <number>1c</number> <tr>tackle</tr> s.t. to be accomplished. <i>Way misúkul sa tambuk,</i> No one had the stomach to take the pork fat. <number>2</number> <tr>resist</tr>, <tr>endure</tr>. <i>Musúkul sa ínit sa adlaw ning pintála,</i> This paint resists the heat of the sun. <number>2a</number> endure and do the same in return. <i>Ayaw siya ug kumidiyáhi kay dì siya musúkul ug kumidiya,</i> Don't rib him because he can't take jokes. <number>3</number> <form>&mdash; sa kábu</form> <itype>[A2]</itype> be <tr>rebellious</tr>. <i>Húnit ang prumusiyun sa magtutudlung musúkul sa kábu,</i> It takes a long time for a rebellious teacher to get promoted. <form>&mdash; dágan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>guerrilla warfare</tr>. <i>Súkul dágan ang gigámit nga inawayan sa mga sundálung Pilipinhun bátuk sa Hapun,</i> The Filipino soldiers used guerrilla warfare against the Japanese. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> employ guerrilla warfare. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> for gamecocks to be in a state ready to contend in a cockfight. <i>Bísan ug tulu pa ka búlan nga sunúya manúkul na,</i> This rooster is only three months old, but he is ready to contend in a cockfight.

<p><form>sukut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>ask</tr> a question regarding s.t. specific. <i>Misukut ang maistra,</i> The teacher asked. <i>Suktun ku siya báhin sa ímung hangyù,</i> I will ask him regarding your request. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b5]</itype> ask to collect payment. <i>Akuy musukut (manukut) sa íyang útang,</i> I'll ask him to pay me his debt. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> ask a certain price. <i>Gisuktan kug mahal sa tindíra,</i> The salesgirl charged me a very high price. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> challenge to a fight. Gisuktan aku níyag áway, He challenged me to a fight. <form>sukutsukut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make <tr>inquiries</tr> in great detail. <i>Dinhay mga imbistigadur nga misukutsukut báhin sa buhis,</i> There were investigators that made inquiries regarding the taxes. <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bill collector</tr>. <form>masuktánun</form> <pos>a</pos> questioning.

<p><form>sukwahì</form> <tr>contrary</tr>. <i>Sukwahì sa ímung pagtúu, ang anak sa gawas may báhin sa irihinsiya,</i> Contrary to what you believe, the illegitimate child gets a share of the inheritance. <i>Ang ímung gibúhat sukwahì kaáyu sa maáyung pamatásan,</i> What you did is very much <tr>against</tr> good manners. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B56]</itype> be contrary, <tr>backwards</tr>. <i>Nagkasukwáhì ang ámung mga hunàhúnà,</i> Our ideas are <tr>opposed</tr> to one another. <i>Ang písa nasukwahì nímu ug butang,</i> You put the piece in backwards. <number>2</number> <itype>[B5; a12]</itype> be in <tr>error</tr>. <i>Nasukwahì ang katapúsan mung tubag,</i> Your last answer was in error.

<p><form>sul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> name of a <tr>dance</tr> or music for it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do this dance.

<p><form>sul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the note <tr>sol</tr>.

<p><form>súla</form> <pos>n</pos> unopened terminal stem of plants that are sharp, e.g. of cogon or <ix>lagnub</ix>. <form>suláhan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. nose <tr>fish</tr>, a delicious fish with a sharp projection in front of the eyes: <bio>Naso <pb n=927>spp</bio>.

<p><form>sulà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> eat s.t. together with the staple. <i>Asin ray ámung gisuwà,</i> The only thing we had to go with our rice was salt. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>SUD-AN</sc>.</xr> <form>sud-an</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. eaten with the staple. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> use to eat with one's staple. <i>Laming sud-ánun ang sikwáti,</i> Chocolate is good to eat with your rice. <form>panud-an</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> search for or obtain s.t. to eat with one's food. <i>Ari mi sa tyanggi kay manud-an mi pára sa panihápun,</i> We're off to the market to look for s.t. to go with the rice for supper. <pos>n</pos> action of searching for food to go with the rice. <form>sud-anun</form> <pos>n</pos> things to be cooked for the food to go with the rice. <form>ig-l-(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>SUD-AN</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>sulà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> <tr>stare</tr> blankly. <i>Nagsulà lang ang mata sa táwung nasakit ug amnisya,</i> The amnesia victim is staring blankly.

<p><form>súlà</form> <xr>= <sc>SÚLA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sulab</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>blade</tr>, <tr>cutting edge</tr> of an instrument. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> put or make a blade.

<p><form>súlab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; b4]</itype> cause one to be <tr>addicted</tr> or crazy over s.t. <i>Ang madyung makasúlab (makapasúlab) sa táwu,</i> It is easy to get addicted to mahjong. <i>Gisulában ka na sa pagtabakù sa upyum,</i> You are already addicted to smoking opium.

<p><form>sulábi</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>LABI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sulad, súlad</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hell</tr>, a place of much wickedness and turmoil. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> wind up in hell. <form>-nun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>evil</tr>. <i>Suladnun kang pagkatáwu,</i> You are a <tr>devilish</tr> man. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become devilish.

<p><form>sulagmà</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <tr>chance</tr>, <tr>coincidence</tr>. <i>Usa lang ka sulagmà nga nag-ábut mi karun dinhi,</i> It is a coincidence that we met each other here today. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> do s.t. correctly by coincidence. <i>Salámat nga nakasulagmà ku sa pagtubag sa pangutána,</i> Thank heavens, I <tr>chanced</tr> to answer the question correctly.

<p><form>sulambì</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> an <tr>extension</tr> to a house, appended to a side or end, usually used for storage. <number>2</number> <tr>paramour</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make an extension room for the house.

<p><form>sulaminti</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <number>1</number> one's very <tr>own</tr>, [so-and-so] oneself. <i>Sulaminting mga ginikánan níya nagpakabuta bungul sa íyang kalisud,</i> His very own parents turned a deaf ear to his needs. <number>2</number> the <tr>only</tr> one. <i>Sulaminti nga anak,</i> An only child. <number>2a</number> <formx>walà &mdash;</formx> not even a single one. <i>Way sulaminting usa ka díyut ang íyang gitábang nákù,</i> He didn't give me a bit of help, not a half a cent. <i>Way sulaminting paryinti nga midúul sa minatay,</i> Not a single relative came to stay by the corpse.

<p><form>sulampatid</form> (from <ix>pátid</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; a12]</itype> walk snagging one foot on the other. <i>Nagsulampatid si Duruy kay hubug siya,</i> Doroy kept catching his feet on each other because he was drunk.

<p><form>sulang</form> <pos>n</pos> chin and jaw bones. -un(&rarr;) a having a prominent jaw and chin bones.

<p><form>sulanggà</form> <xr>= <sc>KALAMANTÍGÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sulápid</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>braid</tr>, <tr>plait</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2S]</itype> walk crossing the feet over each other. <i>Íning dápit sa sáyaw ang lákang magsulápid,</i> In this part of the dance the feet cross over in front of each other. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; ang dílà</formx> <itype>[B]</itype> be <tr>inarticulate</tr> in speech. <i>Sa nagkahubug ku nagkasulápid (nagkasulapid) ákung dílà,</i> The drunker I got, the more inarticulate my speech became.

<p><form>sular</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>yard</tr> or <tr>lawn</tr> immediately contiguous to the house. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a2]</itype> have an open space next to the house for a lawn. <i>Makasular kag dakùdakù niíning gidak-úna sa lúti,</i> With this size of a lot you can have a good-sized space for a yard.

<p><form>sulat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>write</tr> s.t. <i>Ngánung gisulatan man nímu ang bungbung,</i> Why did you write on the wall? <i>Pagkúhà ug papil ug isulat ri,</i> Get a piece of paper and write this down. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> write a <tr>letter</tr>, <tr>story</tr>. <i>Ákù pang sulatun ring ákung humwurk,</i> I still have to <tr>write out</tr> my homework. <i>Gisulatan siya nákù,</i> I wrote him a letter. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>letter</tr>, <tr>mail</tr>. <number>2</number> written or printed message. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> entry of the parties' name into marriage records. <form>pa-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> have entries made for marriage records. <form>-anan(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>writing desk</tr>. <form>ka-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> collection of writings. <form>baláang &mdash;</form> <tr>Holy Scriptures</tr>. <number>2</number> set of written <tr>records</tr>. <form>mag-r-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>writer</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>writing</tr> as an avocation or profession. <form>tag-, tag-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>author</tr>.

<p><form>sulatuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> stare blankly without blinking the eyes. <i>Nagsulatuk lang ang búang nga wà kasabut,</i> The idiot just stared blankly because he didn't understand.

<p><form>sulaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>glaring</tr>, shining with a harsh and uncomfortably bright light. <i>Sulaw kaáyu ang sugà sa awtu,</i> His car has glaring headlights. <number>2</number> <tr>disconcerting</tr>, causing loss of composure. <i>Sulaw kaáyu nga ikúyug nátù ang usa ka higála nga átung gikaáway,</i> It is very disconcerting to have s.o. we just had a quarrel with come along with us. <pos>n</pos> <tr>glare</tr>, intensely shining light. <i>Ang sulaw makadáut sa mata,</i> Glare can damage the eyes. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> give off a <tr>glare</tr>. <i>Musulaw ang línaw inigsílang sa adlaw,</i> The pool gives off a glare when the sun shines. <i>Nagsulaw diri nákù ang ispíhu ug kasilingan sa adlaw,</i> The looking glass is giving off a glare from the sun. <number>2</number> <itype>[A123P; b4c5]</itype> <tr>feel bad</tr> about s.t. <pb n=928>bad s.o. else did to a third party. <i>Akuy gisulawan sa gibúhat sa ákung asáwa. Siya walà magpakabanà,</i> I felt bad at what my wife did, but it didn't bother her. (&larr;) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; b3]</itype> be on bad terms with s.o., glaring at each other. <i>Bísan ug nagkasúlaw ta wà man kuy pagdumut nímu,</i> Though we have been on bad terms I don't harbor a grudge against you. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>SULAW</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <number>2</number> <tr>bad relationship</tr>.

<p><form>sulay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>try</tr> doing s.t. <i>Sulayan ta ug paandar ang makina,</i> Let us try starting the engine. <i>Isulay ring sapatúsa ug maarang ba,</i> Try putting these shoes on to see if they fit:<note>.? P2</note> <number>1a</number> put s.t. to a test. <i>Ang Diyus dílì musulay nátù labaw sa átung maantus,</i> God doesn't try us beyond what we can bear. <i>Gisulayan ta lang kag kahibáwu ba giyud ka,</i> I was only testing you whether you really were good at it. <number>2</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> get s.t. distasteful, e.g. a beating. <i>Hala, balía lang nà arun masulay kang pápa mu,</i> Go ahead and break that so you can get hell from your father. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>try</tr>. <i>Sulay lang tung ákù ug mahímù ba giyud,</i> I just tried it out to see if I could really do it. <number>2</number> expression challenging s.o. in a taunting way to see if he has the guts to do s.t. bad for him or try to prevent him from doing it. <i>Mukáun giyud ka íni? Suway man ug magkalíbang,</i> You sure you want to eat it? Watch if it doesn't give you diarrhea. (&larr;)<sub>1</sub> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; a12]</itype> have it out, clear a matter of contention with a fight. <i>Suláyun nátù ug kinsay ísug nátung duha,</i> Let's have it out to see which of us has guts. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>tempt</tr> s.o. to do s.t. he won't ordinarily have done. <i>Dì tà ku mupalit ánà apan nanulay siya nákù pagpalit ug usa lang,</i> I would not have bought it, but he tempted me to buy one. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> be <tr>possessed</tr> of a devil. <i>Gipanulayan nà siya dihang patábug na siya ug pamusil sa mga táwu,</i> He must have been possessed of a devil to shoot indiscriminately at the people. <number>3</number> <itype>[a12P]</itype> get a dose of disciplinary action. <i>Panulayun ta ka nyà ug ímu nang daútun,</i> I'll give you hell if you break that. <pos>n</pos> devil. <i>Ug luwasa kami sa mga panulay amin.</i> And deliver us from evil. Amen. <form>pag-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>trial</tr> of one's virtue. <i>Kining mga hitabúa mga pagsulay lang sa átung pagsálig sa Diyus,</i> These events are but trials of our faith in God. <number>2</number> <tr>experiment</tr>, testing out of s.t. <form>maN-r-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>paN-</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> a person who tempts s.o. into doing s.t. bad.

<p><form>súlay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a1]</itype> <tr>brace</tr>, prop s.t. standing to prevent it from collapsing. <i>Suláyun nátù ang ságing arun dílì matumba sa kabug-at sa íyang búnga,</i> Let's brace this banana tree before it falls from the weight of its bananas. <pos>n</pos> <tr>brace</tr>, prop placed against s.t. vertical.

<p><form>sulaybagyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. <tr>dwarf banana</tr> growing to 4´, with a large bunch of fruit similar to the búngan, eaten when ripe. <number>2</number> <tr>hornfish</tr>.

<p><form>sulbad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>solve</tr>, find a <tr>solution</tr> or <tr>answer</tr>. <i>Átung sulbárun ning kahimtánga kay dì ni madala nátù ug hilakhílak,</i> We will find a solution because we cannot get it over with by crying. <number>2</number> <tr>undo</tr> a knot. <i>Nasulbad ang baligtus sa písi,</i> The knot of the rope came undone. <pos>n</pos> <tr>solution</tr> to a problem. <i>Dì siya manug-an sa sulbad sa tanghágà,</i> He won't tell us the solution to the puzzle. <pos>a</pos> solved. <form>sulbaran</form> <pos>n</pos> swivel in a fishline, a revolving link placed between the line and leader to prevent kinking. <form>kasulbáran, kasulbarun</form> <pos>n</pos> solution reached. <i>Walay kasulbáran ning sulirána,</i> There's no solution to this problem.

<p><form>sulb&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>solve</tr> a personal problem or puzzle. <i>Dílì ku masulb&acaron;r king mga prublíma ku,</i> I can't find a solution to my problems.

<p><form>sulbung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b8]</itype> splash up, <tr>rise</tr> rapidly. <i>Pagbutu sa bumba sa dágat misulbung ang daghang túbig,</i> When the bomb exploded in the sea, a lot of water splashed into the air. <i>Nagsulbung pa ang asu sa súnug pag-abut námù,</i> The smoke of the fire was still gushing upwards when we arrived. <pos>a</pos> for the voice, fever to rise. <i>Singgit sa kahadluk misulbung gíkan sa nanan-aw,</i> A cry of fear rose from the spectators. <i>Pastilang nakasulbung sa prisyu!</i> My, how the prices have risen!

<p><form>sulda</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>solder</tr>. <pos>n</pos> solder. <form>-dur(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>soldering iron</tr> or gun. <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>solderer</tr>.

<p><form>suldádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>soldier</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> be, become a soldier.

<p><form>súli</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>look at</tr> s.t. to find s.t. out. <i>Sulíha ang pitákag dúna bay kwarta,</i> Look into the wallet to see if there is any money. <i>Hisulihan siya nga patay na,</i> He was found dead. <number>2</number> <tr>look for</tr> s.t. <i>Nagsúli ku sa ákung kábaw nga nakabuhì,</i> I'm looking for my carabao which got loose. <form>sulisúli</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>peep</tr><note>missing .? P2</note> <i>Hilabihan níyang nakasulisúli nímu sa lyabihánan!</i> How he peeped at you through the keyhole!

<p><form>sulì</form> <xr>= <sc>SUHÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sulib</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> put fire to s.t. <i>Nasakpan na ang nagsulib sa katubhan,</i> They have apprehended the man who set the sugar cane field on fire.

<p><form>sulibag</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>crooked</tr>, not straight, <tr>askew</tr>. <i>Sulibag kaáyu ang ákung gibadlis,</i> The line I <pb n=929>drew is too crooked. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> come out crooked, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Ikay nagsulibag sa linya,</i> You made the line crooked. <i>Musulibag (masulibag) giyud ning ákung sinulatan ug way linyang subáyan,</i> My writing comes out all crooked when I don't have lines to follow. <form>(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>SULIBAG</sc>, <pos>v</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>súlid<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>twine</tr>, <tr>thread</tr> of two or more strands twisted together. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make a thread of this sort. <form>-in-</form> <xr>= <sc>SÚLID</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>súlid<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> name given to fish of the genus <bio>Caesio</bio> which are rounded (but not so broad as the <ix>bilásun</ix>).

<p><form>sulíkat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>glare</tr> at s.o. with the eyes wide open. <i>Musulíkat gánì ku, paháwà dáyun,</i> If I glare, better beat it at once. <number>2</number> [A2S; <i>c</i>] for the eyeballs to roll up into the forehead. <i>Misulíkat ang mata sa bátang nagkumbulsiyun,</i> The child's eyes rolled up into his forehead when he had convulsions. (&rarr;) <pos>a</pos> for the eyes to be rolled up into the forehead. <i>Ang táwung sulikat ug mata mu rag pirming maghangad,</i> A person with rolled-up eyes always seems to be looking up. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a defect of the eyes where the eyelids don't close from disease or injury. <i>Dì siya ilhan ug natúlug ba kay sulikat siya ug mata,</i> You never know whether he is asleep or not because his eyes don't close. <number>2</number> one with such an eye defect. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> get this defect.

<p><form>sulimaw</form> <pos>a</pos> having one eye looking off in a direction it shouldn't, e.g. when one has one weak eye which fails to move. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> develop this defect.

<p><form>sulimbad</form> <pos>a</pos> having the eyes in the wrong position in the head: crossed, rolled upwards, one eye out of focus, and the like. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1P]</itype> get this defect. <i>Musulimbad ang íyang mata ug makuyawan siya,</i> She becomes cross-eyed when she gets scared. <i>Gisulimbad níya ang íyang mga mata timáan nga wà siya makaayun,</i> He rolled his eyes up as<note>double as, remove 1?</note> as a sign that he did not like it.

<p><form>sulimni</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>solemn ceremony</tr> or event. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; c1]</itype> for an event to be made solemn. <i>Masulimni giyud ang ukasiyun sa paghandum sa átung mga bayáni,</i> It should be a solemn occasion when we remember our heroes. <form>mísa &mdash;</form> <xr>see <sc>MÍSA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sulindir</form> <xr>= <sc>SURINDIR</sc></xr> (colloquial).</xr>

<p><form>súling</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN2; a12]</itype> <tr>peep</tr>. <i>Ang táwu nga musúling (manúling) sa lyawihánan way batásan,</i> A person who peeps through keyholes has no manners. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>peer</tr>, look closely at s.t. to examine it. <i>Sulínga ang ágig kang kinsa nà,</i> <tr>Look at</tr> the handwriting to see whose it is. <form>sulingsúling</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> look with careful attention from a distance. <i>Táwung nagsulingsúling sa gít,</i> A man standing at the gate, peering inside.

<p><form>sulínga</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> look askance with contempt or anger. <i>Nasukù tu siya nímung nanulínga man?</i> Why did she look at you with scorn? Was it that she was angry with you? <number>2</number> make faces at s.o. jokingly. <i>Misulínga siya nákù dihang giingnan nákù siyang gwápa,</i> She made a face at me when I told her she was pretty. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> growl in distrust or disobedience. <i>Musulínga siya ug pakab-un ug túbig,</i> He will growl if he is told to fetch water. <form>masulingáhun</form> <pos>a</pos> having a scorning or disbelieving look on the face. <i>Hilum, apan masulingáhun kaáyu siyang namátì sa diskursu,</i> He was quiet, but he listened to the speech with disbelief all over his face.

<p><form>sulípat<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>glower</tr> at s.o. to show anger or disapproval. <i>Ákù siyang gisulipátan kay nagsábà man,</i> I glowered at her because she was being noisy.

<p><form>sulípat<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> blink the eyes in the water to remove a foreign body lodged in it. <i>Ákung gisulípat ang ákung mata sa túbig arun pagkúhà sa puling,</i> I blinked my eyes in the water to remove the speck in them.

<p><form>suliping, sulíping</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>SALIPÌ</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>SALIPING</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sulip-it</form> <xr>= <sc>SALIP-IT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sulírab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2P; c]</itype> <tr>glower</tr>, stare fiercely with an angry frown. <i>Gisulirában sa kapatas ang mga kaminíru nga nagpataypátay,</i> The foreman glowered at the street cleaners that were dilly-dallying on the job.

<p><form>suliran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>problem</tr>, an unsettled condition or situation that requires a solution. <i>Suliran nákù ang pagpakáun sa ákung pamilya,</i> It is a problem for me to feed my family. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> have a problem.

<p><form>sulírap<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> for the eyeballs to move up so that they are almost hidden by the upper eyelid. <i>Basta taas ang hilánat, musulírap ang mata,</i> If the fever is high, the eyeballs move up into the forehead.

<p><form>sulírap<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> matting made out of woven coconut palm fronds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> weave coconut fronds into matting.

<p><form>sulírat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB6; c1]</itype> for the eyes to open wide in anger; cause them to do so. <i>Mihílum ang mga bátà dihang ákung gisulirátan,</i> The children kept quiet when I glared at them.

<p><form>sulisilit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <tr>solicit</tr> contributions (humorous&mdash;from <ix>sulisit</ix>).

<p><form>sulísit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>solicit</tr> contributions, donations. <i>Nagsulisit ang maistrag hinábang sa nasunúgan,</i> The teachers were soliciting contributions for the fire victims.

<p><form>sulisitadur</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>prying</tr> or maliciously inquisitive. <pb n=930>Sulisitadur kaáyung bayhána, nangutána kun pilay ákung swildu, What a <tr>nosey</tr> woman. She asked me how much I earn.

<p><form>sulisitur hiniral</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Solicitor General</tr>, an officer of the Justice Department that handles government cases.

<p><form>sulit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> set s.t. <tr>afire</tr> or <tr>ablaze</tr>. <i>Sulitan nákù ang kakugnan,</i> I'll set the grass field on fire.

<p><form>*súlit</form> <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>test</tr>, <tr>examination</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> hold an <tr>exam</tr>.

<p><form>sulitaryu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>solitaire</tr> card game. <number>2</number> <tr>solitaire ring</tr> with a single gem. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> <number>1</number> play a game of solitaire. <number>2</number> wear a solitaire ring.

<p><form>suliut</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. giant <tr>clam</tr> with yellow coloring around the edges of the mouth.

<p><form>sulíut</form> (from <ix>líut</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> force oneself through a crowd or s.t. similar. <i>Misulíut siya sa katawhan arun makadúul sa intabládu,</i> She forced her way through the crowd to get near the stage.

<p><form>sulíyaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for a crowd to shout either in <tr>applause</tr> or derision. Misulíyaw ang mga táwu pagdiskursu sa pulitiku, The people <tr>booed</tr> when the politician delivered a speech. <i>Misulíyaw ang mga táwu pagkabatì sa balità sa kadaúgan,</i> The people shouted upon hearing the news of victory. <pos>n</pos> shouts of a crowd.

<p><form>sulpa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sulfa</tr> drugs.

<p><form>sulpà</form> <pos>n</pos> container for jewelry or important documents used in former times, made of a short bamboo tube, 1&ndash;2´ long, having another cover of bamboo which fits over it and reaches its base. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> place s.t. in a sulpà.

<p><form>sulput</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>issue forth</tr> suddenly, <tr>pop out</tr> of. <i>Misulput ang sungsung ug miágay ang súkà,</i> The stopper popped, and the vinegar flowed out. <i>Misulput lang ang bátà pag-anak níya,</i> The baby just popped out when she gave birth. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> leave suddenly, move with speed. <i>Nây,<note>questionable accent. P2</note> misulput siya ug mipaúlì nga way tingugtíngug,</i> Well! He got up and went home without saying a word.

<p><form>sulsul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>urge</tr>, <tr>egg</tr> s.o. into doing s.t. bad. <i>Gisulsúlan sa mga iyaan ang mga bátà sa pagpasúkul sa ílang inaína,</i> The children's aunts incited them into rebelling against their stepmother. <pos>n</pos> <tr>urgings</tr>, <tr>incitement</tr>.

<p><form>sultáda</form> <pos>n</pos> a match in <tr>cockfights</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> for there to be a cockfight match. <i>Ug magsultáda ug bayinti sa hápun, dì na hínay ang tárì,</i> If there are twenty matches in the afternoon, cockfighting is doing all right. <form>sultadur</form> <pos>n</pos> handler who releases fighting cocks in a match.

<p><form>sultan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sultan</tr>, the name given the chief of some Muslim groups.

<p><form>sultána</form> <pos>n</pos> a sultan's wife.

<p><form>sulti</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> <tr>tell</tr>, <tr>speak</tr>. <i>Way láin nga makagsulti báhin níya kun dílì ang amahan,</i> No one can <tr>say</tr> that about him but the father. <i>Sultían ku pa siya ug musugut ba,</i> I still have to tell him to see if he would agree. <i>Ayaw nag isulti níya!</i> Don't tell him that! <number>1a</number> <itype>[C; abc3]</itype> talk s.t. over together. <i>Dúnay makigsulti nímu sa tilipunu,</i> S.o. wants to talk to you on the telephone. <i>Sultíun (sultíhun) nátù ni. Dì ta mistil maglális,</i> Let's talk this out. We don't have to fight. <i>Gipanagsultíhan pa námù ang nahitabù,</i> We are still <tr>discussing</tr> the events. <i>Gipakigsultíhan mu na ba siya?</i> Have you gone to see him to <tr>talk it over</tr>? <i>Gikasulti ku na si Pápa,</i> I've already talked it over with Dad. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>utter</tr> s.t., <tr>speak</tr>. <i>Makasulti na ang ákung anak,</i> My daughter knows how to talk. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> deliver a <tr>speech</tr>. <i>Maáyu musulti tung kandidatúha,</i> That candidate speaks quite well. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> word of <tr>caution</tr> or <tr>advice</tr>. <i>Usa ka sulti hustu na,</i> One word is enough. <number>2</number> thing said as <tr>news</tr>, <tr>gossip</tr>. <i>Unsa man nang sulti nga nabátì ku nga wà ka na mutunghà?</i> What is that talk I hear that you are not attending classes? <number>3</number> <tr>speech</tr> or talk delivered. <i>Daghang nakasaway sa ímung sulti,</i> A lot of people criticized your speech. <form>sultisulti</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> <tr>chat</tr>, <tr>converse</tr>. <i>Nagsultisulti mi báhin sa ámung gradwisyun nga umaábut,</i> We are conversing about our forthcoming graduation. <pos>n</pos> <tr>gossip</tr>, <tr>rumor</tr>. <i>Mga sultisulti nà nga dílì katuhúan kay gíkan sa mga tabian,</i> That is gossip not worth believing because it originates from the gossipmongers. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>circulate</tr> gossip or news. <i>Ikaw may nanulti ánang tabía,</i> You were the one who spread that gossip. <number>2</number> speak in a certain way. <i>Sakit kaáyu siya nga manulti,</i> He speaks in a very hurting way. <form>sultiánay, sultihánay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c3]</itype> have a conversation. <pos>n</pos> <tr>conversation</tr>.

<p><form>sultiánan</form> <pos>n</pos> subject of conversation. <i>Ang nahitabù nahímung sultiánan sa mga táwu,</i> What happened became a subject of conversation for the people. <form>hinultihun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>talkative</tr>. <i>Dì siya hinultihun ug dì pa níya sinátì ang táwu,</i> He doesn't say much if he does not know the person well. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become talkative. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> person with whom one is talking. <form>sinultihan</form> <pos>n</pos> manner of <tr>speech</tr>, <tr>language</tr>. <form>panultihun, sultihúnun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>saying</tr>, <tr>proverb</tr>. <number>2</number> thing usually said or spoken. <i>Kanang mga pulúnga mauy panultihun ug táwung buangbuang,</i> That is the k.o. thing crazy people say.

<p><form>sultid bins</form> <pos>n</pos> canned <tr>salted beans</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> <pb n=931>have salted beans for food.

<p><form>sultíra</form> <xr>= <sc>SULTÍRU</sc> (female).</xr>

<p><form>sultíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>single</tr>, <tr>unmarried</tr> male.

<p><form>súlu</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> sing a <tr>solo</tr>. <i>Sulúhun ku lang ang kanta,</i> I will make this song a solo. <number>2</number> do s.t. <tr>alone</tr> by oneself. <i>Musúlu lang ku ug trabáhu kay aku ra may nía,</i> I will just work by myself because I am the only one around. <number>2a</number> <formx>sulúha</formx> expression of harsh rejection when s.o. ask<note>asks?</note> for one's company. <i>&lsquo;Manan-aw tag sini.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Sulúha!&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Let's go to the movies.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Go by yourself!&rsquo; <pos>n</pos> vocal solo. <form>sulusúlu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b5]</itype> do s.t. <tr>alone</tr>. <i>Magsulusúlu lang kag adtu sa parti?</i> Are you going to the party alone? <form>&mdash; pláyit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> go s.w. <tr>alone</tr>. <i>Magsúlu pláyit siya ig-adtu sa Mindanaw,</i> He will go to Mindanao alone. <form>-wist, -wista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>soloist</tr>, <tr>lead singer</tr> or player of a group. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> be, be made the soloist.

<p><form>sulù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>torch</tr> made of a dry palm frond bound tightly at regular intervals along its length to make it burn slowly. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make into a torch of this sort. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> use a torch in doing s.t., or illuminate one's way with a torch. <i>Sul-un ku tung langgáma rung gabíi,</i> I will catch that bird tonight lighting my way with a torch. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> go hunting or fishing at night with torchlight.

<p><form>súlù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S]</itype> make a sizzling, hissing sound. <i>Ug musúlù ang mantíkà ilúnud ang sibúyas,</i> When the fat <tr>sizzles</tr>, put the onions in. <i>Basà ang pabílu kay síging nagsulù,</i> The wick must be wet because it keeps <tr>sizzling</tr>.

<p><form>sul-ub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>insert</tr> s.t. into s.t. that it fits into. <i>Palíhug rag sul-ub ug bálik ánang húnus sa lamísa,</i> Please put the drawers back into the table. <i>Isul-ub ring argulya sa usuk,</i> Insert this metal ring over the stake. <number>2</number> <tr>put on</tr>, <tr>wear</tr>. <i>Sul-úbi ang bátà sa putì níya nga sinínà,</i> Let the child wear her white dress. <i>Isul-ub ang ímung singsing,</i> Wear your ring. <pos>n</pos> <tr>wedding dress</tr>. <i>Malagmit dílì mahinayun ang kasal ug isukud ang sul-ub,</i> It's likely that the wedding won't go through if the bride tries on the gown beforehand.

<p><form>sulud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> <tr>go in</tr>, into. <i>Dílì ta makasulud sa sini saylu sa alas nuybi,</i> We cannot <tr>get into</tr> the movies after nine o'clock. <i>Guwà dihà sa kwartu kay ug dílì ka, sudlun ku ikaw,</i> Get out of the room because if you don't I will go in after you. <number>1a</number> <formx>&mdash; sa úlu</formx> <itype>[ac]</itype> for s.t. to have entered the head. <i>Unsay nasulud sa ímung úlu sa pagbúhat sa ingun?</i> What got into your head to make you do such a thing? <i>Isulud nis ímung úlu, ayaw giyud ug lisúa ning twirkáha,</i> Get this into your head. Don't ever turn this screw. <number>1b</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> <tr>understand</tr> s.t. <i>Dílì masulud sa ákung úlu ang liksiyun,</i> I cannot understand the lesson. <number>1c</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> be <tr>pregnant</tr>, esp. in the early stages. <i>Sa pagkasal níla nasudlan na ang babáyi,</i> When they were married, the girl was already pregnant. <number>1d</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> be under the influence of alcohol. <i>Nanghágit nas Pidru ug áway, nasudlan na tingáli,</i> Pedro was challenging people to a fight. He must be <tr>drunk</tr>. <number>1e</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> for the gears of an engine to <tr>engage</tr>. <i>Musulud (makasulud) ang primíra apan dílì mulyamar,</i> The first gear will engage, but it won't function. <number>1f</number> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> be sent into a game. <i>Misúd si Basilan pagkasíkan hap,</i> Basilan was sent into the game in the second half. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>enter</tr>, take a job as. <i>Musulud siya sa pagkapárì,</i> He will enter the priesthood. <i>Unsang trabahúa ímung sudlan?</i> What k.o. job are you going to take? <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put s.t. inside s.t. else. <i>Nagsulud ku aring mga linata sa kahun,</i> I am putting the canned goods in the box. <i>Isulud ni sa kumúda,</i> Put this in the drawer. <number>3a</number> <form>&mdash; sa bulsa</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>BULSA</sc>.</xr> <number>3b</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> in weaving: <tr>sley</tr>, arrange the threads of a warp in a reed. <number>4</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>accommodate</tr>, <tr>hold</tr>. <i>Kining baríla musulud ug nuybinta ka litru,</i> This barrel will hold ninety liters. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>contents</tr>. <i>Way sulud ang pitaka,</i> The wallet was empty. <number>1a</number> <tr>capacity</tr> to hold. <number>2</number> place within. <i>Túa siya sa sulud sa awtu,</i> He is <tr>inside</tr> the car. <number>2a</number> <tr>within</tr>, inside a period of time. <i>Sulud sa tulu ka túig mupaúlì ku,</i> Within three years I'll go home. <i>Lat-i sulud sa tulu ka úras,</i> Boil for three hours. <form>&mdash; sa búyut</form> <tr>in the bag</tr>, absolutely <tr>assured</tr>. <i>Sulud sa búyut ang ímung kadaúgan,</i> Your victory is already in the bag. <number>2b</number> an extra room in a house: a bedroom or a storeroom. <form>sulud guwà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> go <tr>in and out</tr>. <i>Ngánung nagsulud guwà ka man? Wà kay láing lingaw?</i> Why do you keep going in and out? Have you nothing else to do? <number>2</number> shift one's allegations in one's tack of reasoning. <i>Nagsulud guwà kas ímung sulti maung dì ka katuhúan,</i> You keep changing your story. That's why no one can believe you. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> give a job or recommend s.o. for a job. <i>Pasudlun ta kag trabáhu iggradwar nímu,</i> I'll arrange for you to get a job when you graduate. <form>suludsúlud</form> <pos>n</pos> small room for storage. <form>sudlanan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>container</tr>. <form>suluran</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>reed</tr> in weaving, which has the purpose of slamming the weft threads tightly together, so called from the fact that the warp threads go through it. <form>sinudlan</form> <pos>n</pos> having a <tr>filling</tr>. <i>Pan nga sinudlan,</i> Bread with a filling baked inside. <form>sudlunun</form> <pos>a</pos> way back off the road or usual route (lit. a place <pb n=932>you have to go into to get to). <i>Sudlunun kaáyu ang ílang balay gíkan sa karsáda,</i> Their house is far back from the road. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be way back from the usual route.

<p><form>súlud</form> <pos>n</pos> fine-toothed <tr>comb</tr> with two parallel rows of teeth, used to rid the hair of lice. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> comb with the <ix>súlud</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a <ix>súlud</ix>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> comb one's own hair with the <ix>súlud</ix>.

<p><form>sulug</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>current</tr>. <i>Ang kabáyù naánud sa sulug,</i> The horse was swept away by the current. <number>2</number> <tr>onrush</tr> of s.t. as if brought with the current. <i>Usa ka sulug sa pagbátì mikánap kaníya,</i> An onrush of emotion engulfed him. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> flowing with a swift current. <i>Sulug kaáyu ang túbig sa subà,</i> The water in the river is swift. <number>2</number> flowing copiously. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> be, become <tr>swift</tr>. <i>Masulug man lang ning <form>subáa</form> sa ting-ulan,</i> This river only becomes swift during the rainy season. <i>Ang musulug nga kasukù,</i> The onrush of anger. <number>2</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> have a copious blood flow. <i>Gisulgan siya kay nakuháan,</i> She had profuse bleeding because she had a miscarriage.

<p><form>sulugsúlug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>tease</tr>, <tr>harass</tr> s.o. by irritating actions or remarks, or by poking fun at him. <i>Ayg sugsúga si Maríya kay pikun,</i> Don't tease Maria because she easily cries. <number>2</number> <tr>annoy</tr>, <tr>bother</tr> with persistence. <i>Sa kahapúnun ang lamuk na puy musulugsúlug nákù,</i> The mosquitoes annoy persistently in the evening. <pos>n</pos> action of <tr>teasing</tr>. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> a given to teasing.

<p><form>suluksuluk</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>KUTUKUTU<note>KUTU KUTU?</note></sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>KUTU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sulum</form> <xr>= <sc>PALA</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sulumilyu</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> loin of beef or pork, esp. the upper portion.

<p><form>sulung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>see</tr>, <tr>look at</tr>. <i>Musulung ku sa ímung baligyà,</i> Let me take a <tr>look</tr> at the things you are selling. <number>2</number> <itype>[cP]</itype> <tr>show</tr> s.t. <i>Isulung (ipasulung) nákù ninyu ang ákung bag,</i> I will show you my bag. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> show. <i>Íya kung pasulúngun sa íyang bag-ung sapátus,</i> She'll let me see her new shoes.

<p><form>súlung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>set against</tr>, <tr>attack</tr>. <i>Sulúngun nátù ang Hapun rung gabíi,</i> We will attack the Japs tonight. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN2; a12]</itype> go s.w. to look for trouble. <i>Ug sulúngun (sulngun) ka níya sa iskuylahan, itug-an siya sa maistru,</i> If he goes to school to pick a fight with you, report him to the teacher. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2N; a12]</itype> go s.w. to do s.t. <i>Musúlung (manúlung) ta ug baskit sa Talísay,</i> We will go to Talisay to play basketball. <pos>n</pos> <tr>attack</tr>. <i>Ang súlung idungan sa bumbardíyu,</i> The attack will be synchronized with the bombardment. <form>dasmag &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> rush attack or <tr>assault</tr>. <form>maN-r-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>attacker</tr>, <tr>invader</tr>.

<p><form>súlung<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> stare directly at s.t. dazzling. <i>Mu ra kag mahálap ug musúlung kas adlaw,</i> You get blinded if you stare directly into the sun. <form>sulnganay, sinulnganay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> communicate by looking at each other without exchanging words (literary). <i>Nagsinulnganay (nagsulnganay) si Hisukristu ug ang Íyang Mahal nga Inahan kay dílì matúkib sa púlung ang ílang gibátì,</i> Jesus Christ and His Blessed Mother looked at each other with emotions words could not express.

<p><form>sul-ung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> for an illness or some personality quirk that recurs ever<note>every?</note><note>i think it's fine. P2,P3</note> so often to make its appearance. <i>Musul-ung ang íyang <form>sáput</form> kun magdugù,</i> She gets her tantrums when she menstruates. <form>sul-ungsul-ung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> recur in intervals.[+]

<p><form>sulup</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dark</tr>, <tr>lightless</tr>. <i>Wà kuy nakítà sa lángub kay sulup kaáyu,</i> I did not see anything in the cave because it was very dark. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> early evening, just after the sun has gone down. <i>Sulup na sa paggíkan nákù sa búkid,</i> It was already <tr>dusk</tr> when I started home from the mountains. <number>2</number> <tr>jungle</tr>, <tr>thicket</tr>. <form>bábuyng &mdash;</form> <tr>wild pig</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B]</itype> become dark. <i>Misulup ang lawak sa pagkapálung sa sugà,</i> The room became dark when the lamp was put out. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> disappear into the forest or tall grass. <i>Duha ka táwu ang misulup sa bagang lugut,</i> Two men disappeared into the thick brush. <number>3</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> be <tr>overgrown</tr> with brush.

<p><form>sulusiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>solution</tr>, <tr>answer</tr> to a problem. <i>Ang sulusiyun sa prublíma sayun ra,</i> The solution to the problem is very simple. <number>2</number> a drug or chemical solution. <i>Gipailísan nákù ang sulusiyun sa batiríya,</i> I had the battery solution changed.

<p><form>súlut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> giving a <tr>piercing</tr> look, <tr>staring</tr> hard. <i>Sulut kaáyu ug tinan-awan ang íyang mga mata,</i> His eyes gave a piercing look. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> look at piercingly. <i>Gisulútan ákung bátà kay nagpabuyag,</i> She stared hard at my daughter because she was being naughty.

<p><form>súlut<sub>2</sub></form> a tightly wound <tr>rope</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> be, become, make <tr>tight</tr>. <i>Sulútun nákù pagpísì arun dílì dalì nga mabugtù,</i> I will make the rope tight so it cannot break easily. <form>sutanan</form> <pos>n</pos> a device used in rope-making having two or three cranks which impart an appropriate degree of twist to the individual strands after which the strands are twisted collectively into the rope.

<p><form>sul-ut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> fit s.t. precisely over, around, or into s.t. else. <i>Sul-útag plastik ang alambri dikuryinti,</i> <tr>Encase</tr> the electric wire in plastic. <number>2</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> put s.t. on, <tr>wear</tr>. <i>Isul-ut ang sapátus ug maarang ba,</i> Try on the pair <pb n=933>of shoes whether they fit. <i>Kanang putì isul-ut sa parti,</i> Wear your white dress to the party. <form>sul-utsul-ut</form> <xr>= <sc>SAL-UTSAL-UT</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>SAL-UT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>suluwist, suluwista</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>SÚLU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sulyà</form> <xr>= <sc>SUYLÀ<sub>1,2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>súm</form> <xr>= <sc>SULUM</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>súma</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>total</tr> up, <tr>reckon</tr> the final amount. <i>Kinsay nagsúma sa pátung sa mga sápì nga gihulaman?</i> Who is reckoning the interest on the money we lent? <pos>n</pos> figure arrived after calculation. <i>Ang súma diri nákù mil syitisyintus,</i> The <tr>sum</tr> total I get is one thousand, seven hundred. <form>-da</form> <xr>= <sc>SÚMA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sum[=à]</form> <xr>= <sc>SUMÁLÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>súmad</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the day exactly one year after a certain event. <i>Ang súmad sa kamatáyun sa ímung amahan mahiatul ug Byirnis Santu,</i> The day exactly one year after your father's death will fall on Good Friday. <i>Súmad niá-*run<note>spurious -? P2</note> túa na ku sa Amirika,</i> A year from now I will be in America. <number>1a</number> <formx>&mdash; nga Lúnis, usa ka simána, etc</formx>. it was exactly one Monday, one week, etc. after a certain event. <i>Súmad nga usa ka búwan rung pitsa dús sukad sa íyang paggíkan,</i> On the second it will be exactly one month since he left. <number>2</number> <tr>anniversary</tr>. <i>Ang súmad sa átung kagawásan saulúgun karung Duminggu,</i> The anniversary of our independence will be celebrated this Sunday. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b8]</itype> get to be a week, month, etc. after s.t. <i>Musúmad na karung Lúnis ang ákung pagkasakit,</i> It will be exactly one week on Monday since I got ill. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> celebrate an anniversary. <form>sumadsúmad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> do s.t. <tr>yearly</tr>. <i>Musumadsúmad siya ug palit ug awtu kay dátù siya,</i> He buys a new car every year because he is rich. <form>kasumáran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>birthday</tr>. <i>Ása man ta magsaúlug sa ímung kasumáran?</i> Where will we celebrate your birthday?

<p><form>sumagang</form> <pos>n</pos> second-class<note>second-class</note> tobacco leaves somewhat smaller than the first class, not perfectly mature, and having minor tears.

<p><form>sumálà<sub>1</sub></form> <number>1</number> <tr>according to</tr>. <i>Náa kunuy bagyu sumálà sa balità,</i> <tr>According</tr> to the news there's going to be a storm. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; <r>[<ix>gen.</ix>]</r></formx> it's <tr>up to</tr> [gen.]. <i>Sumálà gud nímu ug muadtu ka ba,</i> It's up to you whether you go. <number>2a</number> it is up to you. <i>&lsquo;Mangalígù ba ta?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Sumálà!&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;How about going swimming?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;It's up to you.&rsquo;

<p><form>sumálà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <form>dílì mag-</form> regret not doing s.t. which one had been warned to do. <i>Padad-un kag bálun, dì ka. Dì ka magsumálà ug gutmun ka,</i> I told you to bring your lunch, but you didn't. Now you will regret it if you go hungry.

<p><form>sumalabit, sumalabits</form> <xr>= <sc>SALUMABITS</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>súman</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>BUDBUD</sc>, <i>v3;</i> <i>n3.</i></xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> cook, make into <ix>súman.</ix> <form>&mdash; nga hilaw</form> the <tr>penis</tr> (humorous).

<p><form>sumángil</form> <xr>see <sc>*SÁNGIL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sumarínu</form> <xr>= <sc>SUBMARÍNU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sumat<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>ask</tr> for one's answer. <i>Misumat ang dalága sa laláki kun kanus-a sila pakasal,</i> The girl asked the man when they would get married. <i>Wà pa ku makasumat níya kun muuban ba siya nátù,</i> I have not yet asked him whether he would go with us or not. <number>2</number> <tr>remind</tr> s.o. of s.t. <i>Sumati siya sa íyang sáad,</i> Remind him of his promise.

<p><form>sumat<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23N]</itype> for an unpleasant characteristic to be due to inheritance from forebears. <i>Kanang kangil-ad sa batásan ánang batáa túa musumat (manumat) s<note>can't identify</note><note>sa? P2</note><note>sa says a Boholana F1</note> apuhang babáyi,</i> That child's nasty character is inherited from her grandmother.

<p><form>sumatin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>policeman</tr>.

<p><form>súmay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>repeat</tr> what s.o. said. <i>Sumáya ug makadaghan hangtud larínu ka na nga mulituk,</i> Repeat it over several times until you can say it fluently. <form>sumaysúmay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> ape, <tr>mimic</tr>. <i>Ug musumaysúmay ka sa ákung sinultian, sukmágun ta ka,</i> If you ape my way of speaking, I will strike you.

<p><form>sumbag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; a12b2]</itype> strike with the fist, box. <i>Nagpanumbag siyas bungbung sa kapungut,</i> He banged his fist against the wall in anger. <number>2</number> <itype>[C; a12]</itype> have a fistfight with s.o. <pos>n</pos> blow with the fist. <form>-ay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>SUMBAG</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; ang kwarta</formx> (humorous) have plenty of money. <i>Nagsumbagay ang kwarta ánang tihíka,</i> That miser has loads of money. <form>-in-ay(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fistfight</tr>. <i>Ang sinumbagay dílì makasulbad sa inyung panagbángì,</i> Your differences cannot be resolved by fisticuffs. <form>sumbagsumbag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b5c]</itype> <tr>dunk</tr>, <tr>dip</tr> food in s.t. to add more flavor to it (humorous). <i>Pagkúhà ug unà nga átung sumbagsumbágun (sumbagsumbágan) sa ságing,</i> Get some fish paste sauce to dip the cooked bananas into.

<p><form>sumbalihuk</form> (coined from <ix>sumbalik</ix> and <ix>líhuk</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>reaction</tr>.

<p><form>sumbalik</form> (from <ix>bálik</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; ac]</itype> bounce back on, boomerang. <i>Misumbalik kaníya ang batung íyang gilábay,</i> The stone he threw bounced back at him. <i>Ayaw ug bugtawg irung búang kay sumbalikun ka,</i> Don't chase a mad dog because he will turn back on you. <i>Kanang ímung pangutána ákung isumbalik ug pangutána nímu,</i> I'm going to turn around and ask you the same thing you asked me. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> turn out to be the <pb n=934>exact <tr>opposite</tr>. <pos>n</pos> the exact <tr>opposite</tr>. <i>Ang íyang nawung sumbalik sa linawas kay sa laráwan,</i> In real life his face is the exact opposite of what it is in the picture. <form>&mdash; dasdas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>counterattack</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> counterattack. <i>Gisumbalik dasdas sa mga Aliman ang atáki sa mga Rúsu,</i> The Germans counterattacked the Russians.

<p><form>sumbaling</form> <xr>= <sc>TUMBÁLING</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sumban</form> (from *<ix>subung</ix>) <form>gisumban/sumban/sumbi</form> <pos>v</pos> make s.t. modelled after s.t. else. <i>Ritrátu ray ákung gisumban paggamà nákù áning dulaána,</i> I made this toy by copying a picture. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> allow s.t. to go on without doing anything about it, happy that it is being done or resigned to it. <i>Ikaw ray madáut ug pasumban mu ang ímung ka<note> m? can't identify</note><note>just guessing: kabuguy? P2</note>,</i> You will suffer if you just allow yourself to drift along doing nothing all the time. <i>Gipasumban lang sa babáyi ang pagpanghikap sa íyang hinigugma,</i> The girl just allowed her boy friend to keep on caressing her. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>model</tr>, <tr>pattern</tr>. <i>Sumbanan ni paghímù ug mga kartun,</i> This is the pattern in making cardboard boxes. <number>2</number> <tr>code</tr>, <tr>regulations</tr> on which actions are based. <i>Ang kaangáyan mauy sumbanan sa íyang pakigdáit,</i> He bases his personal relations on fairness. <i>Sumbanang baláud,</i> <tr>Civil Code</tr>. <number>2a</number> <tr>basis</tr> on which one acts. <i>Panimalus mauy sumbanan sa íyang panglíhuk,</i> His actions are <tr>motivated</tr> by a desire for revenge. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. that runs in a family. <i>Ang pagkabúang sumbanun ánang pamilyáha,</i> Insanity is <tr>hereditary</tr> in that family.

<p><form>sumbil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> make a piece of cloth larger by sewing another piece to it. <i>Tinábas lay isumbil sa ubus arun mataastaas,</i> Just add some remnants to the bottom to make it longer. <number>2</number> <tr>light</tr> one's cigar or cigarette from s.o. <i>Lisud nga sumbílan ang mubù nga sigarilyu,</i> It's difficult to light one's cigarette on a shorter one.

<p><form>sumbíngay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>parable</tr>, <tr>allegory</tr>. <i>Ang sumbíngay sa magpupúgas,</i> The parable of the sower. <number>2</number> <tr>hint</tr>, s.t. said in asking for s.t. indirectly. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; cP]</itype> <tr>give hints</tr> for s.o. to do s.t., ask for s.t. indirectly. <i>Ákung gipasumbingáyan (gisumbingáyan) ang táwu nga dì na pabalíkun sa balay,</i> I gave the man <tr>hints</tr> not to come back to the house again. <form>pa-</form> <xr>= <sc>SUMBÍNGAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sumbríya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>culvert</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> put or construct a culvert.

<p><form>sumbuhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>barrel</tr> of firearm or ordnance.

<p><form>sumbung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>tell on</tr> s.o., <tr>report</tr>. <i>Isumbung ta kang Pápa,</i> I will tell Father on you. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> tell s.o. about oneself in private. <i>Ug makasumbung pa lang untà ku níya ning ákung gugma,</i> If I could only tell her how much I loved her. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>accuse</tr> s.o. in court, file a complaint. <i>Isumbung ta ka ug pangáwat,</i> I will accuse you of theft. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>report</tr>, tale s.o. tattled. <i>Wà panumbalínga sa supirintindinti ang sumbung,</i> The superintendent did not heed the report. <number>2</number> <tr>complaint</tr> filed in court. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> the accused person. <form>-íra</form> <xr>= <sc>SUMBUNGÍRU</sc> (female).</xr> <form>-íru, mag-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tattle-tale</tr>, <tr>informer</tr>.

<p><form>súmil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sawmill</tr>.

<p><form>sumitir</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>turn in</tr> for consideration, <tr>submit</tr> homework. <i>Unsa mang upisináha sumitihan sa aplikisyun?</i> What office will the application be submitted to? <i>Isumitir ang ímung humwurk run,</i> Submit your homework now. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>submit</tr>, <tr>yield</tr> to a stronger force. <i>Dinhay pila ka táwu nga walà musumitir sa gahum sa kaáway,</i> There were a few persons that did not submit to the power of the enemy. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> agree that a certain thing is right. <i>Walay but-an nga makasumitir ánang ímung paági,</i> No sane person could <tr>accede</tr> to that procedure of yours. <number>4</number> <itype>[B26; b3]</itype> be immensely <tr>impressed</tr> with s.o.'s ability. <pos>a</pos> be impressed by s.o.'s ability. <i>Sumitir kaáyu ku nímung mudiskursu,</i> I take my hat off to you for your oratorical ability.

<p><form>sumpà</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. to counteract s.t. evil before it happens, usually of a magical nature. <i>Sumpà sa ulan,</i> S.t. to keep it from raining. <i>Sumpà sa dápaw,</i> S.t. to keep itchy trichomes from affecting one. <i>Sumpà sa tunglu,</i> S.t. to render a curse ineffective. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> render s.t. ineffective, counteract some evil before it happens. <i>Sumpáun ang bábuy arun dílì mahurut sa mamistáhay,</i> They will put a special charm on the pig so that it won't be all eaten up at the fiesta. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>swear</tr>, make an <tr>oath</tr> to do s.t. or that s.t. will happen. <i>Manumpà kung tinúud kini,</i> I swear this is true. <i>Gipanumpà níya nga manimalus siya,</i> He swore he would get revenge. <i>Ayaw ipanumpà ang ngálan sa Diyus sa pasipála,</i> Don't take God's name in vain (make oaths in God's name for light situations). <pos>n</pos> <tr>oath</tr>, solemn <tr>declaration</tr> of truth or one's intention. <form>ig-l-</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>SUMPÀ</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>sumpákì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>disagreement</tr>, <tr>dispute</tr>. <i>Dì ta na lang painítun ang átung mga sumpákì,</i> We won't let our disagreements get heated. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23C; b3]</itype> <tr>contradict</tr>, <tr>disagree</tr>. <i>Musumpákì giyud nà siya sa bísan unsay ákung isulti,</i> He contradicts whatever I say. <i>Nagkasumpákì ang ámung hunàhúnà,</i> Our ideas are not in agreement. <number>2</number> <itype>[C; b3]</itype> have a disagreement, <pb n=935>small <tr>argument</tr>.

<p><form>sumpay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>join</tr> things together to make them larger. <i>Sumpáyun ta ning duha ka mubung písì arun mataas,</i> Let us join these two short pieces of rope together so it will be long enough. <i>Nagsumpay mi sa pantalan ug mga bayinti mitrus,</i> We are <tr>adding</tr> about twenty meters to the wharf. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>add</tr>, saying s.t. to s.t. previously said. <i>Sumpáyan pa giyud níya ug kumidiya bísan ug unsay ákung isulti,</i> He always adds jokes to whatever I say. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the additional span or length added. <number>2</number> succeeding installment of a serial. <form>ápas &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sequel</tr>. <i>Kining sugilanúna ápas sumpay sa isturya sa bau ug ungguy,</i> This story is a sequel to the story of the monkey and the turtle. <form>ka- ug tinái</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>brother</tr> or <tr>sister</tr>. <form>ka- sa kasingkásing</form> <pos>n</pos> s.o. close to one's heart. <form>-in-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>joint</tr>, place s.t. has been added or tied to s.t. else.

<p><form>sumpit</form> <xr>= <sc>SUNGPIT</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sumpù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>put an end to</tr> s.t. bad. <i>Sumpúun ku nang ímung pagkatabian,</i> I will put an end to your gossiping. <number>2</number> <tr>check</tr> development. <i>Tambal nga musumpù dáyun sa ubu,</i> Medicine that checks a cough instantly. <i>Kanang bisyúha makasumpù sa túbù,</i> That vice <tr>stunts</tr> the growth.

<p><form>sumpung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B246; a4]</itype> be in one of one's bad moods, have one's sickness or fit come over one. <i>Misumpung na sag sáput ni Lúla kay nagyawyaw man,</i> Grandma must be in one of her ugly moods again because she is grumbling. <i>Gisumpung siya sa íyang kabúang,</i> She had her fit of madness again.

<p><form>sumput</form> <xr>= <sc>SUNGPUT</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sumsum</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c2]</itype> eat s.t. with drinks. <i>Isumsum (sumsuman) nátù ning surísu ug bír,</i> Let's have sausages with our beer. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> be the subject of gossip. <i>Aku na puy gisumsúman ninyu ug tabì,</i> This time I am the subject of your gossip. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> thing eaten along with drinks. <number>2</number> action of having food with liquor. <i>Dúnay sumsum sa ka Kardu rung gabíi,</i> There's going to be drinks with eating at Cardo's tonight. <form>-ay(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> eating and drinking spree. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>SUMSUM</sc></xr>.</xr> <number>2</number> subject of gossip. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> have an eating and drinking spree.

<p><form>sumu<sub>1</sub></form> a for tobacco to burn poorly. <i>Sumu kaáyu ning tabakúa ug mabálaw tag yupyup,</i> This tobacco is so hard to get to burn, and you go crazy trying to suck on it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be slow-burning.

<p><form>sumu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>boring</tr>, tired of s.t. due to its frequency and repetition. <i>Sumu kaáyu ning kinabuhía!</i> What a boring life this is! <i>Sumu pamináwun ang sirmun nga gabalikbálik.</i> It's boring to have to listen to the same lecture over and over again. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> be <tr>fed up</tr> with s.t. <i>Gisumhan ku sa íyang pangatarúngan,</i> I was bored with his reasoning. <i>Gisumhan na kug kináun ug bábuy,</i> I am <tr>sick of</tr> eating pork.

<p><form>sum-uk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> go into a mass of s.t. <i>Nakasum-uk na ang ayruplánu sa mga pangánud,</i> The plane disappeared into the clouds. <i>Ayaw ug sum-úka ang kasagbutan kay náay sawa dihà,</i> Don't go into the undergrowth because there are snakes. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> <tr>try</tr>, <tr>venture</tr> into s.t. <i>Wà ku makasum-uk ánang mga mátang sa panarbáhu,</i> I have not tried my hand at that k.o. work.

<p><form>sum-ul</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for food to be <tr>unpalatable</tr> from having been served too often. <i>Sum-ul ang bábuyng isígig sirbi,</i> You can get <tr>fed up</tr> with pork if you have it all the time. <number>2</number> <tr>boring</tr>, <tr>tiresome</tr>. <i>Sum-ul kaáyung pamatíun nang isturyáha,</i> I'm fed up with hearing that story. <form>&mdash; ug nawung</form> <pos>a</pos> having a nice face, but not one so beautiful people can't get enough of looking at it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> be, become <tr>repulsive</tr> and <tr>unpalatable</tr>. <number>2</number> become <tr>boring</tr>. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> feeling of repulsive <tr>dislike</tr> for food eaten too often.

<p><form>suna</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> inquire of s.o. whether he is amenable to s.t., but without putting pressure on him, esp. asking for a second time. <i>Nagsuna si Husi ug mahinayun ba ang piknik,</i> Jose is asking whether the picnic will go on as scheduled.

<p><form>súna</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>zone</tr>, <tr>area</tr> particularly designated. <i>Ang Sibu gihímù nga súna libri, bisag kinsang tawhána makalansar,</i> Cebu has been made a free zone. Anyone may launch his candidacy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> divide into zones.

<p><form>sun-ad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> boil young corn on the cob. <number>2</number> boil root crops or staple food. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> boiled young corn on the cobs. <number>2</number> any starchy food boiled. <form>sun-arun</form> <pos>n</pos> the young corn ready for boiling.

<p><form>sunánuy</form> <xr>= <sc>SUNÍTU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sunáta</form> <pos>n</pos> musical <tr>number</tr>, usually instrumental. <i>Mau rag nakadungug na ku ánang sunatáha,</i> It seems as if I have already heard that <tr>song</tr>.<i> Pagtukar ug sunáta. Ayaw nang mga bag-ung sunghit,</i> Play a classical number, not one of those new song hits. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> play an instrumental number. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for a baby to <tr>cry</tr> (humorous). <i>Nagsunáta na pud ang anak ni Iska,</i> Eska's baby is crying again.

<p><form>sunaup</form> a low, dark, and damp places. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> for an area to be, become depressed and watery. <i>Nasunaup ang ámung yútà kay naunlud human sa línug,</i> Our land became depressed <pb n=936>and watery because it sank after the earthquake.

<p><form>sunda<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>insert</tr> s.t. having length into a hole or cavity. <i>Gisunda níya sa íyang tudlù ang íyang ilung,</i> He inserted his finger into his nose. <i>Masunda giyud ka ug dì ka makaihì,</i> You'll be catheterized if you can't urinate. <pos>n</pos> s.t. of any size but with length to insert into s.t., e.g. a catheter.

<p><form>sunda<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SÁYUD</sc>, <i>n, v3.</i></xr>

<p><form>sundalísa</form> <pos>n</pos> a letter sent by a boy's parents requesting an audience with a girl's parents for the formal marriage proposal (<ix>pamaláyi</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> send this letter.

<p><form>sundálu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>soldier</tr>. <number>2</number> worms found in salted fish preserves (humorous). <i>Náay daghang sundálus ginamus,</i> There are lots of worms in the salted fish. <form>kasundalúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> group of soldiers or soldiers in general. <i>Ang átung kasundalúhan giila pud nga ísug,</i> Our soldiers have also shown themselves to be brave.

<p><form>sundang</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bolo</tr>, the general name for large knives, machetes, and swords used for heavy cutting work and as weapons. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a bolo. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> strike with a bolo.

<p><form>sundanun</form> <xr>= <sc>SANDANUN</sc></xr>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>SANDANAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>*sunding</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>PASUNDING</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sundug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a2]</itype> <tr>copy</tr>, <tr>follow</tr> s.o.'s way of doing s.t. <i>Dì ku musundug (manundug) sa bag-ung alut,</i> I will not follow the new style of cutting the hair. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. copied or adapted from.

<p><form>súng</form> <xr>= <sc>SÚLUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sungad</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the upper <tr>snout</tr> of animals. <i>Sungad ang ikálut sa amúti sa bábuy,</i> The pig uses its snout to dig up sweet potatoes. <number>2</number> the area around the mouth of a person from the nose to the chin (humorous and derogatory). <number>3</number> the <tr>point</tr> of s.t. <i>Sungad sa dáru,</i> The <tr>tip</tr> of the plow.

<p><form>sungag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>horn</tr>, strike or <tr>butt</tr> with the horn. <i>Sungagun ka ánang kanding ug mudúul ka,</i> That goat will butt you if you go near it. <number>1a</number> <itype>[C; ac3]</itype> for animals to fight with their horns. <i>Nagkasúngag ang duha ka kábaw,</i> The two carabaos are <tr>goring</tr> each other. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ac3]</itype> ram against s.o. with the head. <i>Napáwul ang usang buksidur kay misungag sa kuntra,</i> One of the boxers was penalized because he <tr>butted</tr> his opponent. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>bulldoze</tr> s.t. <i>Sungagun sa buldúsir ang pangpang human dinamitáha,</i> After they dynamite the cliff, they will bulldoze it. <number>3</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> hit the jaw with the fist. <i>Makasungag giyud ku run ug magbinúang ka,</i> I'll hit you in the jaw if you do anything foolish. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> go against the wind or current. <i>Ug musungag ta sa hángin, dúgay ta muabut,</i> If we go against the wind, it will take us a long time to arrive. <number>5</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> plane against the grain in wood. <i>Dì ka makasungag ug sipilya kay dílì hámis ang ági,</i> You cannot plane against the grain because it won't come out smooth. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> fight between horned animals.

<p><form>sung-ag</form> <xr>= <sc>LUNG-AG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sungasung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>brave</tr> adverse weather or conditions to do s.t. or get s.w. <i>Ngánung misungasung ka mag anhi nga ulan kaáyu?</i> Why did you brave the downpour to get here? <i>Aku ang misungasung sa mga kasukù sa mga ginikánan sa babáyi,</i> I had to <tr>face</tr> the anger of the girl's parents.

<p><form>súngay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>horn</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; ab2]</itype> <tr>butt</tr>, <tr>gore</tr>. <i>Ug mudúul ka sa kábaw sungáyun giyud ka,</i> If you go near the water buffalo, you will be gored. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> animal with horns. <number>2</number> the <tr>devil</tr>. <number>3</number> one like a <tr>devil</tr>. <i>Ag sungáyan nagpabuyag na sab,</i> The little devil is making a nuisance of himself again.

<p><form>súngay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> one's lineal or collateral descendants of the fifth generation: grandchild, grandnephew, or grandniece of a great grandchild, grandnephew or grandniece. <form>apu sa &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>SÚNGAY</sc>.</xr> <form>apuhan sa &mdash;</form> grandparent, granduncle or grandaunt of a great-grandparent, uncle, or aunt.

<p><form>sung-ay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> <number>1</number> carry s.o. on one's shoulder, esp. with legs astraddle the neck. <i>Dì ku makasung-ay nímu kay sakit ang ákung abága,</i> I cannot carry you on my shoulders because they are sore. <number>2</number> assume a financial burden, esp. for a political candidacy. <i>Sung-áyun níya ang kandidatúra ni Kabaybay,</i> He will support Kabaybay's candidacy.

<p><form>sungban</form> <xr>= <sc>SUMBAN</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sunggal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> come to <tr>disturb</tr> or <tr>harass</tr> s.o. <i>Kanúnayng musunggal sa íyang kunsinsiya ang dakù níyang kasal-ánan,</i> The wrong he had done always disturbs his conscience. <i>Hawu ang nagsunggal sa íyang manukan,</i> A monitor lizard <tr>raided</tr> his chicken yard.

<p><form>sunggat</form> <xr>= <sc>SALUNGGAT</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sunggaw</form> <xr>= <sc>SUNGGAL</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sunggu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>nosebleed</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a4]</itype> suffer nosebleed. <i>Nagsunggu (gisunggu) ang buksidur pagkaigù sa ilung,</i> The boxer got a bloody nose when he was hit in the nose.

<p><form>sunghan</form> <pos>n</pos> a very itchy k.o. <tr>scabies</tr> with tiny scales on top. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>SUNGU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sunghit, sunghits</form> <pos>n</pos> booklet in which the words to popular songs are printed.

<p><form>súngì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> for the teeth of a comb, nails, and other projections that are somewhat flexible to break off. <form>(&rarr;)</form> having teeth <pb n=937>broken off. <i>Ilábay nang sudlay nga sungì,</i> Throw away that comb with the broken teeth.

<p><form>súngì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> for the feelings to be <tr>hurt</tr>. <i>Nasungì ku sa ímung gisulti,</i> I was hurt by what you said. <number>2</number> <itype>[C13; b3(1]</itype> have bad feelings toward one another. <i>Gikasungían níla ang pagbáhin sa yútà,</i> They had a misunderstanding about the division of the land. <pos>a</pos> having hurt feelings. <i>Súngì kaáyu ákung buut kay wà ku imbitaha,</i> My feelings were badly hurt because I wasn't invited. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>misunderstanding</tr>.

<p><form>súngil</form> <xr>= <sc>SIKMUL</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr>

<p><form>sungisuk</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bulldog-faced</tr>: snub-nosed, having pudgy cheeks, and overhanging bones on the brow.

<p><form>sungkà</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>game</tr> for two played with a board and pieces, the object of which is to get as many pieces as possible. The board consists of two rows of five or seven holes each, each row assigned to one of the two players, and a hole at either end, each assigned as a home base (<ix>balay</ix> or <ix>balayan</ix>) of one of the players. One player picks up a given number of the pieces and distributes them on the board, one piece in each hole. At whatever hole the last piece is dropped, the player picks up all the pieces in it and continues on dropping pieces until he runs out, picks up the pieces in the hole where he ran out, and so forth until he comes to a hole with nothing in it, in which case the opponent gets the turn. Pieces are gained in three ways: (1) a stone is gained each time the home base is passed; (2) when the pieces run out in the player's row opposite a hole in the opponent's row with pieces in it, they go to the player (<ix>hantuk</ix>); or (3) when the throw ends in the hole immediately before the home base the pieces in that hole revert to the player (<ix>sáka, 4</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> play <ix>sungkà</ix>. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> board for playing this game.

<p><form>sungkab</form> <pos>v</pos> [AN; a 12] get at food by breaking open the place where it is kept. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> an animal that steals food by forcing open the place in which it is kept.

<p><form>sungkad</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>exact</tr> in fit. <i>Ang íyang bistídu sungkad kaáyu nákù,</i> Her dress fits me perfectly. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2C]</itype> <tr>fit</tr>, <tr>fit into</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b(1)]</itype> make s.t. according to certain measurements. <i>Unsang gidak-únag ímung gisungkaran,</i> What size box did you take the measurements from? <form>sungkaran</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. from which s.t. can be copied, from which the measurements can be taken.

<p><form>sungkil</form> <pos>n</pos> growth on the body resembling ginger roots, esp. on the joints, which appear after an infection of yaws. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B246N; b4]</itype> get these growths.

<p><form>sungkip</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> patch a thatch roof. <i>Pára mantinil, kartun lay átung isungkip sa atup,</i> We will use cardboard as a make-shift patch for the roof.

<p><form>sungkit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pole</tr> or <tr>stick</tr>, usually with a hook at the end used to get s.t. out of reach. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> get s.t. out of reach with a <ix>sungkit</ix>. <i>Sungkítun nákù ang mga prútas nga dì maabut,</i> I'll get the fruits that are out of reach down with a pole.

<p><form>sungkiub</form> <xr>= <sc>SINGKUUNG</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sungkù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> <tr>reach</tr> up to a point. <i>Musungkù ang Krismas tri sa pisami,</i> The Christmas tree touches the ceiling. <i>Isungkù ang kural sa kílid sa balay,</i> Have the fence reach the side of the house. <number>1a</number> <itype>[a3b2]</itype> bump one's head against s.t. above. <i>Gi! Nasungkù ang ákung úlu sa sanga,</i> Ouch! I bumped my head against the branch. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> go to see s.o. for a purpose. <i>Akuy musungkù sa mga táwu arun sila mahibalu nga may trabáhu ugmà,</i> I will go notify the people that there will be work tomorrow. <i>Gisungkù ku ang ákung inahan arun papuy-un dinhi sa Sugbu,</i> I went to fetch my mother to have her live here in Cebu. <form>&mdash; sa</form> reaching as far as. <i>Sungkù sa lángit ang ákung kalípay,</i> My happiness knows no bounds (lit. reaches the heavens).

<p><form>sungkud<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cane</tr>, <tr>crutch</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> use a <tr>walking stick</tr> or crutch. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> make into a cane. <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> hit with a cane.

<p><form>sungkud<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>great-grandchild</tr>, nephew, or niece. <form>apu sa &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>SUNGKUD<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr> <form>apuhan sa &mdash;</form> <tr>great-grandparent</tr>, <tr>granduncle</tr>, or <tr>aunt</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> have a great-grandchild. <form>sungkuran</form> <pos>n</pos> great-grandparent (uncle or aunt) or great-grandchild (nephew or niece).

<p><form>sungkudsungkud</form> <pos>n</pos> auger <tr>shells</tr> and other long stick-shaped shells.

<p><form>sungkul</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. smooth <tr>herb</tr> coming in two varieties or species: <form>&mdash; putì</form>, with green leaves, and <form>&mdash; pula</form> with purple bottom surface: <bio>Clerodendron sp</bio>.

<p><form>sunglug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>tease</tr>, <tr>provoke</tr> to anger with words or actions. <i>Dì siya musunglug nákù kay dì man ku masukù,</i> He does not tease me because I don't get mad. <number>2</number> for circumstances to mock one, as if teasing. <i>Naplát pa ta, giulan pa giyud. Gisúngug giyud ta sa panahun,</i> We had a flat and got caught in the rain. Circumstances were conspiring against us. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> given to teasing.

<p><form>sungpit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>blowgun</tr> or s.t. used to squirt liquid. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>squirt</tr> liquid or blow pellets <pb n=938>with a blowgun. <i>Kinsay nagsungpit nímu ug túbig?</i> Who squirted water on you?

<p><form>sungput</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> put things in line, end to end. <i>Isumput ning lamisáha sa usa arun ímung kahigdáan,</i> Put this table next to the other one so you can sleep on it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> join a <tr>queue</tr>. <i>Ngánung musumput ka man dihas tungà sa linya?</i> Why do you butt in at the middle of the <tr>line</tr>? <number>3</number> <itype>[A23; b2]</itype> <tr>appear</tr> from nowhere. <i>Misumput lang siya, wà gánì magtiligráma,</i> He just appeared suddenly. He didn't even send a telegram. <form>-ay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tailgating</tr>.

<p><form>sungsung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>stop up</tr> or <tr>stuff</tr> s.t. into a tube or mouth of a bottle. <i>Nagsungsung ku ug tabákù sa ákung hunsuy,</i> I am stuffing tobacco into my pipe. <i>Nasungsungan ang labábu,</i> The washbasin got <tr>stopped up</tr>. <i>Sungsúngi ang bàbà sa butilya,</i> Put a cork into the mouth of the bottle. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>stopper</tr>. <number>2</number> pinch of pipe tobacco, enough to put in the pipe. <number>3</number> k.o. <tr>posthole digger</tr> made of a bamboo pole which is forced into the ground and then pulled out with the dirt stopped up inside it.

<p><form>sungsung<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SALUNGSUNG</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sungu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bill</tr>, <tr>beak</tr> of fowl or birds. <number>2</number> similar structure in other animals: <tr>trunk</tr> of elephants or the <tr>proboscis</tr> of mosquitoes. <number>3</number> the whitish triangular lower structure of a grain of corn that attaches it to the cob. <number>3a</number> by extension, the tough, somewhat transparent covering of the corn kernel. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; a12]</itype> in cockfighting, set the cocks and let them peck at each other before fighting them or determining the winner. <pos>n</pos> action of having cocks peck at each other. <form>sungusúngu sa mais</form> <xr>= <sc>SUNGU</sc>, <i>n3a.</i></xr> <form>sunghan</form> <xr>= <sc>SULÁHAN</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>SÚLA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>súngug</form> <xr>= <sc>SUNGLUG</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>sung-un</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>SUUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sungut, súngut</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>acrid</tr> in smell. <i>Sungut kaáyu ang báhù sa purmalin,</i> Formaline smells acrid. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>irritating</tr>, <tr>irksome</tr>. <i>Súngut kaáyu ning tawhána kay samukan,</i> This man is very irritating because he always meddles in my affairs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; b4]</itype> be, become <tr>irritated</tr> or <tr>irked</tr>. <form>-an(&larr;), masungtánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>irritable</tr>, easily irritated.

<p><form>súnguy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> for an illness, bad trait, public disorders, and the like to make their appearance in large quantities. <i>Musúnguy ang ákung ubu ug hitun-ugan ku,</i> My cough sets in when I get exposed to damp. <i>Nagsúnguy ang panúlis run,</i> Robberies are <tr>rampant</tr> now. <i>Gisúnguy (gisungúyan) ug balatían ang ákung manukan,</i> A chicken epidemic attacked my poultry.

<p><form>sunítu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sonnet</tr>.

<p><form>sunluk</form> <pos>n</pos> sprain or dislocation caused by bending the limb backwards or knocking the bone on its end. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; ab3(1)]</itype> sprain or dislocate bones in this way. <i>Sunlukun ku nang ímung líug pinaági sa pagbunsù,</i> I'll dislocate your neck by banging you down onto the ground head first. <i>Búla ang nasunlukan sa íyang tudlù,</i> He sprained his finger when it was knocked backwards with a ball.

<p><form>sunlut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> peel off, draw off the skin or skin-like covering. <i>Ákù nang gisunlut (gisunlútan) ang mga tiil sa manuk sa mga pánit,</i> I have taken the outer skin off the legs of the chickens. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> the sea cucumber stripped of its skin and innards, ready for consumption.

<p><form>sunsun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>close together</tr> or to each other. <i>Sunsun kaáyu ang pagtanum sa mga lubi,</i> The coconuts are planted very close to each other. <i>Sunsun nga pag-ubu,</i> Coughing fits in rapid succession. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> be close to each other or together. <i>Bagà ning panaptúna kay nagsunsun ang mga hulug,</i> This cloth is thick because the weft threads are close to each other.

<p><form>sunting</form> <xr>= <sc>ASUNTING</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>suntuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> strike with the fist, <tr>box</tr>. <i>Nagpanuntuk siya sa bungbung sa kalágut,</i> He banged his fists on the wall in anger. <form>-ay(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fistfight</tr>.

<p><form>súnù</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. medium-sized, red grouper (<ix>pugápu</ix>).

<p><form>sunub</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> for liquids to penetrate, seep into or through. <i>Gáhì musunub ang túbig sa yútang kúnun,</i> Water doesn't seep easily into clay soil. <i>Dì makasunub ang uwan íning páyung,</i> The rain can't penetrate this umbrella. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> add a small amount of juice pressed from coconut meat to a stew of meat, fish, or vegetables and cook it. <form>(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>SUNUB</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr> <form>-in-an, -in-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> food cooked with coconut juice.

<p><form>sunud</form> <pos>v</pos> <i>1</i> <itype>[A; ab26]</itype> <tr>follow</tr>, go behind s.o. <i>Sunda tung awtúha!</i> Follow that car! <number>1a</number> <itype>[A23; c]</itype> do s.t. later as the next thing.<i> Pamáhaw na mu kay musunud ra ku,</i> Eat your breakfast now because I'll eat next. <i>Silhígi ang salug kay akuy musunud ug lampásu,</i> Sweep the floor because I will follow it up with scrubbing. <i>Isunud ni pagmakinilya,</i> Type this the next thing. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A; a2P]</itype> do s.t. right after having done s.t. else. <number>2</number> follow, imitate. <i>Dílì siya musunud sa bag-ung múda,</i> She doesn't imitate the new styles. <i>Ayaw ug sunda nang batasána,</i> Don't imitate that sort of manners. <i>Ayawg sunda ímung maguwang nga balirúsu,</i> Don't be <pb n=939>headstrong like your elder brother. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2N]</itype> <tr>inherit</tr>. <i>Siyay musunud (manunud) sa ákung kabtángan,</i> He will inherit my property. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>succeed</tr> in office. <i>Ang bísi mauy musunud ingkásug mamatay ang prisidinti,</i> The vice-president succeeds in office if the president dies. <form>&mdash; ug kasal</form> <itype>[AN]</itype> <tr>sponsor</tr> a wedding. <i>Gubirnadur ang nagsunud sa ámung kasal,</i> A governor sponsored our wedding. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>the next</tr>, the one following. <i>Sunud simána,</i> Next week. <i>Sunud ugmà,</i> The day after tomorrow. <number>1a</number> the next thing done. <i>Sunud ilúnud ang balátung human sa karni,</i> After the meat, put the beans in next. <number>2</number> following, according to the. <i>Sunud sa naandan nga batásan,</i> Following the usual custom. <number>3</number> <tr>next</tr>. <i>Sunud simána,</i> Next week. <i>Sunud gulà,</i> Next issue. <i>Siya ang sunud nga prisidinti,</i> He will be the next president. (&larr;) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; a12]</itype> be close to each other in a <tr>series</tr>, line or <tr>succession</tr>. <i>Sunúra ang mga misitíra nga púlus pula,</i> Put the red pots next to each other in line. <form>sunudsunud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do s.t. one after another, following each other in rapid succession. <i>Musunudsunud ug pangaláyà ang dáhun sa tinghulaw,</i> The leaves withered one after another during the drought. <form>sunudsúnud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> keep following, tagging along after. <i>Kining irua musunudsúnud bisan ása ku mulakaw,</i> This dog keeps following me around wherever I go. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> set an example. <i>Ikaw kay magulang, ikay mupasunud sa ímung mga manghud,</i> You are the elder brother, so you should set an example for your younger brothers and sisters to follow. <pos>n</pos> in consecutive order. <i>Hinganlan nákù pasunud ang ngálan sa mga táwu sa laráwan gíkan sa wala ngadtu sa túu,</i> I will name the people in the picture in order from left to right. <form>pa-(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>PA-</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr> <form>sundánun</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to have offspring closely spaced. <form>masunúrun, masundánun, masinundánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>obedient</tr>. <form>maN-r-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>heir</tr>. <form>-um-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>the following</tr>, <tr>as enumerated</tr>. <form>-um-r-(&larr;)</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>MAN-R-</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <tr>followers</tr> of a certain leader, belief, or religion. <form>sulundun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>exemplary</tr>, worth imitating. <form>panulundun</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. which is inherited. <i>Pagtúung panulundun sa katigulángan,</i> A belief inherited from one's ancestors. <i>Panulundun sa ílang pamilyang pagkaunglù,</i> The curse of needing to suck human blood is passed down from generation to generation in their family. <form>salang panulundun</form> <number>1</number> <tr>original sin</tr>. <number>2</number> act of <tr>coitus</tr> (euphemism).

<p><form>sunug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> small room added to a house, usually to a small shack. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make such a small room.

<p><form>súnug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> burn s.t. up. <i>Sunúgun nátù ning mga sagbut,</i> Let us burn these weeds. <i>Ang mga nasunúgan,</i> The people whose houses burnt down. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> be burnt, destroyed by heat. <i>Gisúnug man nímu ang dukut,</i> You burnt the rice. <i>Nasúnug ang tanum sa ínit sa húlaw,</i> The sun burnt up the plants in the drought. <number>2a</number> roast s.t. that one uses slightly burnt. <i>Sunúga ang dáhun, kupúga, ug ibutíbut sa samad,</i> Burn the leaves, pulverize them, and spread them over the wound. <pos>n</pos> <tr>fire</tr>, <tr>conflagration</tr>. <form>(&rarr;)<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. slightly burnt. <i>Sunug man ning mani,</i> These peanuts are burnt! <number>2</number> in a game of <ix>sungkà</ix>, any of the lateral holes which do not have pieces in them. <form>-an<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SUNUG</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr>

<p><form>sunugan<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> flathead fishes.

<p><form>sun-uk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>insert</tr>, dump s.t. under s.t. to hide or protect it. <i>Gisun-uk níyag ribulbir iláwum sa unlan,</i> He hid the revolver under the pillow. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b2]</itype> push through an area with obstacles. <i>Dì ka makasun-uk dihà kay tunukun,</i> You can't pass through that thicket because it is thorny. <number>2a</number> go s.w. through great difficulty. <i>Hisun-ukan ku ang tanang kalisud sa kinabúhì,</i> I have gone through all kinds of difficulties in life.

<p><form>sun-an, sun-un</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>SUUN<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><form>sun-ut</form> <pos>n</pos> width of the opening around the hem of a skirt. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b5c1]</itype> add to the opening of the skirt. <i>Sun-úti (sun-úta, isun-ut) ang ákung sayal arun dì ku maglisud ug líhuk,</i> Add to the opening at the bottom of the skirt so I can move without encumbrance.

<p><form>sunuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rooster</tr>, <tr>cock</tr>.

<p><form>supa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sofa</tr>.

<p><form>súpa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>soup</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> have, make soup. <form>supíra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>soup tureen</tr>.

<p><form>supà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> feed s.o. pre-chewed food. <i>Ug ubhun ang inahan hitakdan ang bátang gisup-an,</i> If the mother has cough the baby is likely to get it if he is given pre-chewed food. <pos>n</pos> pre-chewed food. <form>-in-</form> <xr>= <sc>SUPÀ</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>súpak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>go against</tr>, violate. <i>Dílì ku musúpak sa súgù sa maistru,</i> I will not disobey the teacher's orders. <number>1a</number> <itype>[B1256; a1c]</itype> cut against the grain in wood working. <i>Ayaw ug isúpak ang tumung sa tigib arun dílì gáhì nga ihandus,</i> Don't chisel against the grain or it will be hard to push. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC2; a12]</itype> <tr>oppose</tr>, be contrary to each other. <i>Musúpak ku sa ímung plánu,</i> I will oppose your plans. <i>Nagsúpak ang ámung mga paminsar,</i> Our opinions are contrary to each other. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> person opposed. <i>Kadtung súpak muísa sa ílang kamut,</i> Those who are opposed, raise their hands. <number>2</number> s.t. contrary, against. <i>Supak sa ákung kabubut-un nga mulakaw <pb n=940>ka sa walay pananghid,</i> It is against my will if you go without asking my permission first. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rebuttal</tr>. <form>rigla sa paN-</form> rebuttal technique. <form>ma-in-un, -iru</form> <pos>a</pos> disobedient, tending to oppose. <form>-ira</form> <xr>= <sc>SUPAKÍRU</sc> (female).</xr>

<p><form>sup-ak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>split</tr> s.t. lengthwise, esp. along the grain. <i>Ákù úsang sup-ákun ang káhuy arun masulud sa pugun,</i> I will split the wood first so it will go into the stove. <pos>n</pos> the long piece split off from a bigger piece. <i>Tulu ka sup-ak nga kawáyan,</i> Three slats of bamboo.

<p><form>súpan</form> <xr>= <sc>SALÚPAN</sc>.</xr> <xr>see <sc>SALUP</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>súpang</form> <pos>a</pos> fat and healthy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2N; b6]</itype> be, become fat and healthy. <i>Musúpang (manúpang) ang bátà ug sígi siyang inum ug gátas,</i> The child will become fat and healthy if he keeps drinking milk. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> state of being fat and healthy.

<p><form>súpas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>crackers</tr> or <tr>cookies</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make, have crackers or cookies.

<p><form>súpas<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SÚPA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>súpat</form> <pos>n</pos> grain in wood that is irregular and intertwined. <i>Ang súpat makapalisud sa pagsipilya sa káhuy,</i> The irregular grain makes the wood difficult to plane. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> full of irregular grains. <number>2</number> be hard to split because of irregular grain. <i>Káhuyng supátun kaáyung bugháun,</i> Wood that is very difficult to split. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be wood of this sort.

<p><form>supbul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>softball</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> play softball.

<p><form>sup dringk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>soft drinks</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> have soft drinks.

<p><form>súpi</form> <pos>n</pos> a peso (slang).

<p><form>súpil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; b6]</itype> go against what s.o. wants one to do. <i>Ug supílan mu ang tambag sa ímung amahan, gabáan ka,</i> If you disobey your father's advice, you will get your just desserts. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>rebellious</tr>, <tr>disobedient</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be, become rebellious.

<p><form>supíra</form> <xr>see <sc>SÚPA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>supirbaysing</form> <pos>n</pos> teacher in charge of the administration of a whole school, one rank above the principal.

<p><form>supirbaysur</form> <xr>= <sc>SUPIRBISUR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>supirbisar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>supervise</tr>, <tr>superintend</tr>. <i>Supirbisahi (supirbisari) ang mutsatsang nagdigámu,</i> Supervise the maid while she is preparing dinner.

<p><form>supirbisur</form> <pos>n</pos> supervisor of a school district. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> be made, become the supervisor.

<p><form>supirbisúri</form> <pos>n</pos> supervisory position. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> hold a supervisory position. <i>Dalì rang magsupirbisúri ang mga inhinyíru sa mína,</i> It's easy for mine engineers to get supervisory positions in the mining company.

<p><form>supirbisiyun, supirbisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>supervision</tr>.

<p><form>supirintindint, supirintindinti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>superintendent</tr> of the public schools in a city or in a whole province.

<p><form>supir istár</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>superstar</tr> of the movies. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be, become a superstar.

<p><form>supiriyur</form> <pos>a</pos> of a <tr>high quality</tr>. <i>Supiriyur kaáyu ning panaptúna sa ímung napalit,</i> This cloth is very much better in quality than the cloth you bought. <pos>n</pos> one's superior in an organization or in rank.

<p><form>supirmarkit</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> name of one of the public markets in Cebu. <number>2</number> <tr>supermarket</tr>.

<p><form>supiryúra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mother superior</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> be, be made the mother superior. <form>madri &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>SUPIRYÚRA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>supla</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> arrest the motion of dice or coins that have been thrown. <i>Ákung supláhun (suplahun) ang dayis ug dílì maáyung pagkalábay,</i> I will arrest the dice if they are not thrown properly. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>interrupt</tr> s.o.'s speech, usually with a question. <i>Makasupla ba ta sa nagsulti?</i> May I put a question to the speaker? <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> check vice, bad manners. <i>Ángay nga supláhun nang tarása nga laksut,</i> That bad trait should be put to a halt. <pos>n</pos> violation of the rules in certain games. <i>Sa dáma ubligádu ka pagkáun sa ákung batu. Ug dì ka mukáun, supla ka,</i> In checkers you are obliged to take my piece. If you do not, you violate the rules. <form>supládu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>curt</tr>, <tr>laconic</tr> to the point of rudeness. <i>Supládu kaáyu siya ug sinultihan,</i> He is very curt in speech. <number>2</number> characteristically bent on going against advice, orders, or instructions. <i>Dì masápì ang supládu sa siminaryu,</i> A disobedient person doesn't fit in the seminary. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B125]</itype> be <tr>rudely laconic</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> become characteristically inclined to disobey. <form>supláda</form> <xr>= <sc>SUPLÁDU</sc> (female).</xr>

<p><form>suplágay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a3]</itype> be <tr>dispersed</tr> into various directions, cause s.t. to be dispersed. <i>Kinsay nagsuplágay sa mga húlin diri sa kwartu?</i> Who scattered the marbles all over the room? <i>Nasuplágay na mi human mamatay ang ámung inahan,</i> We were scattered after our mother died. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2; a12P]</itype> <tr>disperse</tr>, run in every direction. <i>Pagbutu sa pusil, misuplágay ang mga táwu,</i> When the gun fired, the people scattered in all direcions<note>directions</note>.

<p><form>suplimintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>supplement</tr> to a publication, to a diet. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> take or add s.t. as a supplement. <i>Pagkáung gisuplimintúhag bitamína,</i> Food supplemented with vitamins.

<p><form>supl&icaron;r</form> <xr>= <sc>SUPR&Icaron;R</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>suplíti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>blowtorch</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> use a blowtorch.

<p><form>suprímu</form> <pos>n</pos> title of the leaders of some organizations. <i>Si Suprímu Luis Taruk pangúlu sa <pb n=941>Kumunista kanhi,</i> Supreme Chief Luis Taruc was the leader of the communists formerly.

<p><form>supr&icaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>substitute</tr> for s.o., substitute s.t. for s.t. else. <i>Ug mupalta ka sa trabáhu dúna bay musupr&icaron;r nímu?</i> If you're absent from work do you have s.o. to substitute for you? <i>Way hingpit nga makasupr&icaron;r sa gátas sa inahan,</i> There is nothing that can substitute perfectly for mother's milk.

<p><form>supsup</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>suck</tr>, take s.t. in by sucking. <i>Ang búwak sa antuwángang dinukduk kusug musupsup ug nánà sa hubag,</i> Crushed hibiscus flowers suck the pus from boils. <i>Supsúpun sa limátuk ang dugù,</i> Leeches suck the blood. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> suck s.o. off. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2N]</itype> fawn, suck up to (somewhat coarse). <i>Musupsup (manupsup) siya sa mga táwung íyang kapangayúan ug pabur,</i> He sucks up to people he wants to ask favors from. <form>&mdash; bútù</form> <pos>n</pos> apple polisher (coarse).

<p><form>supsupun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>saxophone</tr> (word play on <ix>supsup</ix> and <ix>saksupun</ix>&mdash;humorous).

<p><form>supu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> embarrass s.o. by proving his allegations false. <i>Dílì ka makasupu nákù kay tinúud ang ákung gisulti,</i> You cannot prove me wrong because what I said is true. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> discard a card or mahjong piece that allows an opponent to win the game. <i>Dì ku masupu kay magbantay man ku sa mga karta nga ilábay,</i> I don't discard pieces that would allow anyone to go mahjong because I keep an eye on the pieces that have been discarded.

<p><form>supurt&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> provide s.o. with sustenance, <tr>support</tr>. <i>Pila ka kirída ang íyang masupurtaan?</i> How many mistresses can he support? <number>2</number> provide support to an attacking unit. <i>Ang atáki sa dágat supurtahan ug tulu ka bapur digíra,</i> The sea assault will be supported by three battleships. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> support a certain weight. <i>Unum ka halíging simintu nagsupurt&acaron;r sa taytáyan,</i> Six concrete columns supported the bridge. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> endorse, support a candidate. <i>Dì siya musupurtar sa ákung kandidátu,</i> He would not support my candidate.

<p><form>supurtir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>athletic supporter</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> wear, use an athletic supporter.

<p><form>suput</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <i>1</i> shoot with a blowgun. <i>Kinsay nagsuput sa ákung manuk?</i> Who killed my chicken with a blowgun? <number>2</number> force s.t. out from a tight hole by hammering in s.t. in its place. <i>Supta nang lansang ug láing lansang,</i> Force out the nail by banging in another nail on top of it. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23; c]</itype> soar up as if shot from a blowgun. <i>Mu rag misuput ang íyang kalípay ngadtu sa kawanángan,</i> It seemed as though his happiness soared up into space. <number>3a</number> do s.t. with speed, as if shot from a blowgun. <i>Misuput siyag dágan pagkakità sa ákung pistúla,</i> He ran like all get out when he saw my gun. <i>Misuput siya ug usa ka pangutána sa tsirman,</i> He shot a question at the chairman. <pos>n</pos> blowgun or a dart shot from a blowgun.

<p><form>súput</form> <pos>n</pos> general name for bags, esp. paper bags. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> put in a <tr>bag</tr>. <i>Isúput lang nang kámay,</i> Place the sugar in the <tr>paper bag</tr>.

<p><form>sup-ut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> fit s.t. tightly over, in, or around s.t. else. <i>Nagsup-ut ku áring plastik nga túbu sa bára,</i> I am fitting this plastic tube over the iron rod. <number>2</number> <tr>put on</tr> a piece of clothing wear. <i>Nagsup-ut siya ug bag-ung bistídu,</i> She was wearing a new dress.

<p><form>sur<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> mahjong, the south piece, one of the winds (<ix>bintus</ix>). <number>2</number> the player at the right of the dealer. <number>3</number> the second round (<ix>ráwun</ix>) in a game.[+]

<p><form>sur<sub>2</sub></form> title for nuns. <i>Sur Matildi,</i> <tr>Sister</tr> Matilde.

<p><form>súra<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>tease</tr>, <tr>ridicule</tr> a person for a defect. <i>Suráhi (suráha) siya nga pisut,</i> Tease him for being uncircumcized. <number>2</number> <tr>bother</tr>, <tr>annoy</tr>. <i>Ngánung inyung gisúra ang bátà nga natúlug?</i> Why did you bother the child? She was sleeping so nicely. <number>3</number> ask a person to buy one s.t. <i>Musúra na pud ning ákung bátà ug sapátus kay gradwisyun na,</i> My son will ask me to buy him a pair of shoes because it will be graduation. <form>masuráhun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>teasing</tr>.

<p><form>súra<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>dance</tr> with the hands, feet, and body. <i>Pwirting nakasúra sa bátà arun hatágan siyag singku,</i> How the child danced to earn a nickle.

<p><form>súrab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; c1P]</itype> flash a fierce look of anger, hate. <i>Surábun (isúrab, pasurábun, ipasúrab) níya ang íyang mga mata ug masukù,</i> She flashes her eyes when she is angry.

<p><form>suraban</form> <pos>a</pos> greedy eater that eats another's share as well as his own. <i>Gipaulahi pagpakáun ang suraban nga baktin,</i> The greedy piglet was fed last. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become a greedy grabber of food.

<p><form>surambaw</form> <i>n </i>1 <tr>double-cross</tr>, tamper with a game so that the outcome is fixed. <i>Way dalag-an ang átung pusta kay surambaw kaáyu tung duláa,</i> We didn't have a chance with our bet because the game was completely fixed. <number>2</number> name of a child's game played with rubber bands knotted tightly together. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> throw a game, double-cross. <i>Kadtung nagsurambaw sa baskit dílì na paapilun unyà,</i> Those who threw the basketball game will not be allowed to participate next time. <i>Dílì gihápun ku mapildi sa iliksiyun bísag imu kung surambáwun,</i> I will not lose in the election anyway, even if you double-cross <pb n=942>me.[+]

<p><form>surangsurang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>pester</tr>, <tr>annoy</tr> s.o. that is in a bad mood to start out with. <i>Ayaw bayà ku surangsuranga kay ínit ning ákung úlu,</i> Don't anybody pester me because I'm in a bad mood as it is.

<p><form>surbi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>survey</tr> land. <number>2</number> <tr>inspect</tr> a place to see how it is. <i>Musurbi úsà ku ánang yutáa úsà ku mudisidir,</i> I'll inspect that land first before making any decision. <number>3</number> make a survey or <tr>poll</tr>. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> survey of land, inspection of how s.t. is. <number>2</number> survey, poll. <form>-yur(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> land <tr>surveyor</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a surveyor.

<p><form>surbíti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ice cream</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make, make into ice cream. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> have ice cream. <form>-ru</form> <pos>n</pos> ice-cream vendor. <form>-s</form> <xr>= <sc>SURBÍTI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>surihir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make a <tr>suggestion</tr>. <i>Sa míting karun musurihir ku nga multáhan ang dílì mutambung,</i> At the meeting today I will <tr>move</tr> that absentees be fined.

<p><form>suriksurik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b5]</itype> <tr>inquire</tr> searchingly, <tr>search</tr> for s.t. meticulously. <i>Ug musuriksurik (manuriksurik) kag trabáhu, makakità ka giyud,</i> If you're serious in looking for a job, you'll surely find one. <i>Ang sikríta nagsuriksurik ug pangutána sa kasilingánan sa mamumúnù báhin kaníya,</i> The detective inquired in great detail about the criminal from his neighbors. <i>Ang ákung maistra pwirting makasuriksurik (makapanuriksurik) ug buling sa suuk,</i> My teacher searches the corners meticulously for dust.

<p><form>surindir</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>surrender</tr>, give oneself up to proper authorities or a stronger power. <i>Misurindir ang mga Hapun sa mga Alyádu,</i> The Japanese surrendered to the Allies. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>yield</tr>, <tr>concede</tr> defeat. <i>Ug áway lang, dì ku musurindir nímu,</i> I will never surrender to you in a fight. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23; b6]</itype> stop eating due to satiation. <i>Dihà ku sa ayis krim musurindir,</i> When we got to the ice cream, I had to stop eating.

<p><form>suringiw</form> <pos>a</pos> one who never does a thing right when sent on an errand. <i>Suringiw kaáyu ning batáang sugúun tungud sa kalinga,</i> This child never does a thing right when he is sent on an errand because he is so inattentive. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> fail to follow instructions. <i>Ngánung musuringiw ka mag sugúun?</i> Why don't you follow instructions when you are sent on an errand?

<p><form>surísu</form> <pos>n</pos> Spanish <tr>sausage</tr> made of pork. <form>&mdash; di Bilbaw</form> k.o. imported Spanish sausage. <form>&mdash; sa Insik</form> Chinese sausage. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make sausage. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> cook s.t. with sausage as a spice.

<p><form>súrit</form> <pos>n</pos> home-made <tr>rifle</tr> that uses empty bullet shells reloaded with broken nails and gunpowder. <form>suritsúrit</form> <pos>n</pos> bamboo squirt gun.

<p><form>surku</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> plow between rows of corn to loosen the soil and remove weeds (done usually once about halfway to the harvest time). <form>surkuhúnun</form> <pos>n</pos> corn plants at about 2&ndash;3&prime; high, ready for weeding.

<p><form>surpan</form> <xr>= <sc>SURTPAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>surplas</form> <pos>n</pos> leftover military supplies and equipment sold to the civilian population.

<p><form>surprísa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>surprise</tr>, surprise gift. <i>Dúna kuy surprísa pára nímu, píyung úsà,</i> I have a surprise for you, close your eyes (first). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> give s.t. as a surprise gift.

<p><form>sursi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN2; b6]</itype> <tr>darn</tr>, mend by darning. <i>Sursíhan nátù ang samput sa ímung karsúnis,</i> Let us <tr>stitch</tr> over the seat of your pants. <form>&mdash; tápak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> put a piece of cloth under a tear and run stitches over it to strengthen the mend. <pos>n</pos> method of mending in this way. <form>sinursihan</form> <pos>n</pos> place that has been darned on a garment having been mended with darning stitches.

<p><form>surtídus</form> <pos>a</pos> of different sorts. <i>Surtídus ang kulur sa pintal sa balay,</i> The house is painted with all different colors. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a k.o. folk <tr>dance</tr> performed by at least six pairs of male and female dancers. Each dance figure is to a different tune. <number>2</number> assorted sweets sold packaged.

<p><form>surtpan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>short pants</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> wear, make into short pants.

<p><form>súrù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> young of freshwater shrimp. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> gather small freshwater shrimps.

<p><form>súruk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S]</itype> for the blood to boil in anger. <i>Nagsuruk pa ning ákung dugù sa kalágut,</i> My blood is still boiling in anger.

<p><form>surup, súrup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> for air to penetrate through the body causing gas pains. <i>Musurup (manurup) ang tun-ug,</i> Draft causes gas pains. <i>Surupun (surupan) ka ug dì ka maghábul nga matúlug,</i> You will have gas pains if you sleep without covering yourself. <number>2</number> for feelings to flow through one (literary).

<p><form>surusúru</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. spiny <tr>shrub</tr> with fleshy tongue-shaped leaves of strong astringent effect, the young leaves of which are used to spice paklay: <bio>Euphorbia neriifolia</bio>.

<p><form>súruy</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; ac]</itype> <tr>go about</tr>, <tr>stroll</tr>. <i>Diin ka musúruy gabíi?</i> Where did you <tr>go</tr> to last night? <i>Isúruy ang bátà sa parki,</i> Take the child for a stroll in the park. <number>1a</number> <formx>ika-</formx> <tr>presentable</tr> (lit. can be worn for strolling). <i>Dílì ku mauwaw sa ákung uyab kay ikasúruy man pud,</i> I am not ashamed to be seen with my girl friend because she is <tr>pretty</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> bring s.t. around. <i>Nagsúruy siyag isdà,</i> She <tr>peddles</tr> fish. <i>Isúruy ang mga ilimnun sa <pb n=943>mga bisíta,</i> Bring the drinks around to the visitors. <form>libud &mdash;</form> <pos>a</pos> given to wandering about with no useful purpose. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> become a vagabond. <form>(&rarr;) bagduy</form> <xr>= <sc>LIBUD SÚRUY</sc>.</xr> <form>suruysúruy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>promenade</tr>, take a pleasure stroll. <i>Magsuruysúruy ta sa baybáyun,</i> Let's take a <tr>walk</tr> by the beach. <number>2</number> roam about uselessly. <i>Nagpúnay lang siyag suruysuruy ug way nahímù,</i> All he ever did was roam about and never accomplished anything. <form>sinurúyan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. gained as a result of going about. <number>2</number> a woman's child born out of wedlock (lit. s.t. obtained as a result of reckless wandering). <number>2a</number> one's eldest child (humorous). <form>maN-r-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>peddler</tr>.

<p><form>sus</form> <xr>= <sc>HISUS</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr> <form>&mdash; maryusip</form> <xr>= <sc>HISUSMARYUSIP</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>súsa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sodium hydroxide</tr> in white powder form used for making laundry soap.

<p><form>susáyid</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; b3]</itype> commit <tr>suicide</tr>. <i>Nagsusáyid siya kay dispirádu,</i> He committed suicide because he was disappointed in love. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23; bc]</itype> do s.t., gamble against very great odds (lit. commit suicide). <i>Mususáyid lang kug kúhà sa tist bísag wà ku katuun,</i> I'll just take a long chance on the examination, even if I didn't study. <i>Isusáyid kug siyut ning tanan kung kwarta,</i> I'll bet all my money, come what may. <number>2a</number> in rummy, pick up a card one needs but for which must also pick up a large number of other cards which will be a burden.

<p><form>súsi</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>look into</tr> s.t., <tr>go and see</tr> to find s.t. out. <i>Nagsúsi mi sa mangga human sa bagyu,</i> We went to see what became of the mango tree after the storm.<note>:?</note> <i>Wà ku makasúsi ug dúna pa bay túbig ang bangà,</i> I have not gone to see if there is still water in the jar. <number>1a</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> <tr>look into</tr>, <tr>investigate</tr>. <i>Susíhun sa Inbíay ang anumalíya sa Iltísi,</i> The NBI will look into the LTC anomalies. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>come across</tr> s.t., inadvertently find s.t. out. <i>Hingsusihan námù sila nga nagtabakù ug ampiyun,</i> We <tr>discovered</tr> them smoking opium. <number>2</number> come into information about s.t. <i>Nakasusi giyud ku ánang mga makina kay dúgay kung trabáhu sa taliyir,</i> I got to learn s.t. about engines because I worked in a shop for a long time. <form>susisusi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3N; a12]</itype> make inquiries about s.o.'s life, doings, habits, and the like, usually maliciously. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c6]</itype> have a medical examination. <i>Ipasúsi ang bátà sa dukt&ucaron;r,</i> Have the child examined by the doctor. <form>paki-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> ask for information, inquire. <i>Didtu mi ni Kaduy magpakisúsi báhin sa yútang ibaligyà,</i> We asked for information from Cadoy about the land for sale. <pos>n</pos> <tr>investigation</tr>, <tr>inquiry</tr>.

<p><form>suskribir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>subscribe</tr> to a periodical. <i>Gustu ka bang mususkribir sa Tayims?</i> Do you want to subscribe to the Times?

<p><form>suskrisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>subscription</tr>.

<p><form>suskritur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>subscriber</tr>.

<p><form>susmaríya</form> (from <ix>Hisus</ix> and <ix>Maríya</ix>) interjection <number>1</number> expressing helpless frustration at s.t. which happened or about which nothing can be done. <i>Susmaríya ning batáa! Giyabu na pud ag gátas sa lamísa,</i> <tr>Goodness</tr>, this child! He spilled the milk all over the table again. <number>2</number> expressing reaction to fright. <i>Susmaríya, pwirting kuráta nákù,</i> <tr>Heavens</tr>! I sure was frightened.

<p><form>suspi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>peso</tr> or one peso (slang).

<p><form>suspind&icaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>suspend</tr> from office or privilege. <i>Suspindihun ka ug <note>can't identify</note>makítà<note>corrected: makita. P2</note><note> ?akítà, P3</note> ka nga sad-an,</i> You will be suspended if you are found guilty. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> cause an action or practice to cease for the time being. <i>Suspindihun ang klási sa Lúnis ug Martis,</i> The class will be suspended on Monday and Tuesday.

<p><form>suspinsu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>suspension</tr> from office, school. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a12]</itype> <tr>suspend</tr> s.o. from office, school. <i>Ang prisidinti mauy mususpinsu níya sa íyang katungdánan,</i> The president will suspend him from office.

<p><form>suspíru, suspírus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sugar candy</tr>. <form>&mdash; dimani</form> k.o. sugar <tr>candy</tr> into which peanuts have been thrown. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make sugar candy.

<p><form>suspitsa, suspits&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>suspect</tr>. <i>Walay mususpits&acaron;r nátù áning kawáta,</i> Nobody will suspect us of this robbery.

<p><form>suspitsu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> <tr>suspect</tr>, regard s.t. in a certain way without proof. <i>Nagsuspitsu ku nga walà ning batáa magtunghà karun,</i> I am beginning to suspect that this child is not attending school. <i>Siyay gisuspitsuhan nga mauy nagkúhà sa kwarta,</i> I suspect him of being the one who took the money. <pos>n</pos> <tr>suspicion</tr>. <form>-sa</form> <xr>= <sc>SUSPITSÚSU</sc>, <bx>2</bx> (female).</xr> <form>-su</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> arousing suspicion. <i>Suspitsúsu ug líhuk ang istranyu,</i> The stranger's behavior is <tr>suspicious</tr>. <number>2</number> suspicious of others. <i>Asáwang suspitsúsu sa íyang bána,</i> A wife suspicious of her husband.

<p><form>sustansiya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>nutriment</tr>. <i>Daghang sustansiya ang útan,</i> Vegetables are very <tr>nutritious</tr>. <form>ma-, masustansiyáhun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>nutritious</tr>. <i>Ang ayis krim nga Magnulya masustansiya (masustansiyáhun) kaáyu,</i> Magnolia ice cream is very nutritious. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be nutritious.

<p><form>sustinídu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <corr><number>1</number> </corr><tr>sharp</tr>, a note one-half step higher. <i>Pa sustinídu,</i> <tr>F sharp</tr>. <number>2</number> a sharp cord.

<p><form>sustinídu<sub>2</sub></form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>SUSTINIR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sustinir</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>last</tr>, manage to keep up <pb n=944>with some work. <i>Musustinir ka nákù ug buksing ug mga lima ka ráwun?</i> Can you last five rounds boxing against me? <i>Sustinihan ku nang trabahúa,</i> I will keep on with that work. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>withstand</tr> weight or pressure, <tr>sustain</tr>. <i>Ang sanga dì na makasustinir sa gibug-atun sa mga búnga,</i> The branch cannot withstand the weight of the fruits. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> <tr>stick to</tr> a line of reasoning or allegation. <i>Musustinir ka sa ímung gisulti?</i> Will you stick to your story? <number>3</number> <itype>[a2]</itype> <tr>make do</tr> with s.t. less in quality or quantity. <i>Gisustinihan ku níya ug sulti sa íyang kinawayan nga ininglis,</i> He made do, speaking to me in broken English. <i>Ságing nga isustinir sa tinggutum,</i> Bananas which we make do with in times of famine. <form>sustinídu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>assiduous</tr>, <tr>sticking to</tr> s.t. <i>Kadtung sustinídu sa ílang trabáhu pag-usbáwan ug swildu,</i> Those who are assiduous in their work will be given a raise in salary. <number>2</number> having the capaccity<note>capacity</note> to endure, carry on with work. <i>Sustinídu kaáyu siya ug kálut ug kanal kay dagkù siyag buktun,</i> He has the capacity to dig ditches because he has muscular arms.

<p><form>sustintu</form> <pos>n</pos> money for one's <tr>sustenance</tr>. <i>Ang sustintu nga ipadala sa íyang bána ígù ra sa pagkáun,</i> The sustenance her husband sends is enough for food. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> give money for sustenance. <i>Dì na ku musustintu nímu ug magminyù ka,</i> I will not <tr>support</tr> you any more if you get married.

<p><form>súsu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>breast</tr>, the mammary gland or its analogous formation in males. <number>2</number> angular corners of pillows, sacks, and the like which can be taken hold of. <form>-g agtà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hornet's nest</tr> hanging from a tree (lit. an <ix>agtà</ix>'s breast). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S; b(1)]</itype> <tr>suckle</tr>. <i>Ang tútuy nga walà sus-i dílì bitay,</i> Breasts that have not suckled a baby do not sag. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> hit in the chest, underneath the breasts toward the arm. <i>Ug sushun (susuhun) ug dunggab ang táwu, matigbak,</i> If a man is stabbed on the side next to his breast, he will die right away. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> feed with the breast or bottle. <i>Ayaw ni ipasúsu sa bátà kay dáan ning gatása,</i> Don't give the baby this milk because it is not fresh. <form>sus-an</form> <pos>a</pos> having a mammary gland or s.t. like it. <i>Bitin nga sus-an ang gipakítà sa karnabal,</i> They showed a snake with mammary glands in the carnival. <number>2</number> mother with a nursing infant. <form>úmang sus-an</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ÚMANG</sc>.</xr> <form>ma-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>infant</tr>.

<p><form>susù</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. smooth cerith <tr>shell</tr> of fresh waters, black, dark green, or brown. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> gather <ix>susù</ix>.

<p><form>sùsù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>pound</tr> s.t. usually with short and moderately heavy strokes. <i>Sùsúun nímu pag-áyu ang pánit arun mahúmuk,</i> Pound the leather well so it will get soft. <number>2</number> knock s.t. on the surface and <tr>bruise</tr> it without breaking the surface. <i>Sùsúun ku nang ngábil mu ug mutubag ka pa,</i> I'll bruise your lips if you answer back again.

<p><form>susun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>close together</tr>, in rapid succession. <i>Susun ang mga balay sa syudad,</i> The houses in the city are close to each other. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)6; b6c1]</itype> do, situate in rapid or close succession. <i>Misusun siya sa íyang inahan ug kamatay,</i> She died soon after her mother died.

<p><form>susut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>stunted</tr> in growth. <i>Pulus susut ang mga tanum,</i> The plants are all stunted. <number>2</number> <tr>scarce</tr>. <i>Susut ang taksi árung urása,</i> Taxis are scarce round about this time. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> be, become stunted or <tr>runty</tr>. <i>Mususut ang mga bátà kun paalsáhun ug bug-at,</i> Children will grow up to be stunted if they are made to carry heavy loads. <i>Nagsusut ang mga tanum tungud kay wà abunúhi,</i> The plants were stunted in growth because they weren't fertilized. <number>2</number> be, become scarce. <i>Nasusut ang mga isdà tungud sa dinamíta,</i> Fish have become scarce because of the dynamite fishing.

<p><form>susyádu</form> (from <ix>susyu<sub>2</sub></ix>) <pos>a</pos> having a <tr>defect</tr> on the surface. <i>Dì na mahálin ang mga prútas nga susyádu,</i> Fruit with defects on the skin is hard to sell. <i>Dì na siyang patabak-un kay susyádu nag bágà,</i> He is not allowed to smoke any more because he has <tr>defective</tr> lungs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be, become defective.

<p><form>susyal</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of attending <tr>social</tr> functions. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become fond of attending social gatherings. <i>Burung niadtu si Lurna, karun nasusyal na,</i> Lorna used to be shy but now she has become fond of parties.

<p><form>susyalayit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>socialite</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> be, become a socialite.

<p><form>susyidad</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>society</tr>. <i>Susyidad nga maut,</i> Hypocritical society. <number>2</number> society, <tr>club</tr>. <i>Susyidad sa mga kababayin-an,</i> Women's society. <form>alta &mdash;</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>*ALTA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>susyu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>partnership</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C; b6]</itype> be <tr>partners</tr> with, make a <tr>partner</tr> of s.o. <i>Magsusyu mi si Inting ug ristawrant,</i> Inting and I are partners in a restaurant. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a1c]</itype> organize, contribute to a partnership. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>partner</tr> in business.

<p><form>susyu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>defect</tr> or <tr>imperfection</tr> in a fruit. <i>Kining mga mangga nga may susyu laina kay dílì ibaligyà,</i> Separate these mangoes with imperfections because we won't sell them. <number>2</number> <tr>mark</tr>, imperfection in s.t. that is supposed to be smooth. <i>Kutsing way susyu,</i> A car without a <tr>scratch</tr>.

<p><form>sút</form> <xr>= <sc>SÚLUT<sub>1,2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<pb n=945>

<p><form>súta<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a coat coloration of animals consisting usually of half black and half white fur.

<p><form>súta<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>stable boy</tr>, <tr>groom</tr>. <number>2</number> the <tr>jack</tr> of the Spanish cards (number 10). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be, become a groom. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> draw a jack.

<p><form>sútà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; a2b2]</itype> go to <tr>find out</tr> or <tr>verify</tr> s.t. <i>Sutáa didtu ug pilay baligyà sa íyang kabáyù,</i> Go and see how much he wants to sell his horse for. <number>2</number> <itype>[C; a1c3]</itype> have it out with s.o. to find out who is really who. <i>Sutáun nátù ug kinsay talawan nátung duha,</i> We will have it out and see which of us two is a coward.

<p><form>sutána</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> priest's <tr>cassock</tr>, the <tr>soutane</tr>. <number>2</number> the priestly office. <i>Ánang ímung gibúhat wà lang gánì ka maghunàhúnà sa ímung sutána,</i> When you did that you completely forgot that you were a priest. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> wear, make into a soutane.

<p><form>sutanghun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bean threads</tr> or dish made of bean threads. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make <ix>sutanghun</ix>.

<p><form>sutil<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>LIMUNSÍTU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>sutil<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> rebelliously <tr>stubborn</tr>. <i>Layhan kung mulatigu ánang sutil kaáyu nga bátà,</i> I'd like to whip that stubborn child. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become rebelliously stubborn.

<p><form>sutsut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>slurp</tr>, eat or drink noisily in a sucking way. <i>Íya lang gisutsut ang usa ka panaksang sabaw,</i> He simply slurped down one bowl of soup. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> attract s.o.'s attention with a low interrupted hissing sound, either to call him or reprimand him. <pos>n</pos> the hissing or slurping sound of this sort. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> act of <tr>hissing</tr> at s.o.

<p><form>sutuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <number>1</number> leave immediately without looking back or saying anything. <i>Misutuy siya ug lakaw kay nangísug tu nákù,</i> He walked straight away without looking back because he was mad at me. <number>2</number> zoom or <tr>shoot off</tr> like a projectile. <number>3</number> for a child to slip out easily on delivery. <i>Misutuy lang ang bátà sa pagsakit sa íyang tiyan,</i> The mother had a pain in her stomach, and the baby just slipped out.

<p><form>suub<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> pointed <tr>stake</tr> made of a length of thinnish species of bamboo (<ix>bagákay</ix>) put in the bottom of pit traps. <number>2</number> a <tr>spear</tr> fashioned in the same way. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a stake or spear.

<p><form>súub</form> <xr>= <sc>SUL-UB</sc>, <pos>v</pos>.</xr> <form>(&rarr;)<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SUL-UB</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>suud</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>close</tr> in space or time. <i>Suud na kaáyu ang adlaw sa kasal,</i> The wedding day is <tr>near</tr>. <i>Ang baril sa gasulína suud ra kaáyu sa dapug,</i> The gasoline barrel is a bit too near the stove. <number>2</number> <tr>intimate</tr>. <i>Suud kaáyu ming amígu,</i> We are very intimate friends. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ABC; a]</itype> place, be set closely. <i>Suúrun ta nig butang arun dílì magkabulagbulag,</i> Let's place these close together so they won't get separated. <number>2</number> <itype>[BC; a12]</itype> be, become <tr>intimate</tr>, <tr>close</tr> to. <i>Dílì ku makigsúud sa tabian,</i> I don't want to be intimate with a gossip. <form>ka- banay</form> <pos>n</pos> close relative. <i>Ákù gihápun siyang kasúud bánay kay mag-ágaw mi,</i> He is still a close relative because we are cousins.

<p><form>suudsúud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>mimic</tr> s.o. usually to make fun of him. <i>Nagsuudsúud ang bátà sa nagdiskursu,</i> The child is mimicking the man delivering a speech. <i>Suudsuúrun ku siya arun manuyù,</i> I'll mimic her so she'll get angry.

<p><form>suuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>corner</tr>, the <tr>inside</tr> space. <i>Suuk sa kaban,</i> Corner of a trunk. <number>2</number> a remote secluded place. <i>Suuk tung íla sa iskwátir<note>not sure if it is "r"</note><note>it is. P2</note>,</i> They live deep in the squatter area. <number>3</number> in <tr>recesses</tr> of one's thoughts. <i>Sa mga suuk sa ímung kunsyinsiya,</i> In the recesses of your conscience. <number>4</number> <tr>foul smell</tr> characteristic of a dank, dirty corner. <i>Pag-ílis gánig sinínà, nanimáhù ka lang suuk dà,</i> Change into s.t. clean. You smell like a dank and dirty corner. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> be put at the corner or in a remote secluded place. <form>paN-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wisdom tooth</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> grow a wisdom tooth. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>remote</tr> out-of-the-way places of s.t. <i>Íyang gisangyaw ang balità sa kasuukan sa ginharían,</i> He spread the news to the remote corners of the kingdom.

<p><form>suul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> for an illness or bad behavior that recurs at intervals to <tr>recur</tr>. <i>Misuul na pud ang íyang kabúang,</i> His foolishness is showing itself again. <i>Gisul-an na pud siya sa íyang húbak,</i> He is having an attack of asthma again. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b4]</itype> have a <tr>stomach ache</tr>. <i>Ug magsuul pa nang ímung tiyan, tumar áning tambal,</i> If your stomach still hurts, take this medicine. <pos>n</pos> <tr>stomach pain</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa irù</form> very painful stomach cramps believed to be a <ix>kabúhì</ix> which has found its way into the pit of the stomach. <form>sulul-an, sul-ánun</form> <pos>a</pos> prone to having recurring sicknesses or emotional derangements.

<p><form>súul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>wear</tr>, put s.t. on. <i>Ngánung nagsúul ka mag bulingun?</i> Why are you wearing dirty clothes?

<p><form>suun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>imitate</tr>, <tr>adopt</tr> a fad or mannerism. <i>Dílì ku musuun sa mga bag-ung múda sa pamisti,</i> I will not <tr>follow</tr> the new dress styles. <i>Sayun ra ning baylíha, sun-a lang ang ákung lákang,</i> This dance is easy; just follow my steps. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> wear s.t. belonging to s.o. else. <i>Sun-un ang ákung sinínà sa ákung manghud,</i> My younger sister will wear my dress.

<pb n=946>

<p><form>suun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> fill up a hole, cavity with solid objects. <i>Siyay misuun ug balas sa ímung sapátus,</i> He filled your shoes with sand. <i>Sun-ig batu ang mga láta,</i> Fill the cans with stones. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>SUL-UT</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr>

<p><form>*súun ig-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>brother</tr> or <tr>sister</tr>. <form>ig- sa inahan, amahan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>half-sister</tr> or brother on one's mother's or father's side. <form>ig- sa ngálang ig-</form> a brother in the real sense of the word. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123S]</itype> have as a brother or sister. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> consider s.o. as a brother or sister. <i>Ug ang Muslim na gániy makapangigsúun nímu, unúngan ka giyud,</i> When a Muslim considers you a brother, he is loyal to you. <form>mag-, manag-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>siblings</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> do s.t. together as siblings. <i>Imagsuun níla ang ílang nigusyu,</i> The siblings will do business together. <form>mag- sa lamísa apan dílì sa bulsa</form> each must pay his own way, whether or not they are brothers (lit. brothers at the table but not with the pocketbook). <i>Bayran giyud nímu ang ímung útang nákù kay bísan túud ug magsúun ta sa lamísa, dílì man sa bulsa,</i> You should pay me what you owe because though we are brothers, we have different pocketbooks. <form>inig-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> in a <tr>brotherly</tr>, <tr>sisterly</tr> fashion. <i>Inigsuung tambag,</i> Sisterly advice.

<p><form>suung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> go, swim under s.t. that is not far above one's head. <i>Misuung siya sa awtu pagtan-aw ug wà ba mabálì ang mwilyi,</i> He crawled under the car to see if the spring hadn't broken. <i>Dílì ka makasuung sa pantalan kay daghang sisi didtu,</i> You can not swim under the wharf because there are lots of sharp shellfish there. <form>sung-anay</form> <pos>n</pos> method of punishing the losers in a group game by making them crawl between the legs of the winners standing in a line. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> impose this punishment on the loser. <form>suungsúung</form> <xr>= <sc>SUNG-ANAY</sc>.</xr> <form>sung-unun</form> <pos>a</pos> for s.t. to be so low one has to bend his head passing under it.

<p><form>súung</form> <xr>= <sc>SUL-UNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>suup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23N; b6N]</itype> look and hear covertly to gather information. <i>Hadluk ka nga musuup (manuup) sa ímung asáwa,</i> You're scared to <tr>spy on</tr> your wife. <i>Unsay ímung gipanupan dihà?</i> What are you spying on there?

<p><form>suut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>arthritic pains</tr>, usually in the finger joints. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> have arthritic pains, esp. in the finger joints.

<p><form>súut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> pass or force one's way through tall objects. <i>Dílì ta makasúut dihà kay bagà ang mga bágun,</i> We cannot get through there because the vines are very thick. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> <tr>penetrate</tr>, pass through pores. <i>Ang bulà sa Rinsu musúut giyud sa lugas sa panaptun,</i> Rinso suds really penetrate the fibers of the cloth.

<p><form>súut<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SUL-UT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>súuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the edible flesh of the jackfruit (<ix>nangkà</ix>) which encloses the seed. <number>1a</number> name given in some localities to the <tr>jackfruit</tr> itself. <number>2</number> the inedible pulp of the jackfruit which surrounds the edible flesh. <number>2a</number> undeveloped seed of fruit which is small and flat, and analogous to the inedible pulp of the jackfruit.

<p><form>suwa</form> <pos>n</pos> word to drive away chickens.

<p><form>suwà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> general term for various sour, fragrant <tr>citrus fruits</tr> with a taste similar to lime and thick peels that adhere to the flesh, varying in size from the tiny <ix>samuyaw</ix> to the <ix>byásung</ix>. <form>suwàsuwà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bush</tr> bearing leaves with an odor like citrus and small mucilagenous berries, red when ripe: <bio>Triphasia trifolia</bio>.

<p><form>suwà<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SULÀ<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>suwa-</form> <xr>for words with <ix>suwa-</ix> see also <sc>SULA-</sc></xr> and <xr><sc>SWA-</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>súwal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> for a sickness to recur (said of sicknesses for which it is possible to prevent recurrences). <i>Nakasúwal ang íyang pamutu kay nag-abusar man siya sa babáyi,</i> His skin disease came back because he indulged in women.

<p><form>suwat<sub>1</sub></form> a remark uttered by s.o. upon hearing s.o. else sneezing, as a way of preventing s.t. worse from happening (said as a <ix>sumpà</ix>).

<p><form>suwat<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SULAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>súwat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> pull up s.t. lightly rooted on the ground. <i>Átung suwátun ang mga tag-as nga sagbut,</i> We'll just pull up the tall weeds.

<p><form>suway bagyu</form> <xr>= <sc>SULAYBAGYU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>súwing gam</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chewing gum</tr>.

<p><form>suwits</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>switch</tr>; a device for opening or closing an electric circuit. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> switch s.t. on. <i>Isuwits ang sugà bi,</i> Switch the lights on please. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> shift from one course of study to another.

<p><form>súyà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b3]</itype> feel <tr>dislike</tr> towards s.o. out of envy or because of an overbearing, braggart sort of personality. <i>Makasúyà man nang ímung pagkahambugíru,</i> Your bragging makes people <tr>resent</tr> you. <i>Nasúyà siya nákù kay dílì man giyud siya makalupig,</i> He resents it that he can never beat me.

<p><form>suyágit</form> <xr>= <sc>SYÁGIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>súyak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put a spike, thorn, or anything pointed on a path to pierce a foot or tire. <i>Suyákan nátù ang kadaplínan sa gardin,</i> Let's put pointed stakes all around the edges of the garden. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>SUYAK</sc>.</xr> <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> nail, tack or the like, to pierce the foot.

<p><form>suylà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab7]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>overflow</tr>, <tr>spill over</tr>. <i>Kun <pb n=947>mag-ulan, ang túbig musuylà sa kanal,</i> When it rains, the water <tr>spills out</tr> of the ditch. <i>Sa prugráma ang mga táwu misuylà ngadtu sa karsáda,</i> The people who attended the program spilled over into the street. <i>Gisuylà níla ang mga prútas sa lamísa,</i> They put fruit on the table until it spilled over the edges. <number>1a</number> splash up as a result of pressure or impact. <i>Dílì makasuylà ang tubà kay gamay ug bàbà ang sudlanan,</i> The palm toddy cannot splash out because the container has a small mouth. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> for an emotion to be extremely great. <i>Misuylà ang ákung kalípay pagkadungug nákù sa balità,</i> I was <tr>overflowing</tr> with happiness when I heard the news.

<p><form>suylan</form> <xr>= <sc>KAMÚNING</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>suylas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> small <tr>tacks</tr> of the sort used to nail the straps of clogs to the wooden sole. <number>2</number> side of the heels of men's shoes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b]</itype> nail with <ix>suylas</ix>.

<p><form>suysuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> pound a small amount of rice with a pestle. <i>Magsuysuy lang kug pára lugáwun,</i> I'll pound just enough rice for porridge.

<p><form>suyud</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bee stinger</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2N; b8]</itype> <tr>sting</tr>. <i>Dílì makasuyud (makapanuyud) ang buyug ug kuptan sa pakù,</i> Wasps can't sting if you hold them by the wings.

<p><form>súyup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>suck in</tr>, <tr>draw in</tr> air or liquid. <i>Ug suyúpun ang túbig sa bumba, maáyu pa nang bumba,</i> As long as the pump sucks in the water, it is still good. <number>1a</number> <tr>absorb</tr>, draw by capillary action. <i>Ang naylun kúlì musúyup ug singut,</i> Nylon does not absorb sweat well. <number>1b</number> for magnets to <tr>draw</tr>. <i>Ang lansang mutaput ug suyúpun sa batubaláni,</i> The nail will stick if it is <tr>attracted</tr> by the magnet. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> use up money as if it were sucked away. <i>Ang gastu sa gasulína musúyup ug dakù sa ímung kítà,</i> The cost of gasoline just <tr>sucks away</tr> a large portion of your earnings. <pos>n</pos> action of <tr>sucking</tr>, <tr>absorbing</tr>, pulling by a magnet.

<p><form>swá</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for the <tr>SWA</tr>, <tr>Social Welfare Administration</tr>.

<p><form>swábi<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bland</tr>, not irritating. <i>Sa mga tambal sa ubu, kiniy swábi,</i> Of all the cough medicines this is the one that is blandest. <number>2</number> socially <tr>graceful</tr>, <tr>smooth</tr>. <i>Swábi kaáyu siya ug binaylihan,</i> He dances very <tr>smoothly</tr>. <number>3</number> slow but perceptible in effect or outcome. <i>Maáyu ning tambála kay swábi ug ipiktu,</i> This medicine is good because it has a slow but perceptible effect. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> be, become bland, smooth, not so harsh in effect.

<p><form>swábi<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SULÁBI</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>LABI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>swágir</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. loose <tr>blouse</tr> used by pregnant women. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> wear, make into a blouse of this sort.

<p><form>swágit</form> <xr>= <sc>SYÁGIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>swakan</form> <pos>a</pos> eating anything that comes one's way. <i>Nagsakit ang tiyan sa bátà kay swakan man kaáyug bàbà,</i> That child has a stomach-*ache because he eats anything and everything that he can get his hands on.

<p><form>swákì</form> <xr>= <sc>SALUWÁKÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>swángit</form> (from <ix>swápang</ix> and <ix>pángit</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <tr>greedy</tr> and <tr>ugly</tr>.

<p><form>swápang</form> <pos>a</pos> oppressively <tr>opportunistic</tr>, <tr>taking advantage</tr>. <i>Swápang insíka. Maáyu lang manghuwam, piru dílì magpahuwam nákù,</i> That Chinese is a no good opportunist. He's great at borrowing, but when it comes to lending, forget it. <i>Swápang nímu uy. Ikay nagswildu, akuy mubangka,</i> You are so inconsiderate. You get the salary and I have to pay the bill.

<p><form>swásid</form> <xr>= <sc>SALUWÁSID</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>swíbil</form> <pos>n</pos> a joint that pivots freely and is attached between two lengths of line or chain to prevent kinking. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a2]</itype> make into, attach a <tr>swivel</tr>.

<p><form>swildu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>salary</tr>, fixed compensation paid regularly for services done. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3N2; c]</itype> pay a salary. <i>Ug siyay nagswildu nímu adtu ka magsirbisyu níya,</i> If he pays your salary, you work for him. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> get a certain salary. <i>Anhà na ku mangasáwa ug magswildu na kug míl,</i> I will get married when I have a salary of a thousand a month. <form>swilduánan</form> <pos>n</pos> persons who are to receive their salary. <form>di-, swildádu</form> <pos>n</pos> having a salary, <tr>wage earner</tr>. <i>Sa púlù ka magsúun, walu ang swildádu (diswildu),</i> Of the ten brothers, eight are wage earners. <i>Kusug kaáyu kang mugastu. Mu ra kag diswildu (swildádu),</i> You sure do spend, as if you were earning money. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be a wage earner. <form>ting-, tingpaN-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>payday</tr>. <i>Lamì pud ta ug pagkáun sa tingswildu (tingpanwildu),</i> We have delicious food on payday.

<p><form>swiltu</form> a free to do anything. <i>Swiltu kaáyu nà siya sa paglakawlákaw kay daghan mag masúgù,</i> She's free to go anywhere she wants to because she has lots of servants. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B123(1); b6]</itype> be, become free to do anything. <i>Ang kadakù sa aláwans sa istudiyanti mauy makaswiltu (makapaswiltu) niíni ug gastu,</i> A student spends money freely if he gets a big allowance.

<p><form>swing</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>swing music</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1235; a12]</itype> play in <tr>swing</tr> time.

<p><form>swíng</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>swing</tr> to swing on.

<p><form>swípir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sweeper</tr>, the child assigned by the teacher to sweep. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be the sweeper. <form>-unun</form> <pos>n</pos> one's turn to be the <pb n=948>sweeper.

<p><form>swipstik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sweepstakes</tr>, the national <tr>lottery</tr>, the winners of which are usually determined by horse races. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> hold the sweepstakes.

<p><form>swirti</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>luck</tr>, <tr>good fortune</tr>. <i>Ug may swirti ka makahálin ka ug tulu ka tíbi ang simána,</i> With luck you can sell three TV sets a week. <i>Swirti nga nahitabù tu kay nahibaw-an ang íyang binúang,</i> It was a good thing that that happened because I found out what he had been doing. <number>2</number> <tr>fate</tr>, <tr>fortune</tr>. <i>Íyang swirti nga maminyù ug bálu,</i> It is her fate to marry a widower. <i>Swirti nga naabut ang amahan ug naabtan sila,</i> Unfortunately the father arrived and they were caught in the act. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> do s.t. <tr>lucky</tr> by chance. <i>Nakaswirti ku ug pílì sa únang ganti,</i> <tr>By luck</tr> I picked the one that won first prize. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23; a4]</itype> be, get to be lucky. <i>Muswirti usáhay pud ang ákung pangisdà,</i> Sometimes I turn out lucky in my fishing. <form>swirtiswirti</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>chancy</tr>, a matter of luck. <i>Swirtiswirti kanúnay ang panágat ug maáyu nga mangítà ka ug trabáhu,</i> Fishing is a chancy occupation, and you would do better to look for work. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a4]</itype> be, get to be lucky at times.

<p><form>swis línin</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. finely woven imported <tr>cloth</tr>.

<p><form>swít</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>slow music</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> dance to slow music. <form>swit myúsik</form> <xr>= <sc>SWÍT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>swítik</form> <pos>a</pos> clever, smart and mischievous at the same time. <i>Swítik kaáyung batáa, kay mangáyù nákù bisag natagaan na siyang Máma,</i> What a clever rascal. He asks me for money when his Mother already gave him some. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B125]</itype> be clever and haughty. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> deceive with sleight of hand, esp. in cards. <i>Ug wà pa tu switíka sa nagbangka, alas untà tuy ákung madáwat,</i> If the dealer hadn't cheated, I would have gotten an ace.

<p><form>swítir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sweater</tr>, <tr>sweatshirt</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> wear, make into a sweater or sweatshirt.

<p><form>swítu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>know how</tr> to do s.t. <i>Swítu kaáyu siya sa panágat,</i> He knows all about fishing. <number>2</number> <tr>familiar with</tr> a place. <i>Swítu kaáyu siya ug ásang pampaman,</i> He knows where all the bawdy houses are. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B125; b8]</itype> come to know s.t. <i>Naswítu na ku sa inyung sikrítu,</i> I have <tr>found out</tr> your secret. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> go s.w. to find out s.t. <i>Switúha didtu ug naunsa nang ílang ámut,</i> Go and find out what happened to their contribution.

<p><form>syágit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>shout</tr>. <i>Walà siya makasyágit kay gitiúnan ug pusil,</i> She wasn't able to shout because a gun was pointed at her. <i>Isyágit ang ímung tubag,</i> Shout out your answer. <pos>n</pos> <tr>shout</tr>.

<p><form>syákuy</form> <pos>n</pos> tidbit made of flour, and optionally eggs, formed into long slender pieces and deep fried in fat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make, make into <ix>syákuy</ix>.[+]

<p><form>syálan</form> <xr>= <sc>UNSINGÁLAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>syampu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hair shampoo</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> <tr>shampoo</tr>. <i>Dì ku musyampu (manyampu) kay manglarut ang ákung buhuk,</i> I don't use shampoo because I am losing my hair.

<p><form>syánga</form> <xr>= <sc>PANTÍHAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>syáping</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> go shopping for dry goods. <i>Magsyáping ka sa Wayit Guld?</i> Will you go shopping in the White Gold (department store)? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>window-shop</tr>.

<p><form>syapirun</form> <xr>= <sc>TSAPIRUN</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>syápù</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>shrub</tr> of waste places, the bark of which makes a weak rope.

<p><form>syápul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>shuffle</tr> cards, mahjong pieces.

<p><form>syápul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C23; b5]</itype> for a cock to fight by making thrusts with the feet. <i>Syapúlun (syapúlan) dáyun nang inyung manuk sa akúa,</i> My cock will attack yours with his feet instantly. <pos>n</pos> action of fighting, making thrusts with the feet. <form>-in-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> manner of fighting in this way.

<p><form>syárap</form> <tr>shut up</tr>! <i>Syárap! Dì giyud ka pul-an ug sulti!</i> Shut up! You never get tired of talking, do you!

<p><form>syarpsyútir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sharpshooter</tr>. <number>2</number> one who consistently puts the ball into the goal or hole. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become a sharpshooter or consistent scorer.

<p><form>syáru &mdash; ug</form> expression of disbelief: it's <tr>impossible</tr>. <i>Syáru ug mahúbad ning pagkabaáta,</i> It is impossible that it should come undone the way it was tied. <i>Wà giyud kay ikahátag? Syáru ug wà kay diyis!</i> You can't give a penny? Surely you can let me have ten!&mdash;[<ix>name</ix>, <ix>pronoun</ix>] How could [noun or pronoun] do such a thing! <i>Syáru sab ka Tina. Wà na lang makapakáun sa bátà!</i> Tina, how could you! You haven't even thought of feeding the child!

<p><form>syát</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> shoot the ball into the basket or hole to score a point. <number>2</number> take a still photograph. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> point or goal scored by shooting the ball. <number>2</number> a <tr>shot</tr> of liquor. <number>3</number> <tr>shot</tr>, single exposure on a roll of film. <form>-ir</form> <pos>a</pos> one who is a good shot or good at throwing in games that require aiming. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become a good shot. <form>maniníyat</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>photographer</tr> (humorous). <form>-gan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shotgun</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b2]</itype> fire a shotgun at.

<p><form>syátir</form> <pos>a</pos> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>SYÁT</sc>.</xr> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shutter</tr> of a camera.

<p><form>syáuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> long, drawn out <tr>shout</tr>, <pb n=949><tr>shriek</tr>. <i>Misyáuk ang bumbíru sa pagpaingun sa kaláyu,</i> The fire truck went to the fire with <tr>screaming</tr> sirens. <i>Intáwun ang bátà nagsiyauk sa kasakit,</i> The poor boy was shrieking in pain. <pos>n</pos> loud, long-drawn sound, <tr>shriek</tr>.

<p><form>syáwir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>shower</tr> for bathing. <number>2</number> <tr>shower bath</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a2]</itype> install a shower. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> take a shower.

<p><form>syáwir parti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shower</tr> for brides. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> give a bridal shower.

<p><form>syíding</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shading</tr> of s.t. drawn or letters. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1b]</itype> shade s.t. drawn.

<p><form>syílak</form> <xr>= <sc>SÍLAK<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>syimpri</form> expression indicating an obvious and unavoidable consequence. <i>Syimpri, ímu giyud tung bayran kay ikay mikáun sa mangga,</i> <tr>Of course</tr> you must pay for the mango because you ate it.

<p><form>syinsiya</form> <xr>= <sc>SINSIYA<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>syintipiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>scientist</tr>. <pos>a</pos> done in a <tr>scientific</tr> way. <i>Gigamà ni sa syintipiku nga paági,</i> This was made in a scientific way. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> be a scientist. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> do s.t. <tr>scientifically</tr>.

<p><form>syintu</form> combining form for counting one <tr>hundred</tr> between 101 and 199. <i>Syintu diyis,</i> One hundred ten. <form>-s</form> <tr>hundreds</tr>, used only after the numbers of Spanish origin except <ix>singku</ix> &lsquo;five&rsquo;. <i>Dus syintus,</i> Two hundred. <pos>v</pos> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>TRIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>syíring</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> sew s.t. with <tr>shirring</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> wear s.t. with shirring. <pos>n</pos> s.t. sewn with shirring.

<p><form>syirtu</form> <xr>= <sc>SIRTU</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>syista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>siesta</tr>, a brief nap after lunch. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> take a siesta.

<p><form>syíti</form> <xr>= <sc>SÍTI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>syúap</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>show up</tr> as expected. <i>Dì na tingáli musyúap ang ímung dít kay lawum nang gabíi,</i> Your date is probably not going to show up any more because it is already quite late. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>shine</tr> in a field of activity. <i>Ingun ug bráyit. Wà man lagi siya musyúap sa klási,</i> They say she is very <tr>bright</tr>. Why didn't she show up in class?

<p><form>syudad</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>city</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>pubic region</tr> (humorous). <i>Ug daghang táwu sa baryu, labi na sa syudad,</i> There are plenty of people in the village (i.e., hair in the beard). How many more there must be in the city (i.e., hair in the pubic region)! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> be, become, make into a city. <form>-nun</form> <pos>n</pos> city resident. <pos>a</pos> like one from the city. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125]</itype> become <tr>citified</tr> in one's ways.

<p><form>syukang kaw</form> <pos>n</pos> action of winning in mahjong where a player has obtained an <ix>úpin kang</ix> (see <sc>KANG<sub>2</sub></sc>) and the fourth piece which made the <ix>kang<sub>2</sub></ix>.

<p><form>syuktung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. cheap commercial <tr>alcoholic drink</tr>, called after the brand name Se Hoc Tong.

<p><form>syúmuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. game of marbles in which the marbles are thrown toward five small holes such that only one marble gets in. If none does, the player hits a marble designated by the opponent without hitting any of the others. Hitting more than one marble or putting more than one marble in the hole nullifies the play. <number>2</number> action of putting the marble in a hole. <number>3</number> <tr>intercourse</tr> (humorous). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> play <ix>syúmuy</ix>. <number>2</number> shoot the marbles into the hole. <number>3</number> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> have intercourse (stick it in&mdash;humorous).

<p><form>syúpaw</form> <pos>n</pos> snack made of rice flour filled with meat, eggs, and spices, and cooked in steam. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make, have <ix>syúpaw</ix>.

<p><form>syurtkat</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>short-cut</tr> route, shortest way to reach a place. <i>Kining karsáda mauy syurtkat sa Talísay,</i> This road is a <tr>shortcut</tr> to Talisay. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> take a shortcut. <i>Nagsyurtkat mi sa baul,</i> We took a shortcut through the field.

<p><form>syurt pants, syurts</form> <xr>= <sc>SURTPAN</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>syút<sub>1</sub></form> go ahead ask the question. <i>Ug andam ka na sa ímung pangutána, syút!</i> If you are ready with your question, go ahead, <tr>shoot</tr>!

<p><form>syút<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> put all the money one has on one bet. <i>Isyút ang ímung pusta, daug lagi,</i> Shoot your money. We'll win, you can count on it.

<p><form>syúting</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>filming</tr> of a motion picture. <form>wà pa mahuman ang &mdash;</form> a humorous phrase used in referring to a man with long hair, from the notion that actors wear long hair throughout the duration of the filming of s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>film</tr> a motion picture. <number>2</number> <tr>take pictures</tr>. <i>Magsyúting mi sa baybay,</i> We'll take pictures at the beach.

<p><form>syútis</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>ASYÚTIS</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>SAYÚTI</sc>.</xr>






<pb n=950>
<div1>
<head>T</head>


<p><form>ta<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>see <sc>KITA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>ta<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>TALA<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tà<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>short for <sc>UNTÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tà<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>short for <sc>TÁTÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>táak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>step on</tr>, <tr>tread</tr>. <i>Ngánung gitaákan man nímu ang ákung sabud?</i> Why did you step on my seedbed? <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> come to a place for the first time. <i>Nakatáak (nakataak) na kug Amirika,</i> Now, I have set foot in America. <i>Taákun ku bisag impirnu pagpangítà nímu,</i> I'll go to hell and back in my search for you.

<p><form>taal</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>genuine</tr>, <tr>pure</tr>. <i>Sáyaw nga taal Pilipínu,</i> Native Filipino dance. <i>Taal nà siyang Árab,</i> He is a full-blooded Arab. <number>2</number> <tr>mellow</tr> and <tr>well-aged</tr>. <pos>a</pos> said of root crops that have been left to mature in the ground. <i>Kamúting taal,</i> Mature sweet potatoes. <i>b</i> said of wine or vinegar. <i>Súkà nga taal,</i> Fully-aged vinegar. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); a2]</itype> become well-aged.

<p><form>taan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> set a trap of any sort. <i>Itaan ang búbu, lit-ag,</i> Set the fish trap, the noose. <form>taantáan</form> <pos>n</pos> method of fishing with a hook and line in shallow waters where the fisherman looks in the water with a <ix>silip</ix> or goggles at the same time as he holds his line and maneuvers his boat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> fish in this way.

<p><form>*taantaan pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> let s.t. happen to s.t. or oneself a while longer. <i>Magpataantaan pa ku ug bulad sa adlaw,</i> I'll stay out in the sun just a bit longer. <i>Ákung gipataantaanan ang lúgaw sa kaláyu,</i> I let the porridge cook on the fire just a little longer.

<p><form>taas</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>long</tr>, <tr>tall</tr>, <tr>high</tr>. <i>&mdash; ug ilung</i> not see s.t. right in front of one's nose. <i>Taas kag ilung kay wà ka kakità sa lápis sa ímung atubángan,</i> You're blind because you didn't see the pencil right in front of your nose. <form>&mdash; ug tinuntu</form> <tr>extremely naughty</tr>. <form>&mdash; ug lupad</form> <xr>see <sc>LUPAD</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B3(1); b6]</itype> grow, appear long, tall. <i>Mutaas ka kun maghayhil,</i> You'll appear tall if you wear heels. <i>Wà makataas ang káhuy kay giawngan,</i> The tree didn't grow tall because it was stifled by other trees. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> add more length, height. <i>Tas-i ang lamísa,</i> Make the table higher (longer). <number>3</number> <itype>[a]</itype> do s.t. in a long way. <i>Ayaw tas-a ímung ampù,</i> Don't make your prayers long. <number>4</number> <itype>[B23(1)4; b6]</itype> rise in temperature, pressure, and other quantities. <i>Nagkataas ang íyang hilánat,</i> His fever is getting higher and higher. <pos>n</pos> fifth bottle (slang). <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); a1]</itype> be <tr>stretched</tr> long, <tr>tall</tr>. <i>Mitáas íyang líug ug pinangítà nákù,</i> She <tr>craned</tr> her neck looking for me. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>I-</sc>.</xr> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>raise</tr>. <i>Magpataas sa kamut ang dúnay pangutána,</i> Anyone who has a question should raise his hand. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>lengthen</tr>, increase the length. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>upward</tr>. <i>Isíbug ang kwadru pataas,</i> Move the picture upwards. <number>2</number> <tr>length-</tr>*wise, <form>-g-</form> <tr>high</tr>, <tr>tall</tr>, <tr>long</tr> (plural). <form>gitas-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>height</tr>, <tr>length</tr>. <form>ha-</form> <pos>a</pos> very <tr>long</tr>, <tr>high</tr>. <i>Hataas nga panahun,</i> A very long time. <form>i-, i-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>upstairs</tr>. <form>katas-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>uplands</tr>. <form>kahitas-an</form> <number>1</number> <tr>sky</tr>, <tr>heavens</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>God</tr>. <i>Ihangad sa kahitas-an ang ímung suliran,</i> Look to God for the solution to your problems. <form>mapahitas-un, mahatas-un, mahitas-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>haughty</tr>. <i>Mapahitas-un ang mga dátù,</i> The rich people are haughty. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> become haughty. <form>kamapahitas-un, kahatas-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>haughtiness</tr>.

<p><form>taay</form> <xr>= <sc>TAYÀ<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>t&amacracu;b</form> <xr>= <sc>TÁLAB</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tabà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pork fat</tr>.

<p><form>tabaghak</form> <xr>= <sc>BALÁHAK</sc>, <pos>n</pos>, <pos>v</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>tabagnul</form> <pos>n</pos> a disease of bananas and root crops characterized by the appearance of hard masses of dark spores which sometimes break up into fine dust. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be affected with <tr>rust</tr>. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>blighted</tr> with fruit rust.

<p><form>tabagsak</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>sardine</tr>, slightly fatter than the <ix>tagnípis</ix>: <bio>Sardinella sp</bio>.

<p><form>tabagsuy</form> <xr>= <sc>TIBAGSUY</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>tabak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13P; b6P]</itype> <tr>give</tr>, <tr>furnish</tr> s.o. with s.t. that can be worn on one's person for a purpose. <i>Kinsay nagtabak (nagpatabak) nímu ánang tráhi?</i> Who furnished you that suit? <i>Walà siya mahadluk kay gitabakan (gipatabakan) ug pistúla,</i> He was not afraid because he was furnished a pistol.

<p><form>tab-ak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> cover s.t. or s.o. by heaping or dumping s.t. onto it. <i>Daghan kaáyung trabáhu ang gitab-ak ni bus sa sikritarya,</i> The boss <tr>heaped</tr> a pile of work on the secretary.

<p><form>tabakalíra</form> <pos>n</pos> large warehouse belonging to the Tabacalera organization where farmers sell their products.

<p><form>tabákù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> tobacco. <number>2</number> piece of <tr>tobacco</tr> rolled for smoking. (&rarr;) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>smoke</tr>. <i>Ang <pb n=951>dáhun sa lumbuy maáyu tabak-un sa hubákun,</i> <i>Lungbuy</i> leaves are good for asthmatics to smoke. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> be <tr>smoking</tr>. <i>Wà gánì tay ipanabákù, sini na núun,</i> I don't even have money for smoking much less for movies. <form>tabakun-an, -an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> tobacco field.

<p><form>tabal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> preserve large fish by salting but not drying under the sun. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> keep a piece of gossip. <i>Gitabal nákù ang íyang pagkadisgrasyáda,</i> I kept it a <tr>secret</tr> that she once had a baby out of wedlock. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> fish preserved with salt.

<p><form>tabal-ak</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. large woven <tr>sack</tr>, usually made of buri leaves, commonly used for holding brown sugar or salt. <i>Usa ka tabal-ak kámay,</i> A buri bag full of brown sugar. <pos>a</pos> for a woman to be fat and shapeless like a <ix>tabal-ak</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make this k.o. container. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> do by the <ix>tabal-ak</ix>. <number>3</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> get to look like a <ix>tabal-ak</ix>. <i>Lawásan pa nà run, apan manghinap[=û]<note> this does not appear as an acute in the text</note> ka túig karun matabal-ak na pud nà,</i> She may have a good body, but give her ten years and she will look like a sack. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> put in the <ix>tabal-ak</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>TABAL-AK</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr>

<p><form>tában</form> (from <ix>talában</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; a12]</itype> <tr>elope</tr>. <i>Nagtában ang duha ug wà na lang pakasal,</i> The two eloped and did not get married formally. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>TALÁBAN</sc>.</xr> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> give, put s.t. miscellaneous along with the thing of primary interest. <i>Magpatában siyag kwarta matag sulat níya,</i> He <tr>encloses</tr> money each time he writes. <i>Gipatabánan ug midiyas ang gipalit kung sapátus,</i> A pair of socks went together with the shoes I bought. <number>2</number> do s.t. additional, do s.t. but not without making unwanted remarks. <i>Muhátag lagi, apan patabánan ug sirmun,</i> Sure, she'll give you some but not without reading you a lecture. <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>enclosed</tr> or put along with.

<p><form>tabanaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>whore</tr>, <tr>prostitute</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>fake</tr>. <i>Dì ku mudáwat niánang tabanaw nga kwarta,</i> I won't accept that fake money. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a1c1]</itype> be a prostitute.

<p><form>tábang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>help</tr>, give a hand. <i>Tabángi siya,</i> Help her. <i>Kun may ikatábang ku sangpit lang,</i> If I can do s.t., just call on me. (&rarr;) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>rescue</tr>, attend to s.o. suddenly ill. <i>Tabanga siya kay hápit na malumus,</i> Rescue him because he's drowning. <number>2</number> <itype>[a]</itype> be <tr>helped</tr>, <tr>remedied</tr>. <i>Matabang pa kahà ning dakù mag sayup,</i> Can this big error still be <tr>corrected</tr>? <number>3</number> manage to do all of s.t. <i>Dì na matabang ning kadaghanúna,</i> I can't manage to do this much work. <number>4</number> <itype>[A3; b(1)]</itype> gang up to do s.t. together. <i>Nap[=û]<note>again, this does not appear as an acute</note> ang mitabang nákug sumbagay,</i> Ten people ganged up to fight against me. <i>Tabangan nátù nig káun kay daghan,</i> Let's all of us help eat this because there's so much. <number>5</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> hook in a big catch with a <tr>gaff</tr>. <i>Tabanga ang íyang kuhà arun dì makabuhì,</i> Hook in his catch with a gaff so that it can't get away. <pos>n</pos> a <tr>gaff</tr> attached to a handle used to help pull in a big fish caught on a fishline. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> assist in child delivery. <i>Akuy nanábang pagpanganak níya,</i> I delivered her baby. <pos>n</pos> <tr>help</tr>, <tr>aid</tr>. <form>-ay, -in-ay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2]</itype> help each other. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c5]</itype> send aid (usually material assistance). <i>Gihinabángan ang Byapra sa Ridkrus,</i> Biafra is receiving <tr>aid</tr> from the Red Cross. <pos>n</pos> <tr>aid</tr>, <tr>assistance</tr> sent. <form>paki-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S3]</itype> ask for help. <i>Nakitábang (mipakitábang) ang kundinádu sa kinataliwad-an sa íyang kaguul,</i> The condemned man called out for help in the midst of his sorrows. <i>Nagpakitábang (nagpakitabang) ang babáying gilúgus,</i> The woman who was being raped cried for help. <form>singgit paki-</form> <pos>n</pos> cry for help. <form>maN-r-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> medically untrained mid-*wife. <form>maN-r-(&rarr;) ug sanggì</form> harvest help. <form>tabangtábang, ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>helper</tr>, <tr>assistant</tr>. <form>ma-in-un, pahiN-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>helpful</tr>.

<p><form>tab-ang</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>flat</tr> in taste, lacking sugar or salt. <i>Pun-ig kámay ang kapi kay tab-ang ra,</i> Put more sugar in the coffee because it tastes flat. <i>Ang isdà sa dágat dílì mabúhì sa túbig tab-ang,</i> Marine fishes do not live in fresh water. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> be flat in taste. <number>2</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> for a man or woman to feel cool toward his sweetheart. <i>Nagbúlag ang managtrátu kay gitab-angan na ang usag-usa kaníla,</i> The sweethearts separated because they got tired of each other. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> mentally deficient. <i>Wà giyud magtúnu ang íyang gipanulti, mu ra giyug táwung tab-angan,</i> The things he says do not make sense. He seems to be a stupid fool.

<p><form>tabangkà</form> <xr>= <sc>KAGÙKÙ<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tabangkù</form> <pos>n</pos> young <tr>barracuda</tr> (<ix>rumpi kandádu</ix> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>RUMPI</sc></xr>).

<p><form>tabánug</form> <xr>= <sc>TALABÁNUG</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>BANUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tábas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> cut lengthwise or through s.t. flat. <i>Gitábas ang trúsu nga himúung tabla,</i> The log was cut into boards. <number>1a</number> go over a surface as if cutting it. <i>Ang gamayng sakayan nitábas sa mabalud nga lawud,</i> The small boat plowed through the stormy seas. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> make a dress. <form>&mdash; sa nawung</form> <pos>n</pos> shape of the face. <i>Nindut kaáyug tábas ang íyang nawung,</i> She has a finely-shaped face. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> style of dress. <i>Minugbù ang tabas sa sinínà karun,</i> Short dresses are the <tr>style</tr> now. <number>2</number> k.o. cock feather coloration of a splotch of darker color on a light field. <form>-in-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> the style of a particular article of clothing.

<pb n=952>

<p><form>tábaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>joist</tr>, parallel board to which the floor boards are nailed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; c]</itype> put in joists. <i>Ang báhì sa pugáhan lig-un itábaw,</i> The core of the pugáhan palm make strong joists.

<p><form>tabawung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>trunkfish</tr>: <bio>Ostracion spp</bio>.

<p><form>tábay</form> <xr>= <sc>ATÁBAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tabáyag</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible <tr>squash</tr>, round in shape with a knob-like protrusion at the top. The shell becomes hard when mature and is used as a container: <bio>Lagenaria leucantha var</bio>.

<p><form>tabì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c6]</itype> <tr>gossip</tr>, spread secrets. <i>Ayaw siya suginli kay mutabì (manabì) dáyun,</i> Don't tell her because she gives away secrets. <i>Ayaw ni itabì (ipanabì) kay makauúlaw,</i> Don't gossip about this because it's embarrassing. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>talk</tr>, <tr>chat</tr>. <number>2</number> unpleasant <tr>gossip</tr>. <form>(&larr;)<sub>1</sub>, hiN-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> action of gossiping or chatting. <i>Tábì (hinábì) ray inyung mahímù ug wà matiwas ang trabáhu,</i> All you can do is <tr>blah-blah</tr>, and you never finish any work. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13C]</itype> engage in gossip or chatting. <i>Túa na ang duha, nagtábì (naghinábì) na pud,</i> There they are, shooting off their mouths again. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>talkative</tr>, <tr>loquacious</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>gossiper</tr>.

<p><form>tábì<sub>2</sub></form> <number>1</number> <ix>particle of courtesy used to ask permission to leave for a second, ask a question, pass in front of s.o.:</ix> <tr>excuse me</tr>. <i>Tábì, kinsay ímung ngálan?</i> Excuse me, what's your name? <i>Tábì úsà, byáan tikawg kadiyut,</i> Excuse me, I have to leave you a second. <number>2</number> particle telling s.o. to get out of the way rather brusquely. <i>Tábì diha u sikáran tika,</i> Get out of the way or I'll kick you. <form>&mdash; iskína</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> name of news column and radio program that exposes anomalies. <number>2</number> child that has a young sibling (and this<note> thus ?</note> is shunted off to the corner). <number>3</number> woman beyond her prime (and not yet married). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256; a12]</itype> be aired in this program or column. <number>2</number> <itype>[B35]</itype> wind up a spinster. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> say excuse me.

<p><form>tabíbì</form> <xr>= <sc>TÍBÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tabid<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B346; c1]</itype> <tr>trickle</tr>, <tr>drip</tr>, flowing down a side. <i>Magtabid nang íyang láway ug matúlug,</i> Her saliva trickles from her lips as she sleeps.

<p><form>tabid<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>braid</tr> the hair. <i>Tabira nang buhuk mu, ayaw ipunitil,</i> Braid your hair instead of having it in ponytail. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make into a <ix>tabid</ix>. <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>hamper</tr> for containing clothes woven from bamboo strips around 20&prime; by 20&prime;, with a cover. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> braided hair.

<p><form>tabig</form> <xr>= <sc>TABID<sub>2</sub></sc>, <i>v2, n.</i></xr>

<p><form>tabígì</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>mangrove</tr>, the bark of which yields a red dye used for strengthening fish-*lines, nets or coloring the floor of a house: <bio>Xylocarpus granatum</bio>.

<p><form>tabíki</form> <pos>n</pos> houses in Spanish times made of stones evenly piled and plastered smoothly with lime. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> build structures of <ix>tabíki</ix>.

<p><form>tabikung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; c1]</itype> sit on s.t. <tr>straddling</tr> it. <i>Mitabikung siya sa baksit sa bisiklíta,</i> She sat on the backseat of the bicycle, straddling it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> have sexual intercourse (euphemism). <i>Mihanà ang laki pagtabikung sa bayi,</i> The male set out to mount the female.

<p><form>tábil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> put up a curtain in order to conceal s.t. <i>Gitabílan ang katri sa pasyinting gilígù,</i> They put a curtain around the bed of the patient while he was being given a bath. <number>2</number> <tr>blanket</tr>, <tr>engulf</tr> (literary). <i>Ang kangitngit mitábil na sa kalibútan,</i> Darkness covered the earth. <pos>n</pos> curtain for covering s.t. <form>puting &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>movie screen</tr>. <number>2</number> world of the movies. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>TÁBIL</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>tabiláwan</form> (coined from <ix>tábil</ix> and <ix>laráwan</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>stage curtain</tr>, <tr>backdrop</tr>.

<p><form>tabili</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. lizard, about 1&frac12;&prime; long with shining yellow and green skin, found out-of-doors. <form>&mdash; sa dágat</form> <pos>n</pos> lizard fish, a k.o. fish around 6&Prime; long, living on sandy bottoms of shallow waters.

<p><form>tabílis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S]</itype> <tr>flow</tr>, <tr>drip</tr> continuously. <i>Mitabílis ang túbig sa tangking nabuslut,</i> Water flowed continuously from the water tank that had a hole in it. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>continuous flow</tr>, <tr>dripping</tr>, <tr>trickling</tr>.

<p><form>tabilung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. rounded slipmouth of two species: one with fine, black scales which peel off easily, and the other a smooth, rounded and silvery species: <bio>Leiognathus spp</bio>.

<p><form>tabilus</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. slipmouth with a small mouth which could be elongated when stretched: <bio>Leiognathus sp</bio>.

<p><form>tabing</form> <xr>= <sc>MARBAS</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>tabírak</form> <xr>= <sc>BINIGNIT</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>tabirnakulu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tabernacle</tr>.

<p><form>tabirwak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vagina</tr>, said of women who have given birth to one or more children.

<p><form>tabisay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>flow</tr> down vertically in a thin stream, usually touching a surface. <i>Nagtabisay ang dugù gíkan sa kílay nga nasìsì,</i> Blood flowed from the cut eyebrow. <i>Ang íyang suwang gitabisayan sa láway,</i> Saliva dribbled down his chin.

<p><form>tabíwis</form> <xr>= <sc>TABÍLIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tabla<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>draw</tr>, <tr>tie</tr>. <i>Tabla ang risulta sa iliksiyun,</i> The election ended in a draw. <number>2</number> having experienced an equal amount of s.t., usually unpleasant. <i>Tabla ta. Púlus hilatusan,</i> <pb n=953>We both came out the same. We both got a whipping. <number>3</number> just like, just as if. <i>Ang ímung pagluib nákù tabla ra sa ímu akung gipatay,</i> When you betrayed me it was just as though you had killed me. <i>Tabla ka ug búang ánang ímung taas nga buhuk,</i> You are like a madman with your long hair. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> [A13; a 12] declare a game a draw, end in a draw. <i>Tabláhun ta na lang ni kay ngitngit na,</i> Let's call the game a draw because it's getting dark. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> play s.o. to a draw. <i>Maáyu nag makatabla kag kampiyun,</i> It would be good enough if you could play a champion to a draw. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> give one's life to get revenge. <i>Kay nadisgrasya na ku manabla na lang ku níya,</i> Because he has violated me, I'll give my life to kill him.

<p><form>tabla<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>board</tr>, a piece of sawed lumber, made of lumber. <i>Muskitírung tabla,</i> <tr>coffin</tr> (lit. mosquito net of wood). <number>2</number> pieces of cloth cut ready for sewing. <i>Upat ka tabla ang karsúnis,</i> Trousers are sewn from four pieces of cloth cut according to the measurements. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> saw into boards. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> cut cloth for sewing. <form>-in-</form> <pos>a</pos> gore, a style of skirt. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> wear, make into a gore style skirt.

<p><form>tabla<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make off with s.t. that belongs to s.o. else. <i>Nakatabla siyag duha ka líbu nga kubransa,</i> He made off with two thousand pesos that he had collected.

<p><form>tabládu</form> <xr>= <sc>INTABLÁDU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tablaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> get a big enough quantity of s.t. pleasant not to desire any more. <i>Dì ku matablaw pagtinan-aw nímu,</i> I can't get enough of looking at you. <i>Makatablaw (makapatablaw) sad tung inyung híkay,</i> Your dinner was more than filling.

<p><form>tablíta, tablítas</form> <pos>n</pos> tablet, <tr>capsule</tr>.

<p><form>tablíya</form> <pos>n</pos> ground cacao pressed into solid pieces. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> mold cacao into pieces. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> molded into cubes or bricks. <i>Nangismágul siyag tinablíyang buláwan,</i> He smuggles gold bullion. <i>Tinablíya nga batu,</i> Stone blocks.

<p><form>tablug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; c]</itype> <tr>swing</tr>, make a swinging motion. <i>Mutablug ang kawáyan kun hangínun,</i> The bamboo poles swing to and fro when the wind blows them. <i>Siyay nagtablug sa dúyan nákù sa gamay pa ku,</i> She rocked my cradle when I was young. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> throw s.t. out with a swinging motion. <i>Gitablug níla sa barku ang mga patay,</i> They threw the dead men overboard. <i>Tablúgan ta unyà ka ug inínit,</i> I'll throw hot water on you, if you don't watch out. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> rope or cloth that holds up a hammock. <form>tablugtablug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>dangle</tr> as a result of almost being cut off. <i>Nagtablugtablug ang íyang tudlù nga hápit maputul,</i> His finger that was almost cut is dangling.

<p><form>tablun</form> <pos>n</pos> a log squared off and ready for sawing into boards. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>square off</tr> a log.

<p><form>tabtab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> hack s.t. off with several blows. <i>Siyay nagtabtab sa písing gibugkus sa kaban,</i> He cut off the rope that bound the trunk.

<p><form>tábù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>meet</tr> s.o. <i>Tabúun nátù siya sa piyir,</i> We'll meet him at the pier. <i>Pirmi lang kasábà ímung itábù inig-abut nákù,</i> You always meet me with nagging when I come home. <number>1a</number> <itype>[C; c3]</itype> meet each other on the way. <i>Ambut ása siya. Gikatábù man tu nákù,</i> I don't know where he'<note> "s"?</note> going. We met on the way. <number>1b</number> <itype>[AC; a2]</itype> assemble, meet, cause people to do so. <i>Ang mayur mauy mitábù sa mga draybir,</i> The mayor assembled the drivers. <i>Magtábù ta sa simbahan,</i> We will assemble in church. <number>2</number> <itype>[C3; c1]</itype> for two ends to meet, make them meet. <i>Tabúa (itábù) ang masig ka tumuy arun glúhan,</i> Make both ends meet so they can be glued. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> converge at a place for market. <i>Magtábù dinhi malúnis,</i> They hold market here on Mondays. <pos>n</pos> periodical converging to hold market. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>go shopping</tr>, esp. at a periodical market. <i>Manábù ku sa Mantalúngun,</i> I'll attend the market day in Mantalongon. <form>hi-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>happen</tr>, <tr>take place</tr>. <i>Nahitabù nga nagkasákay mi,</i> It so happened that we rode on the same vehicle. <number>2</number> for s.t. bad to happen. <i>Ug magpadáyun kag paíbug nákù mahitabù ra man ta,</i> If you keep on flirting with me s.t. will happen between us. <i>Dúna tingaliy nahitabù sa báy kay gikulbaan man ku,</i> S.t. bad must have happened at home because I feel uneasy. <pos>n</pos> <tr>incident</tr>, <tr>happening</tr>. <i>Gisaysay níya ang hitabù,</i> He told about the incident. <form>ha-/hiN-/haN-(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>HITABÙ</sc></xr> (but not as frequent).</xr> <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C3; c3]</itype> <tr>meet</tr> s.o. by chance. <i>Na, kay naglikay ku, nagkahinábù na hinúun mi,</i> I was trying to avoid him, but instead we ran into each other. <form>tabùtábù</form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>market</tr>. <form>tabuan</form> <pos>n</pos> place where periodic markets are held. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gift</tr> given by s.o. who arrives from a trip.

<p><form>tabudlung</form> <xr>= <sc>BUDLUNG<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tabudyus</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>cylindrical</tr>. <i>Tabudyus ang panghaw sa barku,</i> The ship's chimney is cylindrical. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the fry of the <ix>gisaw</ix>. <number>2</number> sweet made of starch from the trunk of buri palm mixed with grated coconut meat, sugar, and <pb n=954>water, wrapped in banana leaves and rolled to cylinders the size of a child's arm, about 7&Prime; long, and roasted. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> roll into a cylinder, tube. <i>Nagtabudyus siyag sín nga himúung túbu sa túbig,</i> He rolled a galvanized sheet into a cylinder to make a water pipe. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> prepare <ix>tabudyus</ix>.

<p><form>tabug</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>TABLUG</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr> <number>2</number> beehive hanging from a tree branch shaped like a mammary gland. <form>tabugtabug</form> <xr>= <sc>TABLUGTABLUG</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>TABLUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tábug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; 1]</itype> drive, send away. <i>Tabúga ang bábuy nga misulud sa kural,</i> Drive the pig that got into our yard away. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> throw s.t. away to dispose of it. <i>Itabug tikas bintánà,</i> I'll throw you out the window.

<p><form>tábug<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. in excess, way beyond reasonable bounds. <i>Nagtábug (nagpatábug) ka man lag prisyu sa ímung baligyà!</i> You are pricing your merchandise ridiculously high! <i>Nakapatábug kug sulti tungud sa ákung kalágut,</i> I said a lot of things I should not have because of my anger. <number>2</number> do s.t. without forethought. <i>Nagpatábug lag tíru, lagmit makaigù,</i> The way he is just shooting so carelessly, he might just hit s.o. <number>3</number> do s.t. hurriedly and carelessly. <i>Dì ku makapatábug ug lútù sa sud-an,</i> I can't cook the food hurriedly and poorly.

<p><form>tábug<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>TABLUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tabugsuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large spider conch.

<p><form>tabugsuk<sub>2</sub></form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>BUGSUK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tabuguk</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small octopus, larger than the <ix>tamalà</ix>, smaller than the <ix>kugíta</ix>.

<p><form>tabuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>cross over</tr>, bring s.t. across to the opposite side. <i>Mutabuk na ta sa karsáda,</i> Let's cross the street. <i>Kuyaw tabukun ning subáa kay sulug,</i> This river is dangerous to cross because the current is strong. <i>Itabuk ning asin sa píkas p[=û],</i> Bring the salt across to the other island. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> emigrate to another island. <i>Mitabuk siya sa Mindanaw pamásin nga muasinsu,</i> He migrated to Mindanao in the hope that he would be successful there. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> move from one group or affiliation to a rival one. <i>Ang Libiral nga diputádu mitabuk ngadtu sa Nasyunalista,</i> The Liberal congressman crossed over to the Nacionalista Party. <pos>n</pos> area on the other side, across the street. <i>Túa siya manarabáhu sa tabuk,</i> He works on the other island (other bank). <form>-anan(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ferryboat</tr>. <number>2</number> small, make-shift bridge. <form>-anun(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> people from across the street, the other island. <form>-l-un</form> <pos>a</pos> to be reached by crossing a body of water.

<p><form>tabukaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. yaws, swelling with an oozing opening in the center, growing to 1&Prime;, after which <ix>sungkil</ix> develops.

<p><form>Tabúli</form> <pos>n</pos> a pagan ethnic group of Cotabato.

<p><form>tábun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>cover</tr> s.t. to protect or conceal it. <i>Tabúni ang kan-un arun dílì langawun,</i> Cover the food so it won't get flies on it. <number>2</number> <tr>cover up</tr> for s.o.'s mistakes. <i>Nagdasà siya kay mutábun ang ginikánan sa íyang binúang,</i> He is abusive because his parents cover up for his foolishness. <number>3</number> <tr>drown out</tr> a sound. <i>Hápit tabúni ang íyang tíngug sa makusug nga áwit,</i> Her voice was almost drowned out by the loud song. <pos>n</pos> <form>&mdash; sa láyag</form> <tr>Passion Sunday</tr>, the second Sunday before Easter when it was the custom to cover the tabernacle and statue with a piece of purple cloth. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cover</tr>. <i>Hápit walay tabun ang íyang dughan,</i> Her breast was almost uncovered. <form>tabuntábun</form> <xr>= <sc>TÁBUN</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr> <form>tabuntábun, tabuntabun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>eyelid</tr>.

<p><form>tábun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>TULÁBUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tábung</form> <xr>= <sc>TULÁBUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tab-ung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac1]</itype> keep fruits in a dark, warm place to hasten ripening. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fruit ripened in this way. <number>2</number> unsavory secrets about one's past experiences.

<p><form>tabunuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fertile</tr>. <i>Tabunuk ang yútà sa pátag,</i> The soil in the plains is fertile. <i>Káda túig man manganak, tabunuk giyung matrísa,</i> She gives birth every year. She has a fertile womb. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become fertile.

<p><form>tabúnun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>brown-skinned</tr>. <pos>n</pos> the <tr>brown race</tr>. <i>Si Risal garbu sa yútang tabúnun,</i> Rizal is the pride of the land of the brown race.

<p><form>tabunus</form> <pos>n</pos> a covered <tr>receptacle</tr> esp. for soiled clothes about 2&ndash;3&prime; long, made of sawali.

<p><form>taburíti</form> <pos>n</pos> wooden or rattan <tr>chair</tr> with a backrest.

<p><form>tabuylug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; b2c1]</itype> <tr>swing</tr>, <tr>spin</tr> around; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Mitabuylug ang bátà sa písì,</i> The child hung to a rope and swung around. <i>Nagtabuylug ang tyubíbu,</i> The merry-go-round is spinning around.

<p><form>tabuylug<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> <tr>go together</tr>. <i>Magtabuylug ta ngadtu sa sini,</i> Let us go to the show together. <i>Gitabuylug níya paghigut ang mga bábuy,</i> He tied the pigs together on one peg. <pos>n</pos> constant companion. <i>Íyang anak ang ákung tabuylug,</i> His son is my constant companion. <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> walk together in groups; walk side by side together. <i>Dílì kita makatinabuylug sa pagpanglákaw niíning pit-us nga dálan,</i> We can not walk <tr>abreast</tr> on this narrow path.

<p><form>tabyáyung</form> <xr>= <sc>BALANTÍYUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tabyug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB456; a1]</itype> swing s.t. suspended. <i>Mitabyug ang písing ákung gikumbibátan,</i> The rope I was clinging to swung. <i>Kinsay nagtabyug sa dúyan?</i> Who swung the hammock? <pb n=955><i>Tabyúga ang butùbútù sa kampána,</i> Swing the clapper of the big bell. <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to swing a hammock, such as a string.

<p><form>tabyun</form> <xr>= <sc>KULABYUN</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>tabyus</form> <xr>= <sc>KADYUS</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>tád</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small, slippery <tr>fishes</tr> of various colors, with large scales, found in seaweeds.

<p><form>tadhan</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>TAHUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tadiyà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> throw a knife such that the point sticks in at impact. <i>Hingígù ka giyud ug makatadiyà ka ánang irung nagdagan,</i> You're really a marksman if you can sink a knife into that running dog. <pos>n</pos> <tr>knife throwing</tr>.

<p><form>tadiyaw</form> <pos>n</pos> large earthen jar to hold liquids. <form>-in-</form> a shaped like a <ix>tadiyaw</ix>. <i>Ang íyang kasing tinadiyaw,</i> His top is <tr>egg-shaped</tr>.

<p><form>tadlas</form> <tr>across</tr> an area. <i>Midágan siya tadlas sa uma,</i> He ran across the farm. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>go across</tr> a broad area. <i>Tadlásun ku ang kadagátan pagpangítà nímu,</i> I'll <tr>cross</tr> the oceans searching for you. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> center player of the defensive team in <ix>tubigtúbig</ix>.

<p><form>tadlip</form> <xr>= <sc>ADLIP</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>tadluk</form> <pos>n</pos> coconut seedling. <i>Pilía ang tambuk nga tadluk,</i> Choose a healthy seedling. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> let coconuts sprout for seedlings. <i>Mutadluk (magtadluk) tag pila ka buuk,</i> We will let a few coconuts sprout into seedlings.

<p><form>tadlung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; a12]</itype> go or walk straight to a place. <i>Tadlúnga lang tung kahúya kay hilabyan mu ang tábay,</i> Just walk straight to that tree and you will pass the well.

<p><form>tadlungan</form> <pos>n</pos> black-finned <tr>shark</tr>: <bio>Carcharias melanopterus</bio>.

<p><form>tadluy</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> small <tr>funnel</tr> for solids, used to get rice out of sacks to see what the contents are. <number>2</number> a k.o. <tr>fish</tr> with a round, tapered body growing about 5&Prime; or 6&Prime; in length, about an inch in diameter, white belly and darker back, with fine scales. a straight, in line with. <i>Syárug dílì ka kapasulud sa numiru dyís nga tadluy man ni kaáyu ngadtus bangag,</i> Surely you can get the number ten ball in because it is directly in line with the hole.

<p><form>tadtad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>chop</tr> into bits. <i>Nagtadtad siyag tinái arun himúung dugùdugù,</i> He is chopping entrails into bits for the blood stew. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> have <tr>sexual intercourse</tr> (slang). <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> action of <tr>cutting</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>sexual intercourse</tr>. <form>maáyu lang tayáda way &mdash;</form> all talk and no action. <form>tadtaran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chopping board</tr>. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> dish consisting primarily of chopped entrails and blood.

<p><form>tadyak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>kick</tr> hard with the foot. <i>Tadyáki ang irung náa sa iláwum sa lamísa,</i> Kick that dog under the table.

<p><form>tadyaw</form> <xr>= <sc>TADIYAW</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>tadyus</form> <xr>= <sc>KADYUS</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>tadyùtù</form> <xr>= <sc>TAYÙTÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tág</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tag</tr>, a piece of paper identifying s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6(1)]</itype> put a <tr>tag</tr> on s.t.

<p><form>tag-<sub>1</sub></form> affix forming nouns which refer to the agent of a particular action or to the particular person concerned. <i>Si Risal ang tagsúlat (tagsulat) sa Núli Mi Tanghiri,</i> Rizal was the author of Noli Me Tangere. <i>Ang tagsalà,</i> The one who committed the sin. <i>Tagbalay (tagbálay),</i> Owner of the house.

<p><form>tag-<sub>2</sub></form> <number>1</number> prefix added to numbers and numerals to form numerals which mean [so-and-so] many apiece. <i>Tag singku ang pan disal,</i> Rolls cost five cents each. <i>Tagsa ka sáku, tagurha ka sáku ang palitun káda palit níya,</i> He buys a sack, two sacks at a time. <number>2</number> <ix>added to other parts of speech:</ix> [such-and-such] <tr>each time</tr>. <i>Tagdugay siyang mupaúlì,</i> He comes home late each time. <i>Taglagyù siyag byáhi,</i> He travels long distances each time.

<p><form>tagà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fishhook</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a3b2]</itype> caught, snagged on a fishhook. <i>Hitag-an na bayà apan nakabuhì,</i> It was already caught on the hook, but it broke free. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> catch with a hook and line.

<p><form>tagà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>cut down</tr> trees. <i>Siyay nagtaga sa ímung tanum,</i> He cut your plant down. <i>Tagaa ang punúan sa ságing,</i> Cut the trunk of the banana tree down. <pos>n</pos> action of <tr>felling</tr> trees. <form>maN-r-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>woodcutter</tr>.

<p><form>*tágà</form> suppletive form for <ix>hátag</ix> used optionally for suffixed forms.<i> Tagáan (hatágan) ta ka ug dulsi,</i> I will give you candy. <i>Pagbinuutan kay básig hitagaan kag gása,</i> Be good because you might get a present. <form>-l-an(&rarr;), -anan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. one is obliged to give. <number>2</number> person to whom given. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> one to whom s.t. is given. <form>-in-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> manner of giving. <form>ka-un</form> <pos>a</pos> on the verge of giving. <form>ma-in-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>generous</tr>, liking to give. <form>-l-un, -unun(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>TAGAANAN</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p><form>taga-</form> prefix added to words that refer to a place to form nouns which mean: <number>1</number> one who is from [such-and-such] a place. <i>Tagamanílà diay ka,</i> So, you are from Manila. <i>Tagaámù,</i> One who is from my hometown. <number>2</number> one who is associated with a certain group. <i>Tagakustum,</i> People in the <tr>Customs</tr>. <i>Tagakíim</i>, One of the members of the K.M.'s (<ix>Kabatáang Makabáyan</ix>, Patriotic Youth).

<p><form>taga-(&rarr;)</form> prefix added to words referring to parts of the body to form words meaning &lsquo;up to [so-and-so]&rsquo;. <i>Tagaliug ku sa útang,</i> I'm up to my neck in debts.

<p><form>tagábung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> strands of hair formed into a <pb n=956><tr>wig</tr> to reinforce a chignon. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> make into a hairpiece of this sort.

<p><form>tagábung<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>TUGÁBUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>give attention to</tr>, <tr>mind</tr>. <i>Wà na siya magtagad sa íyang pangláwas,</i> She stopped paying attention to her health. <i>Wà ku makatagad nímu dáyun,</i> I wasn't able to <tr>attend to</tr> you at once. <i>Walà ni Li tagda ang ákung pakilúuy,</i> Lee did not heed my pleading. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>pay attention to</tr> s.o. showing warmth, concern. <i>Mutagad lang siya kun unáhan,</i> He is friendly to others only when they speak to him first. <i>Nagtagad pa giyud kag andam dà,</i> You shouldn't have bothered fixing anything to eat. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>wait for</tr>. <i>Ása ta magtagad ug sakyanan?</i> Where shall we wait for the bus? <pos>n</pos> action of <tr>caring</tr>. <i>Wà siyay tagad sa íyang pagkáun,</i> He is not particular about his food. <form>(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>TAGAD</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr> <form>tagdanay, tinagdanay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2]</itype> be on friendly terms with each other. <form>-in-</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>looked up to</tr>, <tr>respected</tr>, considered important. <i>Usa siya sa mga tinagad nga táwu sa lungsud,</i> He is one of the respected people in the town. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13N]</itype> treat s.o. as worthy of attention. <i>Magtinagad (maninagad) ka man niánang bastus,</i> Why do you mind those rowdy fellows? <form>-anan, tagaranan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>waiting place</tr>. <form>tinagdan</form> <pos>n</pos> manner of attending to s.t. <i>Lahì ang íyang tinagdan (pagtagad) kanákù karun sa kaniadtu,</i> She treats me differently from the way she used to. <form>matinagdánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>attentive</tr>. <form>pag-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>attention</tr>. <i>Ang íyang líhuk nakadani sa ákung pagtagad,</i> The way she acted caught my attention. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>TINAGDAN</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>tagadtad</form> <pos>a</pos> for the meat of fleshy fruits and tubers to have hardened parts. <i>Tagadtad kaáyu ang kamúti nga guwang,</i> Matured sweet potatoes have hardened portions. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> get to have hardened portions. <i>Sakit ang nakatagadtad (nakapatagadtad) sa ságing,</i> A blight caused the bananas to develop hardened lumps.

<p><form>tagak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> join strands of abaca at the ends to make a long thread. <form>-an, -an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>basket</tr>, cylindrical in shape and with a large mouth, used to hold joined strands of abaca. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> joined abaca fibers.

<p><form>tágak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; ac]</itype> cause s.t. to fall straight down. <i>Matágak ang mga dáhun,</i> The leaves will fall. <i>Tagákun ku nang langgam sa usa ka tíru,</i> I'll knock that bird down in one shot. <i>Namatay siya kay hitagakan sa lubi,</i> He died because a coconut fell on his head. <i>Itágak nang sapátus kay naglisud ka pagsaka,<note>pagsakà? P2</note></i> Kick off your shoes because you're having trouble climbing. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>fail</tr> in school. <i>Tagáka siya kay absiníru,</i> Fail him because he's always absent. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> for coconuts to yield. <i>Kanang kalubihána mutágak ug usa ka líbu,</i> That coconut plantation yields one thousand nuts. <number>4</number> <itype>[B1267; b8]</itype> suffer a <tr>miscarriage</tr>. <i>Natagákag makaduha,</i> She has had two miscarriages. <number>5</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> for the curtain to fall signifying the end of a presentation (metaphorical). <i>Ug dinhi natágak ang tabil sa átung sugilánun,</i> And so, here our story ends. <number>6</number> <formx>&mdash; ang kwarta</formx> <itype>[a3]</itype> spend money. <i>Natágak ang kwarta sa way hinungdan,</i> The money was just wasted. <pos>n</pos> <tr>yield</tr> of coconuts. <form>(&rarr;)<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fallen leaves of fruits. <number>2</number> fallen pieces, pieces which fell or spilled out of a container. <i>Tagak sa kupras, mais,</i> Extra pieces of copra, corn grain. <form>tagaktagak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B6; c16]</itype> drop down in spurts or drips. <i>Nagtagaktagak ang tái sa bátang nagkalíbang,</i> The child with the diarrhea kept having his BM's in spurts. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> drop things around, <tr>mess</tr>. <i>Mauy musilhig sa sawug ang nagtagaktagak ug kan-un,</i> Whoever throws rice all over the floor is going to have to pick it up. <number>3</number> <itype>[B145; c1]</itype> fail to do s.t. in unison. <i>Dungána pagrisayit. Ayaw tagaktagaka (itagaktagak),</i> Recite it together in unison, not raggedly. <pos>a</pos> not in unison. <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>TAGAKTAGAK</sc>, <i>3.</i></xr>

<p><form>tagaktak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>clacking</tr> or <tr>banging</tr> sound, but not resounding, e.g. that of slapping s.t. with wood. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> make such a sound. <i>Mitagaktak ang sín pagbundak sa ulan,</i> The metal roof made a banging noise when the rain came down hard. <i>Ayawg itagaktak ang bakyà sa simintu,</i> Don't bang your wooden slippers on the concrete.

<p><form>tagaktak<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. crunchy <tr>sweet</tr> made of a thick dough of ground rice or sweet potatoes and sugar passed through a sieve to form fine threads, fashioned into triangles or other shapes, and fried brown. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make <ix>tagaktak</ix>.

<p><form>tagal</form> <pos>n</pos> stipulated length or <tr>period</tr> of time to do s.t. <i>Ang tagal sa pagbáyad sa útang tulu ka búlan,</i> The stipulated period for paying the debt is three months. <i>Ugmà ang íyang tagal nga mubálik,</i> He set tomorrow as the day he'll be back. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> stipulate a period of time within which or at which s.t. is to be done. <i>Gitagalan ang masakitun ug lima ka adlaw,</i> The patient was given five days to live. <i>Daghang burúka ang gikatagal niánang adláwa,</i> Many cases had been set for that day.

<p><form>tagála</form> <pos>n</pos> a woman from the Tagalog region.

<p><form>tagalubi</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>LUBI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>Tagálug</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Tagalog</tr> language, people. <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> <pb n=957><pos>n</pos> Tagalog language, way. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>speak Tagalog</tr>.

<p><form>tagalúla</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>rattan</tr> used in tying bamboo floor slats.

<p><form>tagam</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B25; b2]</itype> <tr>refrain</tr> from repeating an act as a result of an unpleasant experience previously undergone. <i>Mitagam (natagam) siyag pangáwat human maprísu,</i> He didn't steal again after he was put in prison once. <i>Balikbálik, ayaw pagtagam,</i> Come see us again (lit. don't learn a lesson). <i>Hitagman kag bisíta kun dì ka mutagad,</i> People will not come to visit you again if you don't entertain them. <form>káun ug &mdash;</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> experience s.t. bad so as to feel that one doesn't ever want to repeat it. <i>Nakakaun ka bag tagam nga dì na ka muadtu sa ámù?</i> Did s.t. bad happen to you that you don't want to come back to our place? <form>katalagman</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>calamity</tr>. <i>Nahiágum sa katalagman ang Pilipínas paggúbat,</i> The Philippines experienced great calamities during the war.

<p><form>tagamtam</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12b2]</itype> have a taste, <tr>experience</tr>, feel of s.t., usually s.t. abstract. <i>Nakatagamtam kug lángit uban nímu,</i> I have tasted heaven with you. <i>Tagamtáma ang ákung panimalus,</i> Get a taste of my revenge.

<p><form>tag-an</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>guess</tr>. <i>Akuy tag-an sa sulud sa bangà,</i> I'll guess what's inside the jar. <i>Hitag-anan nákung ikaw tung nagmaskara,</i> I guessed right that you were the one wearing a mask. <number>2</number> <tr>foretell</tr>. <i>Tag-ánun níya ang ímung kapaláran,</i> He will tell your fortune. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>guess</tr>. <number>2</number> fortune told. <form>tag-antag-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> any k.o. guessing game. <number>2</number> <tr>guesswork</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C]</itype> play a guessing game. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>conjecture</tr>, <tr>guess</tr>. <i>Wà ku makasigúru sa íyang panuígun. Átù lang tag-antag-ánun,</i> I can't be sure of her age. Let's just guess it. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>a</pos> good guesser. <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fortune-teller</tr>.

<p><form>tagána</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> set s.t. aside for future use, prepare s.t. beforehand for s.t. <i>Nagtagána kug aslúnun pára sa pista,</i> I reserved a pig to be roasted for the fiesta. <i>Itagána ku ang kwarta sa inyung pagtuun,</i> I am setting this money aside for your studies. <i>Ulì na kay gitagan-an kag latus ni Tátay,</i> Come home because Father is preparing a whipping for you. <pos>a</pos> <tr>prepared</tr>. <i>Andam ug tagána na síya sa iksámin,</i> He is ready and prepared for the examination. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. prepared for s.o. esp. for a special occasion. <i>Dakung bábuy ang ákung tagana sa pista,</i> I prepared a huge pig for the fiesta. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b3c]</itype> do s.t. as a precaution just in case. <i>Pagdág pistúla. Maáyu nang managána,</i> Bring a gun. It's a good precaution. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2S3; b3]</itype> <tr>hesitate</tr> to do s.t., have reservations about doing s.t. <i>Nagpanagana kung mamisíta níya kay istrikta,</i> I hesitate to visit her because she's a difficult person. <form>mapanagan-un</form> <pos>a</pos> characterized with cautious hesitation.

<p><form>taganas</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small <tr>waterfall</tr> where the water glides along a sloping stone cliff, or the smooth, stone slope the water glides over.

<p><form>tágas</form> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>TÁGAK</sc>.</xr> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>TÁGAK</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr> <number>2</number> egg accidentally laid by a hen while walking.

<p><form>tagasak, tagásak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make the sound of cascading water hitting s.t. <i>Nagtagasak ang ulan gíkan sa sandayung,</i> The rain made a splashing sound as it poured from the gutter. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> splashing sound.

<p><form>tagasanta, tagasantu</form> see *<xr><sc>ISTÍGI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagáuk</form> <xr>= <sc>TUKTUGÁUK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>wander</tr>, <tr>roam</tr>. <i>Nakatagaw na siya sa íyang mga saup,</i> He has already made the rounds of his tenants. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; c6]</itype> <tr>deviate from</tr>, <tr>go separately</tr>. <i>Sa pag-ikskursiyun námù mitagaw silang duha,</i> During our excursion the two of them got separated from us. <i>Mangulitáwu gánì nà siya, itagaw ang sulti,</i> If he begins talking about love, change the subject. <number>3</number> <itype>[B]</itype> be <tr>boorish</tr>, <tr>ignorant</tr> in one's ways. <i>Makatagaw man diay ning subra ra sa paghigpit,</i> I found out that being too strict with a child makes him develop into a shy, socially poor sort. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b3c]</itype> <tr>talk</tr>, <tr>speak</tr> out loudly. <i>Mitagaw siya sa mikrupunu,</i> He spoke loud over the microphone. <pos>a</pos> ignorant and boorish. <i>Giinum sa tagaw nga dakù ang patis, ábi níyag kuka-*kúla,</i> The oaf drank the soy sauce thinking it was coca-cola. <pos>n</pos> <tr>vagabond</tr>, <tr>wanderer</tr>. <i>Dì ku mamánag tagaw,</i> I won't marry a vagabond. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> be in confusion. <i>Mutágaw (matágaw) ang panagsulti ug muintra na siya,</i> If he takes part, the conversation will get utterly confused. <i>Tagáwun ku ang ílang panimuyù,</i> I'll cause confusion in their home. <form>la-</form> <xr>see <sc>LATAGAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagawtaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; c6]</itype> talk nonsense to oneself. <i>Kabuangun nà siya kay síging magtagawtaw,</i> He is going crazy because he keeps talking nonsense to himself. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>nag</tr> and <tr>scold</tr> in a long rambling way. <i>Nagtagawtaw ang asáwa kay nahubug siya,</i> His wife kept nagging him because he was drunk. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>nonsense</tr> one speaks. <number>2</number> uninterrupted nagging talk. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>nagger</tr>.

<p><form>tágay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>pour</tr> alcoholic drinks into a drinking vessel. <i>Ikay tágay kay ímu ning silibrasiyun,</i> You pour the drinks because it's your celebration. <number>2</number> <itype>[C2; c3]</itype> <tr>drink together</tr>. <i>Makigtágay aku níya,</i> I will drink together with him. <number>2a</number> indulge in sensual pleasure together. <i>Nagtágay sila sa kinawatkawat <pb n=958>nga kalípay,</i> They shared stolen moments of joy. <number>3</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> be proferred s.t. <i>Gitagáyan siyag madaníhun nga pahíyum,</i> He was proferred a winsome smile. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> drink poured. <number>2</number> drinking party. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> vessel one drinks liquor from.

<p><form>tagaylu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC]</itype> <tr>barter</tr>, exchange one commodity for another. <i>Nakatagaylu kug humay ug rilip,</i> I bartered some relief clothes for rice. <pos>n</pos> act of bartering.

<p><form>tagaytay</form> (from <ix>taytay</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>mountain ridge</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> go along the mountain ridges. <i>Managaytay lang ta kay gibahaan ang ubus,</i> Let's travel along the ridge because the valleys are flooded.

<p><form>tagbagu</form> <xr>= <sc>TALAGBAGU</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>tagbak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>herring</tr>: <bio>Ilisha hoevenii</bio>.

<p><form>tagbak<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. herbaceous plant of cool, damp places, with lanceolate leaves, similar to banana, growing to 1&frac12;&ndash;2 meters: <bio>Kolowratia elegans</bio>.

<p><form>tagbaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP1B16; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>satisfy</tr> to the point of satiety. <i>Didtu siya sa Rílis, nagtagbaw (nagpatagbaw) sa kaugalíngun,</i> He was in the red light district, satisfying his sexual needs. <i>Manggáwas ta kay natagbaw na kug tíbi,</i> Let's go out. I've had enough TV. <number>2</number> get enough of s.t. to make one tired of it. <i>Ang nawung ni Imilda dílì makatagbaw,</i> One can't get tired of looking at Imelda's face. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> state of being satisfied, having had enough. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> satisfaction at s.t. done. <i>Pagsirbisyu nga makahátag dakung katagbáwan,</i> Service that can give great satisfaction. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>KA-UN(&rarr;)</sc>.</xr> <form>ka-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> satisfaction reached. <i>Way katagbawung bayhána,</i> An insatiable woman.

<p><form>tagbaya<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> ulcer in the corners of the mouth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> have a mouth ulcer. <i>Gitagbaya siya kay way kalígù,</i> He has sores in the corner of his mouth because he hasn't bathed. <form>tagbayahun</form> <pos>a</pos> having ulcers in the corners of the mouth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> develop this condition.

<p><form>tagbaya<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. bird, the Philippine bulbul: <bio>Hypsipetes philippinus</bio>.

<p><form>tagbù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>work bee</tr> on a community project. <i>Tagbù sa pagpúu sa ilagà,</i> A work bee to exterminate mice. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>SÚGAT</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> hold a work bee. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>TÁBÙ</sc>, <i>v1,</i> <i>2.</i></xr> <form>hiN-</form> <xr>= <sc>HINABÙ</sc>.</xr> <xr>see <sc>TÁBÙ</sc>.</xr> <form>tagbùtagbù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12C2; c1]</itype> <tr>meet</tr> in a clandestine manner. <i>Dì na sila makatagbùtagbù kay nasakpan na ang ílang rilasiyun sa bána,</i> They can no longer continue with their trysting because the woman's husband found out about it. <number>2</number> <itype>[C3]</itype> keep passing by one another. <i>Magtagbùtagbù lang ang nagkalainláing mga sakyanan sa kadalánan,</i> All different vehicles keep passing each other on the streets. <form>-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> trysting place. <form>-in-an</form> s.t. s.o. brings when arriving from a trip.

<p><form>tagduk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A46; c]</itype> <number>1</number> for s.t. pointed to pierce and stick into s.t. <i>Gitagduk níya sa punúan sa káhuy ang bára,</i> He stuck the iron bar into the trunk of the tree. <i>Tagdúki ang yútà ug kahiktan sa báka,</i> Plant a stake into the ground to tie the cow to. <number>2</number> <tr>prick</tr>, make a small hole like a dot. <i>Siyay mitagduk sa pabúrut,</i> He punctured the balloon. <pos>n</pos> <tr>puncture</tr>, prick. <i>Pilía ang síng walay mga tagduk,</i> Choose iron sheets that have no punctures.

<p><form>tagduy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> for s.t. pointed to pierce and stick into s.t. <i>Mitagduy ang panà sa íyang dughan,</i> The arrow pierced and stuck in his breast. <i>Gitagdúyan sa tunuk ang íyang lapalapa,</i> He got a thorn stuck in his sole.

<p><form>tagdyaw</form> <xr>= <sc>TADIYAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>taghap</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> <tr>guess</tr>. <i>Taghápa ang ákung ngálan,</i> Guess my name. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> hit on the right thing accidentally. <i>Unsay kahibáwu! Hitaghapan ku lang,</i> I didn't know! I just guessed it. <pos>n</pos> <tr>guess</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> do s.t. in a guessing way. <i>Gipanaghapan níyag áyu ang radiyu,</i> He took a stab at fixing the radio. <pos>n</pos> <tr>guess</tr>, wild try. <form>taghaptaghap</form> <pos>n</pos> hit and miss procedure. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b8]</itype> do s.t. by a hit and miss procedure.

<p><form>taghud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> throw s.t. bulky s.w. with the intent of keeping others from finding out about it. <i>Diin nímu itaghud ang nangkà nga ímung gikáwat?</i> Where did you dump the jackfruit that you stole?

<p><form>taghuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; ac]</itype> <tr>whistle</tr>, whistle at s.o. <i>Taghúya ang túnu ánang kantáha,</i> Whistle the tune of that song. <i>Nasukù siya kay gitaghúyan,</i> She got angry because s.o. whistled at her. <pos>n</pos> <tr>whistling</tr>.

<p><form>tagibanwa</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>BANWA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagidiyut</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>DIYUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tágik</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac1]</itype> tie things together carefully in construction. <i>Nagtágik siya sa mga nípà didtu sa katsaw,</i> He was tying the nipa strips to the rafters. <i>Gitágik níya ang duha ka bulus kawáyan,</i> He tied two bamboo poles together. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> create s.t. literary or musical.<i> Maáyu siyang mutágik ug sugilánun nga kulbà hínam,</i> He is good in composing suspenseful stories. <number>2a</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> organize or arrange words or ideas. <i>Tagíka (itágik) únà pag-áyu ang ímung mga púlung nga igsusulti,</i> Compose what you are going to say carefully. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to tie things together. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. constructed by tying. <form>mag-r-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>composer</tr> of poems or songs.

<p><form>tagiktik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ticking</tr>, clicking. <i>Tinagiktik sa rilu,</i> <pb n=959>Ticking of the clock. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make the sound of tick-tick, pink-pink, or click-click. <i>Mitagiktik ang bildu nga nahúgan sa lansang,</i> The glass went pink-pink when the nails fell on it. <i>Hastang nakatagiktik sa íyang makinilya,</i> My! Her typewriter went clickity-clack.

<p><form>tagilhus</form> <xr>= <sc>TAGULHUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagilhaw</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>HILAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagilma</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>LIMA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagilpù</form> <xr>= <sc>TAKILPÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagiltil</form> <pos>n</pos> short, high-pitched somewhat resonant sounds: clink-clink. <i>Tinagiltil sa kutsára,</i> Clinking of spoons. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a clinking sound. <i>Mitagiltil ang tigib nga gimartilyu,</i> The chisel went clink-clink when he hit it with a hammer.

<p><form>tagilumbuy</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tree of the second growth forest: <bio>Eugenia sp</bio>.

<p><form>tagiluyluy</form> <xr>= <sc>BYATILIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagíma</form> <xr>= <sc>TAGILMA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagimata</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>MATA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagimtim<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> discoloration of teeth or surface roughness on metals, concrete, stone, due to exposure to the elements. <number>2</number> very tiny seashells found attached to stones or the bottoms of logs that have lain in the sand for a long time. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> be discolored and dirtied by the elements. <i>Munyumintu nga gitagimtiman na,</i> A monument that has been discolored by the elements. <number>2</number> <itype>[a4b4]</itype> stay long s.w. (as if long enough to develop <ix>tagimtim</ix>). <i>Gitagimtim (gitagimtiman) na lang ang lubut ug paninda, apan wà giyud muirug,</i> He has been in business for a long time, but he has never prospered.

<p><form>tagimtim<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tiny oyster found adhering in clumps on rocks along the shore, similar in flavor to <ix>sisi</ix>.

<p><form>tagingting</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> jingling or clanging sound. <number>2</number> <tr>resounding</tr>, ringing of voice. <i>Tagingting ang mandù sa sultan,</i> The sultan's command resounded. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> go ting-ting or clang-clang. <i>Nabátì níya ang tinagingting sa panagsingkì sa duha ka kris,</i> She heard the cling-clang of the two swords. <i>Tagingtínga (itagingting) ang kwarta kun minì ba,</i> Make the coin jingle to see if it's fake. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> for harsh words to ring in one's ears. <i>Nanagingting sa íyang dalunggan ang kasábà sa amahan,</i> Her father's scolding rang in her ears.

<p><form>taginhus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> go away from or arrive at a place, one by one or in small numbers. <i>Nagtaginhus pag-abut ang mga mananagat sa baybáyun,</i> The fishermen arrived at the shore one by one. <form>Culu-</form> <xr>= <sc>TAGINHUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagiptip</form> <pos>n</pos> dirt, grime that is stuck hard on s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> have dirt sticking hard on s.t. <i>Gitagiptipan ang labábu,</i> The sink was covered with grime. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> dirty, grimy with dirt stuck to it.

<p><form>tagitági</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> do s.t. little by little. <i>Madúgayng tagitági ug búhat ánà, mahuman ra man nà,</i> That work will get done if you do it <note> a</note> little at a time. <i>Tagitagíhun nákù pagbáyad ang útang,</i> I'll pay the debt off a little at a time.

<p><form>tagìtì</form><note>not sure</note> <pos>n</pos> tartar that sticks on the teeth or tobacco tars formed from smoking. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6N; a4b4]</itype> be incrusted with tartar or tobacco tars. <i>Nanagìtì<note>not sure</note> ang hunsuy sa hinabákù,</i> He smokes constantly so his pipe is incrusted with tars.

<p><form>tagiwálu</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>WALU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tag-íya</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ÍYA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagkus</form> <xr>= <sc>TAKGUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagmaya</form> <xr>= <sc>TAGBAYA<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagming</form> <xr>= <sc>TAGNING</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagmuk</form> <xr>= <sc>TAGNUK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagnà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>predict</tr>, <tr>prophesy</tr>. <i>Si Amus nagtagnà nga mahúlug ang Samarya,</i> Amos prophesied that Samaria would fall. <i>Hitagnaan níya nga patyun si Kinidi,</i> She predicted that Kennedy would be killed. <number>2</number> <tr>guess</tr>. <i>Tagnáag unsay ákung surprísa,</i> Guess what my surprise is. <pos>n</pos> <tr>guess</tr>, <tr>prediction</tr>, <tr>prophecy</tr>. <form>maN-r-/l-</form> <pos>n</pos> one who has power to predict, <tr>prophet</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>guesswork</tr>. <i>Púlus lang panagnà ang íyang panambal,</i> His treatment was pure guesswork. <form>paN-l-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prophecy</tr>.

<p><form>tagning</form> <pos>a</pos> resonant and high-pitched quality of voice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become resonant and high-pitched. <i>Nagkatagning ang íyang tíngug kay síging praktis,</i> Her voice is getting resonant and high-pitched because she constantly practices.

<p><form>tagnipà</form> <xr>= <sc>SIRBILYÍTA<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagnípis</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>NIPIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagnuk</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. gnat, tiny swarming insects of rice fields that bite. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infested with this k.o. gnat.

<p><form>tagpas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> <tr>permeate</tr>, penetrate through material. <i>Mitagpas ang ulan sa tulda,</i> The rain permeated through the tent. <number>2</number> <itype>[b1]</itype> be splotched with menstrual blood from menstruation. <i>Wà mutindug ang babáyi kay gitagpasan diay,</i> The woman didn't want to get up because her menstrual blood had seeped through her skirt.

<p><form>tagpilaw</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>PILAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagpis</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; c1P]</itype> slice s.t. thinly. <i>Tagpísun (itagpis) nákug hiwà ang kasahusun nga karni,</i> I'll slice the meat thin to make it into jerked meat. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be skinny <pb n=960>and slim. <i>Natagpis nà siya kay masakitun,</i> He is skinny because he is sickly.

<p><form>tagpud</form> <pos>a</pos> crisp, brittle and easily breaking into small pieces like glass or like dry and mealy sweet potatoes. <i>Ang tagpud nga kamúti kun lútù, uga ug unud nga húmuk mapulpug,</i> A powdery sweet potato is dry when it is cooked and has meat that crumbles readily. <i>Ang biskwit nga bag-ung lútù tagpud,</i> Newly baked biscuits are crisp. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> become crisp or brittle. <i>Nagtagpud ang íyang ngípun,</i> His teeth are crumbling.

<p><form>tagsa</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>USA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagsaun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. thick rattan used as a rope.

<p><form>tagsikan</form> <pos>n</pos> coconuts that are beginning to turn brown, but not completely matured.

<p><form>tagsip</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab7]</itype> cut s.t. off of s.t., cut in thin, long pieces (narrow or broad). <i>Halus makatagsip sa pánit sa káhuy ning sundánga,</i> This machete can hardly cut the bark off a tree. <i>Tagsípa ang kamúti,</i> Slice the yams into thin pieces. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> only a few of a large number. <i>Tinagsip lang ang makapasar sa bár,</i> Only a small percentage passes the bar. <number>2</number> thin chippings or slices.

<p><form>tagsuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB16; ac]</itype> pack elongated things tightly in an upright position using every bit of space. <i>Nagtagsuk ang mga táwu sa trak dikarga,</i> People were jampacked into the truck. <i>Tagsukun níya ang butilya sa sáku,</i> He will pack the bottles tightly into the sack. <i>Itagsuk ang putput sa alat,</i> Pack the sticks tightly in an upright position into the basket. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>pierce</tr>, plant into but not through. <i>Kinsay nagtagsuk ning sundang sa báni?</i> Who stuck the bolo into the banana trunk?

<p><form>tagù</form> <pos>a</pos> for fibrous materials to be weak, not strong and durable. <form>&mdash; ug kasingkásing, balatían</form> <pos>a</pos> easily moved emotionally. <i>Tagù ug kasingkásing (balatían) ang mga babáyi. Dalì da kaáyung madala sa pakilúuy,</i> Women are soft-hearted. They easily get carried away with pity. <form>&mdash; ug mata</form> <pos>a</pos> shedding tears easily.<i> Tagù siyag mata. Bísan diyútay lang kaguul, muhílak dáyun,</i> She cries at the slightest provocation. Let anything go wrong and she bursts into tears. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> for fibrous materials to become weak. <i>Mutagù (matagù) ang sinínà kun sigíhag klúruks,</i> Clothes become weak if you keep washing them with chlorox. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> a of a weak sort.

<p><form>tágù</form> <pos>a</pos> hidden from view. <i>Tágù kaáyu ílang balay gíkan sa karsáda,</i> Their house is well hidden from view from the road. <form>sa &mdash;</form> in secret. <i>Nahigugma siya nímu sa tágù,</i> She loves you in secret. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be hidden from view. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB3; b5c2]</itype> <tr>hide</tr>, keep away from view or knowledge. <i>Didtu siya mutágù luyu sa kamálig,</i> He hid behind the barn. <i>Makatágù ka bag sikrítu?</i> Can you keep a secret? <i>Walà ku tagúa (tagúi, itágù) ang sulat,</i> I did not hide the letter. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b5c2]</itype> put away in a safe place for future use. <i>Nagtágù ka ug sud-an pára ugmà?</i> Did you put away some food for tomorrow? <form>tagùtagù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> hide away in fear, do in secret. <i>Nagtagùtagù silag panagtagbù kay minyù man ang babáyi,</i> They have their meetings secretly because the woman is married. <form>tagùtágù, tagùtaguay</form> <pos>n</pos> game of <tr>hide-and-seek</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> play hide-and-seek. <form>-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> hiding place; hideout. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. hidden. <form>Kristung -in-</form> a religious sect, the ceremonies of which are strictly private. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <note> <number>1</number></note> <tr>secret</tr>. <i>Nasáyud na ku sa ímung tinagúan,</i> I know your secret. <number>2</number> s.t. kept from being lost or used up. <i>Gastúha na lang ang ímung tinagúan,</i> Just spend your savings. <form>ma-in-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>secretive</tr>. <form>ka-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> feel very much like hiding oneself. <form>-um-r-, -um-l-</form> <pos>n</pos> be about to hide.

<p><form>taguangkan</form> (from <ix>tágù</ix> and <ix>anak</ix>) <pos>n</pos> womb, esp. of animals.

<p><form>tagubtub</form> <pos>n</pos> deep, resonant, thumping sound produced by pounding. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> emit a boomp boomp sound. <i>Mitagubtub ang íyang likud nga gisumbag,</i> His back went thump when it was struck. <form>Bul-ánung &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> pure Boholano (humorous). <i>Bul-ánung tagubtub, pakisabaw, pakibahug, usa ka buuk itlug, sabwag pitu ka sag-ub,</i> A pure Boholano is so fond of soup and food mixed with soup that he uses seven bamboo containers full of water to boil one egg.

<p><form>tágud<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> plant in a seedbed, esp. rice, but also other plants. <i>Magtágud na ta pára pangulílang,</i> Let's plant the seedbed now for the second crop. <i>Itágud sa kahun ang kamátis,</i> Plant the tomatoes in the box. <number>1a</number> <itype>[B2456]</itype> for a rice field to have a certain capacity. <i>Mutágud ning basáka ug usa ka bákid,</i> This rice field is big enough to have one cavan planted on it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> drop in several numbers. <i>Nagtágud siyag lima ka pasul,</i> He dropped four hooks and lines. <i>Gitágud ang mga bumba sa syudad,</i> The bombs were dropped on the city. <number>3</number> <itype>[B125]</itype> be covered with wounds, sores. <i>Natágud sa núka ang makililímus,</i> The beggar is covered with sores. <pos>n</pos> rice seedlings. <form>taguran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>seedbed</tr>.[+]

<p><form>tágud<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cut or slice into small, but not fine, pieces. <i>Gitágud ang kamúti nga giságul sa kan-un,</i> The potatoes that were boiled with the rice were sliced into small pieces. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB125; a]</itype> tear into pieces. <i>Bátà ang mitágud sa piryudiku,</i> It was the child <pb n=961>who tore the newspaper into pieces. <i>Nagkatagud ang tualya,</i> The towel is being reduced to tatters. <form>tagudtagud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>cut</tr> s.t. small into many pieces. <number>2</number> cut s.t. with short, fast chopping strokes. <i>Tagudtagurun ta ka rung tikasána ka!</i> I will chop you to bits, you cheat, you!

<p><form>tagudtud</form> <pos>a</pos> having the quality of being <tr>rubbery</tr> when bitten by the teeth but yielding when subjected to increased pressure. <i>Ang unud sa budyung tagudtud apan lamì,</i> The meat of the conch shell is rubbery but delicious. <i>Tagudtud kan-un ang hilawhílaw nga linung-ag,</i> Inadequately cooked rice is not soft enough. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be rubbery in consistency.

<p><form>taguk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sticky</tr> sap of plants and fruits. <number>2</number> sticky, thin, membranous substance that sticks on the body of a newly-delivered child. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b8]</itype> give off sap. <i>Mutaguk ang kapáyas ug tigbásun,</i> The papaya will give off sap if it is cut. <i>Hingtagukan ang ákung sinínà,</i> My shirt got smeared with sap. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> for s.t. to be sticky with sap. <i>Dì na nà makataguk kay uga na,</i> That sap won't stick because it is dry. <number>1b</number> <itype>[B]</itype> for sap to get sticky. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> catch s.t. with a sticky substance, esp. the sap of a plant. <i>Tagukun ku nang langgáma,</i> I'll catch that bird with sticky sap. <number>3</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> remove, gather the sticky sap. <i>Ákung tagukan ning púsù úsà utánun,</i> I'll remove the sap from this banana blossom before I cook it. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> have sticky substance all over it. <i>Nagkatáguk ang bátà nga bag-ung natáwu,</i> The newborn baby had sticky substance all over it. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> a child having thin sticky substance on him at birth. <number>2</number> producing plenty of sticky sap. <i>Tagukun kaáyung gumáha,</i> Rubber tree producing lots of latex. <number>3</number> having lots of sticky sap on it.

<p><form>taguktuk</form> (from <ix>tuktuk</ix>) <pos>n</pos> knocking, thumping sound. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make a knocking sound. <i>Mitaguktuk ku sa pultahan apan way miabli,</i> I knocked at the door, but nobody opened. <i>Ayawg itaguktuk ang sapátus,</i> Don't let your shoes thump.

<p><form>taguláki</form> <xr>= <sc>TAGURALÁKI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagulhus</form> (from <ix>ulhus</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> do s.t., come out <tr>in turns</tr> or <tr>alternately</tr>. <i>Nagtagulhus ang háguk sa duha ka táwu,</i> The two men were snoring alternately with each other. <i>Itagulhus (tagulhusun) sila pagpabantay sa masakitun,</i> They will be assigned to watch the sick man in turns.

<p><form>tagulílung</form> (from <ix>tágù</ix> and <ix>lílung</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. <tr>charm</tr> which enables a person to appear and disappear at will, said to be the egg of a k.o. bird (the <ix>tuktur</ix>) which flies only after dusk when he can be heard but not seen. The egg is also invisible but obtainable through magical procedures. <number>2</number> person who possesses this charm. <number>2a</number> one who disappears as suddenly as he appeared. <i>Mabáwu man tag pangítà nímu. Mu ra man kag tagulílung,</i> I've been going crazy looking for you. You are harder to find than a <ix>tagulílung</ix>. <number>3</number> name also given to the <ix>tuktur</ix> bird.

<p><form>tagultul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a signalling device made of a nodule of bamboo having the nodes covering both ends and a slit on the side. <number>2</number> thonking sound. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> beat this <tr>bamboo resounder</tr> or produce a similar sound. <i>Mutagultul siya arun pagtawag sa mga silíngan,</i> He sounds the bamboo resounder to call the neighbors.<i> Mutagultul ang likiun nga kawáyan kun dukdúkun sa káhuy,</i> A cracked bamboo tube will make the sound of thonk-thonk if you beat it with a stick.

<p><form>tagultul<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>TAGAWTAW</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>tagul-ul</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. bird.

<p><form>tágum</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>indigo</tr>: <bio>Indigofera suffruticosa</bio>. <form>panimáhung &mdash;</form> for leafy vegetables to develop a fetid smell when they wither. <i>Ngánung nagpalit ka ánang kamunggay nga nanimáhù nang tágum?</i> Why did you buy <ix>kamunggay</ix> that isn't fresh? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>dye</tr> s.t. dark or <tr>stain</tr> s.t. <i>Ang nayabung tintà mitágum sa mantil,</i> The ink spilled and blackened the tablecloth. <i>Gitágum níya ang pughaw níyang sinínà,</i> She dyed her faded dress black. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> become dark, black. <i>Mutágum ka kun magpúnay kag kalígù sa dágat,</i> You will become dark if you keep going swimming. <i>Nagtágum ang lángit, muulan tingáli,</i> The sky is getting dark. Maybe it is going to rain. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having the smell of indigo leaves (not fresh). <number>2</number> <tr>dark</tr>, <tr>gloomy</tr>, <tr>dirty-looking</tr>.

<p><form>tagumbul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)46; a12]</itype> produce a deep, thudding sound. <i>Mitagumbul ang bungbung nga naigù sa lamísa nga gitulud,</i> The wall made a <tr>thud</tr> when the table was pushed against it.

<p><form>tágun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>patient</tr>, <tr>long-suffering</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> endure with patience. <i>Mitágun giyud siyag bantay bísag gikapuy siya,</i> He endured the long hours of the vigil even though he was very tired. <i>Tagúna lang ang kasakit, kadalì ra lagi,</i> Just endure the pain. It won't last, I assure you. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>patience</tr>, <tr>endurance</tr>.

<p><form>tagungtung</form> <pos>n</pos> short, vibrant, low-pitched sound, such as that produced by a small closed gong. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a <ix>tung-tung</ix> sound. <i>Tagungtúngun (itagungtung) ni pára sa sáyawng Muslim,</i> This gong will be clanged <pb n=962>during the Moslem dance.

<p><form>taguntun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> half the value of a domestic animal. <i>Bayinti písus mauy taguntun sa ákung bábuy nga íyang gibatunan,</i> He took care of my pig for which I gave him half the value, twenty pesos<note>full stop . ?</note> <i>Baktin mauy ákung taguntun sa katungà sa litsun níya,</i> I exchanged a piglet for one-half of his roast pig. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> give one-half the value of a domestic animal. <i>Ákù na ning bábuy kay nakataguntun na ku,</i> I've given for half the value of this pig for raising it, so it is all mine now.

<p><form>taguntun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>swellings</tr> around the legs or swollen glands in the joints, groin, axilla. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b4N]</itype> suffer this sort of swelling.

<p><form>taguraláki</form> (from <ix>laki</ix>) <pos>n</pos> male <tr>papaya</tr> (that bears no fruit, but bears male flowers).

<p><form>tagurha</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>DUHA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tag-usà</form> <xr>= <sc>TALAGSA</sc></xr>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>USA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagustus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> for rope to <tr>unwind</tr>, get undone. <i>Usba pagbúbud ang písì kay nagtagustus na,</i> Wind the rope again because it is <tr>unreeling</tr>. <i>Itagustus (tagustúsa) ang mga lánut nga gibugkus,</i> Undo the abaca fibers that had been tied in place. <number>2</number> <itype>[AP; c1P]</itype> pay out a line slowly. <i>Ikay tagustus (patagustus) sa láyag inigkusug sa hángin,</i> Lower the sails slowly when the wind begins to blow hard. <i>Tagustúsi ang tabánug. Taas bítaw ang lambu,</i> Give the kite more line. Anyway it has a long line.

<p><form>tagùtù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>chop</tr> rapidly with short strokes so that the result comes out finely minced. <i>Átung tagùtúun ang dabung nga iságul sa kinílaw,</i> Let's chop the young bamboo shoots into fine pieces to mix them with the salad. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>minced</tr> finely.

<p><form>tagùtù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> clicking of the tongue. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>TALÙTÙ</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> click the tongue. <i>Kahibáwu kang mutagùtù?</i> Do you know how to click your tongue? <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> click the tongue in exasperation, dejection, anger. <i>Nagpanagùtù siya kay napildi,</i> He kept clicking his tongue in dejection because he lost. <pos>n</pos> action of clicking the tongue.

<p><form>tagùtù<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>TALÙTÙ<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagutungan</form> <xr>= <sc>DUTÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tagyaw</form> <xr>= <sc>TADIYAW</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>tagyum</form> <xr>= <sc>LALUM</sc></xr> <i>1, 3, 4</i> (dialectal).

<p><form>tahà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b3(1)]</itype> feel shyness or inhibition in the presence of s.o. who commands distant respect. <i>Matahà siyang mudúul ug dagkung táwu,</i> He is afraid to approach big shots. <i>Paríhu ra nátù nang ímung gikatahaan,</i> You feel shy in his presence, but he is just like us. <form>panahàtáhà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> hesitate to do s.t. due to reservation, tact, or shyness. <i>Manahàtáhà pa giyud nà siyag sampit sa ákung ng&amacracu;n,</i> Why does he hesitate to address me by name? <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> shyness due to respect. <form>ka-an, ka-an(&larr;)</form> a worthy of distant respect. <form>ma-un(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> shy due to respect.

<p><form>tahal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> sharpen a pencil. <i>Talhi <corr sic="(ta "></corr>(tahali) ang lápis,</i> Sharpen the pencil. <pos>n</pos> <tr>pencil sharpener</tr>. <form>talhanan</form> <pos>n</pos> pencil or s.t. which needs sharpening.

<p><form>tahan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <number>1</number> offer part of the body in anticipation. <i>Íyang gitahan ang náwung níya arun hagkan,</i> She put her face forward to be kissed. <number>2</number> <tr>offer</tr>, <tr>render up</tr>, <tr>offer up</tr> in trust. <i>Itahan ku kining k<note>can't identify</note><note>P2 guesses kinabuhì.</note> sa kahitas-*an,</i> I'll <tr>entrust</tr> my life to the Almighty. <number>3</number> offer without reservation. <i>Itahan<note>can't identify</note><note>corrected. P2</note> sa kaáway ang pagpasaylu,</i> Offer forgiveness to the enemy. <number>4</number> for bets to be placed or handed over usually before the start of the game. <i>Itahan nang ímung pusta arun sugdan ang dúlà,</i> Place your bets so that the game may start. <number>5</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> offer a <tr>bond</tr>, <tr>security</tr>. <i>Itahan ku ang ákung yútà sa salapì nga hulaman ku nímu,</i> I will put up my land as security for the money that I will borrow from you. <pos>n</pos> <tr>bond</tr>, <tr>guarantee</tr>. <i>Ímu na kining singsing silbing tahan sa ákung pagmahal nímu,</i> Take this ring as a guarantee of my love for you<note>full stop . ?</note>

<p><form>táhap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256N; b3(1]</itype> be <tr>suspicious</tr>. <i>Nanagána siya kay natáhap sa ákung túyù,</i> She hesitated because she was suspicious of my motives. <i>Siya ang gikatahápang tulisan,</i> He is the <tr>suspected</tr> robber. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> assume s.o. to be guilty without good evidence. <i>Kung manáhap ka, tinúa únà,</i> If you presume s.o. guilty, be sure to ascertain the facts first. <pos>n</pos> <tr>suspicion</tr>. <i>Ang ákung panáhap nga minyù tung tawhána natinúud giyud,</i> My suspicion that that man was married came out true. <form>ka-an</form> <xr>= <sc>PAN-</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr> <form>ma-un, manggi-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>suspicious</tr>.

<p><form>táhas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> task or duty one must fulfill prior to acquiring possession of supernatural powers. <i>Dúnay táhas únà makahuput ug urasiyun,</i> You must perform a task before you may acquire a magic formula. <number>2</number> <tr>mission</tr> one is bound by vow or otherwise to accomplish. <i>Matag táwu adúnay táhas sa kalibútan,</i> Each man has a mission on this earth. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; c5]</itype> make a vow to accomplish s.t. <i>Tahásun ku ang pagtúman sa íyang túgun,</i> I will make it my mission to fulfill her commands. <number>2</number> <itype>[c]</itype> assign as a mission. <i>Akuy gitahásan pagpatay nímu,</i> I was entrusted with a mission to kill you. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> able to be in some place alone without fear. <i>Makatáhas ka bag mintiryu?</i> Do you dare go to the cemetery alone?

<p><form>tahì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>sew</tr>, <tr>stitch</tr>. <i>Kinahanglang tahiun <pb n=963>ning samad,</i> This wound requires stitches. <i>Gitahian ku níyag birmúda,</i> He sewed a pair of bermuda shorts for me. <pos>n</pos> <tr>stitches</tr>. <form>-anan(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dress</tr>, <tr>tailor shop</tr>. <form>maN-r-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>seamstress</tr>, <tr>dressmaker</tr>. <form>-unun(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> pieces of cloth to be made into s.t.

<p><form>tahirig</form> (from <ix>hirig</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <tr>lean</tr>, <tr>tilt</tr> to one side. <i>Nagtahirig ang lubi padúlung sa karsáda,</i> The coconut tree is leaning towards the road. <i>Tahiriga (itahirig) pagtanum ang páka sa tubu,</i> Plant the cuttings of sugar cane stalks in a leaning position.

<p><form>tahisyan, tahisyan bird</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>dance</tr> wherein the buttocks wiggle like the tail of a bird. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> perform this dance.

<p><form>tahu, tahù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ginger tea</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> have ginger tea.

<p><form>tahù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>notify</tr>, <tr>inform</tr>. <i>Itahù kini níya arun siya mahibáwu,</i> Inform him of this so that he will know. <pos>n</pos> <tr>reports</tr> about an event. <form>tahùtáhù</form> <pos>n</pos> idle <tr>gossip</tr>, <tr>reports</tr> passed around to instigate a quarrel. <i>Nagpalákat silag tahùtáhù arun magkadisgustu ta,</i> They are spreading idle gossip to make us quarrel.

<p><form>tahud</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>spur</tr> of fowls and birds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> <number>1</number> get one's spurs. <i>Walà pa tadhi ang sunuy,</i> The rooster hasn't gotten his spurs yet. <number>2</number> become <tr>experienced</tr>. <form>tadhan</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>experienced</tr> and <tr>authoritative</tr> in one's line of work. <i>Tadhan siyang kusiníru,</i> He is an experienced cook. <form>tahudtahud</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> growths on the body, usually near the joints, which look like the spurs of the rooster. <number>2</number> small boils on small children's heads.

<p><form>táhud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23; a12]</itype> <tr>obey</tr>. <i>Tahúra úsà ang ákung gipabúhat úsà magdúwà,</i> Do what I tell you to before you play. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>respect</tr>. <i>Tahúra ang ímung ginikánan,</i> Respect your parents. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A3; c6]</itype> use an address of respect to an elder. <i>Nagtáhud siya nákug Tiyù,</i> He <tr>addresses</tr> me as Uncle. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>respect</tr>. <number>2</number> address of respect. <i>Púpuy ang ámung táhud níya,</i> We addressed him as Grandpa. <form>pa-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> be <tr>arrogant</tr>, demanding of more respect than one has the right to. <i>À, mu pay muhangyù mau pay mupatáhud!</i> Hm, here you go acting as if you want me to kiss your feet when you are asking me for a favor! <form>tahuray</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> respect each other. <i>Ángay magtahuray ang managsúun,</i> Brothers must respect each other. <form>katahúran, pangatahúran</form> <pos>n</pos> words of greeting. <i>Nangáyù mig pangatahúran (katahúran) apan way mitubag nga tagbalay,</i> We called out <tr>greetings</tr> but no one in the house answered. <form>pangatahúran</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> say words of respect or greetings. <i>Nangatahúran sila paglabay sa párì,</i> When the priest passed by they <tr>greeted</tr> him. <form>matinahúrun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>respectful</tr>. <number>2</number> <ix>short for</ix> <form>kanímu matinahúrun</form> <ix>in the complimentary closing of a letter:</ix> &lsquo;<tr>Respectfully yours</tr>&rsquo;. <form>talahúrun</form> <pos>n</pos> term of address to a person of distinction. <i>Duha sila ka táwu, talahúrun,</i> There were two of them, <tr>sire</tr>.

<p><form>tahum</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>beautiful</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B24; a12]</itype> be beautiful. <i>Mutahum ka pa kun mangarmin,</i> You'll be more beautiful if you wear make-up. <i>Nagkatahum ang kalibútan sukad ku ikaw makítà,</i> The world has become a more beautiful place since I met you. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make oneself up. <form>pa-, pangpa-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>beauty products</tr>. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>beauty</tr>, <tr>loveliness</tr>. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> great <tr>beauty</tr> (literary). <form>ma-</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>beautiful</tr>, <tr>lovely</tr>.

<p><form>tàhung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put s.t. over and around s.t. else or hang it over. <i>Akuy nagtàhung ug kawit dihà sa palwa,</i> I was the one that hung a toddy container over the palm frond. <i>Gitàhúngan níya ang kingki,</i> He put a shade over the kerosene lamp. <i>Láta ang itàhung sa pusti arun dílì dáyun magabuk sa ulan,</i> Slip paint cans over the posts so they will not rot in the rain.

<p><form>tahup</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chaff</tr> of cereals. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> separate the <tr>husk</tr> from husked grains. <i>Taphi nang linubuk,</i> <tr>Winnow</tr> the pounded rice. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> full of chaff, <tr>chaffy</tr>. <i>Ayúha paglimpiyu ang bugas kay tahupun,</i> Clean the rice well. It's still full of chaff. <form>taphanan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> ground cereals to be winnowed. <number>2</number> place where winnowing is done.

<p><form>tahur</form> <pos>a</pos> having the <tr>imposing</tr> posture of s.o. rich or of high rank. <i>Tahur kaáyu siyang tan-áwun, apan nanghulam ra diayg bisti,</i> He looks very imposing, but in reality he's wearing borrowed clothes. <pos>n</pos> big-time, professional gambler. <form>sugarul nga &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>TAHUR</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> make oneself look imposing so as to appear rich or of high rank.

<p><form>tahuri, tahúri, tahurì, tahúris</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible <tr>bean</tr> slightly bigger than the mung and rusty brown in color, growing wild and cultivated: <bio>Phaseolus calcaratus</bio>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> have <ix>tahuri</ix>.

<p><form>tahusyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>soy beans</tr> preserved in soy sauce. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> cook with preserved soy beans. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> have <ix>tahusyu</ix> as the only food to eat with the staple.

<p><form>tahuy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make a clay pot nonporous by heating it and then putting shredded coconut or vinegar in it. <i>Kinahanglan tahuyun úsà ang kúlun únà gawía,</i> You must treat the pot before you use it.

<p><form>tahuy<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>soup</tr> made of sweet potatoes cut into small pieces boiled in water with nothing else. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> fix this soup.

<p><form>tái</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>feces</tr> of people and animals. <number>2</number> in the <pb n=964>game of <ix>bíku</ix>, the act of stepping on the line. <number>3</number> <tr>dross</tr> from molten metal. <i>Tigúma ang tái sa kalbúru kay ipintal ta sa batu,</i> Keep the dross of melted carbide because we can use it to paint the stones. <form>dakung &mdash;</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>DAKÙ</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4(1)]</itype> get feces on it. <i>Mataíhan (mataihan) nang hapin ug iságul sa taíhun,</i> That diaper will get feces on it if you put it with the dirty ones. <form>taitai</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B145S; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. with difficulty and turn out poor results. <i>Nagtaitai kus iksámin. Hagbung ku adtu,</i> I found the examination hard. I'll probably fail it. <number>1a</number> <form>&mdash; ang búhat</form> do one piece of work after another and leave most everything unfinished. <i>Dì ku gustung magtaitai ang ákung búhat,</i> I don't want to begin another job before I finish the work at hand. <number>2</number> for a pen not to function well, resulting in dirty penmanship. <number>3</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for plants to be growing at different heights in one field or bed. <i>Init ang nakataitai (nakapataitai) pagtúbu sa mga maís<note> mais ?</note>,</i> The heat of the sun caused the corn plants to grow at different heights. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> take out entrails of animals. <number>2</number> clean the entrails of feces. <i>Paghinái nákù sa bábuy, napisà ang apdu,</i> When I took the pig's entrails, I squashed the gall bladder. <number>3</number> have a woman for sexual intercourse. <form>ka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> get feces all over it. <form>taíhun</form> <pos>a</pos> dirty with feces. <form>-in-</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>TINÁI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>taka</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> get tired of doing s.t. and thus cease. <i>Mitaka na siya,</i> wà na maghilak, He got sick of crying so he stopped. <i>Gitak-an kug hinuwat nímu, maung mipaúlì lang ku,</i> I got tired waiting for you so I just went home. <number>2</number> <itype>[c5]</itype> not like to do s.t. <i>Kun dì mu ikataka palíhug buháta kini,</i> If you don't <tr>mind</tr>, please do this for me. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> feeling of <tr>boredom</tr> or of being <tr>fed up</tr>. <form>ma-</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>boring</tr>, <tr>tiresome</tr>, <form>tak-ánun, matak-ánun, matalak-un</form> <pos>a</pos> easily bored, tending to lose interest.

<p><form>*takà, *tákà</form> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> do s.t. without really knowing how to do it, without regards as to how he is doing it. <i>Maghibús ka kun magpatákà (magpatakà) kag káun,</i> You will have diarrhea if you eat indiscriminately. <i>Patakai lag ansir. Sambahan lagi,</i> Just answer them at random. You'll guess some right. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> tell s.t. untrue, inaccurate. <i>Nagpatákà lang bisag siyay nánguna,</i> He's <tr>lying</tr>. He started the fight.

<p><form>takaba, takabà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> wrap a piece of cloth or the like around the body, esp. the torso. <i>Human kag kalígù magtakaba kag tualya kay musihag ang sinínà,</i> After you swim, you should put a towel around you because you can see through your dress. <number>2</number> use as a shield or cover for any part of the body. <i>Nagtakaba siyag papil tungud sa ínit,</i> She put a piece of paper over her head to protect her from the heat of the sun. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> carry s.t. on the back or shoulders by tying it. <number>3a</number> carry s.o. on the back or shoulders not tied. <i>Gitakaba ni Mulit ang íyang manghud,</i> Mulit carried his little brother <tr>pick-a-back</tr>. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; aP]</itype> for animals to <tr>mate</tr>. <number>4a</number> have <tr>intercourse</tr> (derogatory). <i>Mitakaba ka uruy ánang mubug lupad,</i> You went to bed with that pig of a woman. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> wrap-*around cloth. <number>2</number> s.t. to cover one's head or shoulders.

<p><form>takad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> step on a line or specific area. <i>Dì ka mutakad sa bágis kay páwul ka,</i> If you step on the line, you are foul. <i>Kining batúha ímung takaran (takdan) arun makaabut ka sa búnga,</i> Step on this stone so that you can reach the fruit. <form>takdanan</form> <pos>n</pos> in games, the line on which one steps at the start or any phase of the game.

<p><form>tákal<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>volume</tr>, <tr>contents</tr>. <i>Ang garapun dakug tákal kay sa básu,</i> A jar holds more than a glass. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>measure</tr> out in a certain volume. <i>Gitákal níla sa bukag ang kamúti,</i> They measured the sweet potatoes by baskets. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB; c]</itype> for a measure to become full, cause it to do so. <i>Lainláing butang ang nagtákal sa íyang pitáka,</i> Her bag was <tr>filled</tr> with all different things. <i>Nagkatakal ang baldi sa hinayhínayng túlù sa túbig,</i> The pail is slowly <tr>filling up</tr> with water dripping into it. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> a measuring box, basket, or can of any convenient size.

<p><form>tákal<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC2; b(1)]</itype> for male pigs to <tr>mount</tr> another animal; by extension, for humans to do so (derogatory). <i>Kaduha takáling anáya únà mumabdus,</i> This sow was mounted twice before it got pregnant. <form>bu-(&rarr;)</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>BUTAKAL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tak-al</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c16]</itype> for a cover not to be closed tight, door to be <tr>ajar</tr>. <i>Ang kaban nga labihang kapunù mitak-al,</i> The trunk was part open because it was too full.

<p><form>takam, tákam</form> <pos>a</pos> ravenous. <i>Ang táwung takam mukáun bísan unsa,</i> A ravenous person will eat anything. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B]</itype> be <tr>hungry</tr>, ravenous. <i>Kinsay dílì mutakam (matakam) nga tulu ka adlaw wà miy káun gawas sa prútas,</i> Who wouldn't become ravenous when for three days we did not have anything to eat except fruits. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> take a large bite, <tr>chew</tr>. <i>May nagtakam sa kík kay gamay na lang ang nahibilin,</i> S.o. took a big bite from the cake because only a small portion of it is left. <i>Itakam (takama) ug maáyu ang <pb n=965>kan-un únà tunla,</i> Chew the food well before you swallow it. <form>takamtakam</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; c16]</itype> <tr>smack the lips</tr>. <i>Nagtakamtakam ang bátà kay miángay sa lamì sa gátas,</i> The child is smacking his lips because he likes the milk. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> await eagerly. <i>Nagtakamtakam na ku sa lamì sa mga sud-an,</i> I am eagerly <tr>anticipating</tr> the delicious food.

<p><form>takandal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P]</itype> for vehicles to run with a jouncing, bouncing motion. <i>Mutakandal na pud ang trák kun mulabang sa kabatuan,</i> The truck will bounce again when it crosses the stony area. <number>2</number> <itype>[B46; c1]</itype> make a <tr>clacking</tr>, banging sound. <i>Mitakandal ang bakyà sa simintádung dálan,</i> The wooden slippers went clickety clack over the cemented walk. <i>Ang táru nga way sulud mitakandal kay ákung hipatiran,</i> The empty can <tr>rattled</tr> when I kicked it.

<p><form>tákang</form> <xr>= <sc>LÁKANG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tak-ang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put a pot or kettle on the stove. <i>Itak-ang na ang lung-agúnun,</i> Put the rice on the stove. <form>tak-angánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>stove</tr>. <number>2</number> pot or kettle rest.

<p><form>tákas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; ac]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>go up</tr> an incline. <i>Takásun pa nátù ang pitu ka bungtud úsà muabut sa píkas baybay,</i> We still have to <tr>ascend</tr> seven hills before we get to the other side of the island. <i>Kining bakilíra dílì katakásan ug gamayng awtu,</i> A small car cannot negotiate this slope. <number>2</number> go <tr>ashore</tr>. <i>Ang pawíkan mutákas arun mangitlug,</i> The sea turtles <tr>go ashore</tr> to lay their eggs. <i>Dì ta makatákas kay balud kaáyu,</i> We can't go ashore because the sea is very rough. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> land from a sea attack. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> escape from prison. <i>Tulu na ka prisuhan ang ílang gitakásan,</i> They have already escaped from three prisons.

<p><form>takba</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> lean forward on s.t. or s.o. and cling to it. <i>Mitakba siya sa bukubuku sa íyang bána nga nagkaun,</i> She <tr>leaned on</tr> her husband's back while he was eating. <i>Maáyu kay nakatakba siyag bátang pagkalúnud sa barku,</i> Luckily he was able to cling to a log for support when the boat sunk. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> carry a child closely in one's arms with the child facing one. <i>Takbáha ang bátà kun butdan sa tiyan,</i> Carry the child with his stomach pressed against you if he has gas in the stomach. <number>3</number> <itype>[AC; b(1)]</itype> <tr>mount</tr> for copulation, as if for copulation. <i>Mitakba na ang butù apan dì gustu ang bayi,</i> The male mounted, but the female did not like it. <number>3a</number> for humans to <tr>have intercourse</tr> (coarse). <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> wrap a part of the body with s.t. <i>Gitakbahan níyag dyákit ang bukubuku sa dalága,</i> He covered the girl's back with a jacket.

<p><form>takbas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> swing a bolo or a similar bladed instrument. <i>Mitakbas siyag bálus apan lúya na siya,</i> He swung a bolo to retaliate but he was already too weak. <number>2</number> sever with a swing of the bolo. <i>Si Simyun ang mitakbas sa gamayng punúan sa ságing,</i> Simeon cut down the small banana trunk in one stroke.

<p><form>takbuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>hug</tr>, <tr>cling</tr> closely in order not to fall. <i>Mitakbuy ang tikì sa bukubuku sa manananggut,</i> The gecko clung tightly to the toddy gatherer's back. <i>Nakatakbuy ang anak sa láwas sa inahan dihang midugdug,</i> The child clung to his mother when it thundered. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> <tr>infect</tr> with a disease. <i>Tíbi ang mitakbuy níya,</i> He <tr>contracted</tr> T.B. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23P; b(1)]</itype> stay with s.o., usually as a dependent. <i>Siyay ákung gitakbúyan ug dúgay kay kwartáhan man,</i> I stayed long at her house because she was wealthy.

<p><form>takdà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>schedule</tr>, set a date. <i>Átung itakdà ang sunud nátung tígum,</i> We will set the date for our next meeting. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>sign</tr>, put a <tr>mark</tr> on. <i>Siyay mitakdà (nagtakdà) sa sulat,</i> He signed the letter. <i>Takdái ug íkis ang punúan sa lubi,</i> Mark the trunks of the coconut trees with an X. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>signature</tr>, <tr>mark</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>reminder</tr>; s.t. that is used as a reminder. <i>Ang anínu sa pusti mauy ákung takdà sa úras,</i> The shadow of the post is my reminder of the time. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>TAKDÀ</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>takdang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <number>1</number> hack or lodge a blade laterally into s.t. <i>Ang amul wà makatakdang sa punúan sa káhuy,</i> The dull bolo did not cut the trunk of the tree. <number>2</number> make <tr>notches</tr>, <tr>nick</tr>. <i>Ang bátà mauy mitakdang sa tiil sa silya,</i> The child made notches on the legs of the chair. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> strike the forehead with s.t. heavy. <i>Akuy mutakdang ug puthaw sa ímung agtang,</i> I'll strike your forehead with an iron rod.

<p><form>takdù</form> <tr>exactly</tr>, no more and no less. <i>Takdù karung diyis anyus ang átung kaminyúun,</i> We have been married for exactly ten years today. <i>Takdù sa gikasabútan,</i> In exact accordance with their agreement. <i>Takdù giyud sa nahitabù ang íyang tahù,</i> His report turned out to be exactly in agreement with what had happened. <form>&mdash; ang búwan</form> for the moon to be full. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB256C3; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> for things that are joined to fit exactly at their point of junction, make s.t. fit. <i>Walà mutakdù ang takub sa kaban,</i> The cover of the trunk doesn't fit squarely. <i>Takdúa (itakdù) ang duha ka iskína arun tíkup,</i> Have the corners meet and fit to make it tight. <number>2</number> <tr>coincide</tr>, be in agreement with each other; <pb n=966>make things be in agreement. <i>Ang íyang kamatáyun ug ang ímung damgu nagkatakdù lang,</i> His death and your dream were just a <tr>coincidence</tr>. <i>Itakdù ang ímung bakak sa akúa arun katuúhan,</i> Make your lie be in <tr>accordance</tr> with mine so they will be plausible. <number>3</number> be <tr>appropriate</tr>. <i>Kinahanglang mutakdù ang ímung isul-ub sa ukasiyun,</i> Your attire must <tr>fit</tr> the occasion. <number>3a</number> <itype>[C3]</itype> be on compatible terms with each other. <i>Nagkatakdù ang duha ka buringug,</i> The two fools <tr>hit it off</tr> nicely. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> point of junction, place s.t. meets.

<p><form>takdul<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>DAKTUL</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>takduy</form> <xr>= <sc>TAGDUY</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>takgus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>fasten</tr> s.t. to s.t. with a knotted cord. <i>Palíhug rag takgus sa ríbun sa ákung<note>not sure, whether letter is missing</note><note>P2, P3 thinks it's just a stray mark.</note> buhuk,</i> Please tie my hair up for me with a ribbon. <i>Takgúsun na silang duha sa talikálà sa kaminyúun,</i> They are going to be <tr>bound</tr> together in wedlock. <i>Ang salug nga kawáyan takgúsan ug uway ngadtu sa busaug,</i> The bamboo flooring is <tr>tied</tr> to the joists with rattan. <number>2</number> tie into a loop that easily gets undone. <i>Takgúsa ang list&ucaron;n sa ákung sapátus,</i> Tie my shoelace. <number>3</number> tie s.t. around s.t. <i>Nagtakgus siyag sundang sa háwak,</i> He strapped a bolo around his waist. <i>Itakgus ang tarì sa tiil sa hiniktan,</i> Tie the gaff around the cock's leg. <pos>n</pos> s.t. that is fastened to s.t. else by entwining or the like. <form>-in-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> the knotted part of s.t. tied. <i>Tan-áwa nga dílì mailhan ang tinakgusan,</i> See to it that the knotted part does not show.

<p><form>takiang</form> (from <ix>kiang</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> walk limpingly. <i>Nagtakiang siya kay nalisa ang tiil,</i> He is <tr>limping</tr> because he sprained his foot.

<p><form>tákig</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>malaria</tr>. <number>2</number> any disease characterized by chills and shaking. <number>2a</number> fit of shivering due to illness. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; b4]</itype> <number>1</number> be afflicted with malaria. <number>2</number> have the <tr>chills</tr>. <i>Gitakígan ang masakitun,</i> The patient had the chills. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> one afflicted with malaria.

<p><form>takigrapíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stenography</tr>, <tr>shorthand</tr>.

<p><form>takigrapu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stenographer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> be, become a stenographer.

<p><form>takihud, takíhud</form> (from <ix>kihud</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> <tr>limp</tr>. <i>Nagtakihud siya tungud sa pulyu,</i> He limps because he had polio.

<p><form>takílid</form> (from <ix>kílid</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>tilt</tr>, <tr>turn over</tr> on the side. <i>Nilísù siya kay mutakílid siya paghigdà,</i> He turned over to lie on his side. <i>Ang agúkuy magtakilid nga maglakaw,</i> The fiddler crab walks <tr>sideways</tr>. <i>Ayaw itakílid (takilíra, takilda), mayabu,</i> Don't tilt it. It might spill. <number>2</number> <tr>veer</tr>, change directions. <i>Mitakílid ang barku sa tuu,</i> The ship veered off to the right. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> get money from one's pocket (lit. lean over to stick the hands in the pocket). <i>Mutakílid siya dáyun ug pangayúag kwarta,</i> He immediately reaches in his pocket if anyone asks him for money.

<p><form>takilpù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> for one's foot to slip to its side, ankles to give way. <i>Natakilpù siya sa íyang bag-ung hayhil,</i> Her foot slipped on its side on her new high heels.

<p><form>takilya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>box office</tr>, a place where admission tickets are sold. <i>Si Klint Istwud gihugúpan pag-áyu sa takilya,</i> Clint Eastwood is very popular at the box office. <form>takilyíra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ticket seller</tr> (female). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> be a <tr>ticket vendor</tr>. <form>takilyíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ticket seller</tr> (male).

<p><form>takin</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> strap s.t. around the waist. <i>Nagtakin siya ug sundang kay mangáhuy,</i> He's strapping a bolo on his waist to gather firewood. <i>Itakin ang baskit kun mangáni,</i> Strap the basket around the waist when you harvest rice. <pos>n</pos> basket fastened to the waist, used in harvesting rice.

<p><form>tak-in</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>tuck-in</tr> one's shirt. <i>Angayan kang magtak-in kay dì sapyut,</i> You look nice with your shirt <tr>tucked in</tr> because your buttocks are not flat.

<p><form>takinding</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> roll with a clatter. <i>Pagkahúlug níya ang plátung íyang gidala mitakinding sa ubus,</i> When he fell, the plates he was carrying rolled with a clatter.

<p><form>takingking</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>hop</tr> on one leg. <i>Takingkínga kútub ngadtu,</i> Hop up to there on one leg.

<p><form>takinhud</form> <xr>= <sc>TANGKIHUD</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>takip</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>include</tr> along with, do to s.t. at the same time as one does it to s.t. else. <i>Kinsay nagtakip sa ákung ngálan sa lista?</i> Who included my name in the list? <i>Nagtakip kug ritrátu sa ákung sulat,</i> I <tr>enclosed</tr> a picture in my letter. <i>Gikatakip nákug gastu ang ímung kwarta,</i> I spent your money <tr>along with</tr> mine. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1c]</itype> join flat things one on top of the other or at their edges. <i>Takípa nang duha ka papil arun madakù (mabagà),</i> Join those two sheets of paper to make them bigger (or Paste them on top of one another to make them thicker).

<p><form>taklà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make a clicking, clacking noise with the tongue. <i>Taklái siya kay mau nay ámung sinyas,</i> Clack your tongue at him because that's our signal. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> clacking of the tongue. <number>2</number> a k.o. small, dark-hued <tr>shrimp</tr> 2&ndash;3 cm. long which emits a loud clicking sound similar to tongue clacking. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> make a clacking noise with the tongue in exasperation, dejection, or admiration. <i>Nanaklà siya kay hibyaan sa <pb n=967>bus,</i> He clacked his tongue because he missed the bus.

<p><form>taklap</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>spread</tr>, <tr>lay</tr> s.t. flat over s.t. so as to cover it. <i>Itaklap ring hábul sa lamísa,</i> Spread this blanket over the table. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2456]</itype> <tr>cover</tr> as if enveloping. <i>Mitaklap ang kangitngit sa kalibútan,</i> Darkness covered the world. <pos>n</pos> s.t. spread over s.t. to cover it.

<p><form>taklas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for dogs to jump all over s.o. <i>Nabuling ang ákung sinínà kay gitaklásan ku sa irù,</i> My clothes got dirty because the dog jumped all over me. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> climb, clamber up on s.t. not affording a good foothold. <i>Hipaakan tà ku sa irù ug wà pa ku makataklas sa kináma nga mga kahun,</i> I would have been bitten by the dog had I not clambered on the stacked boxes.

<p><form>taklay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> hang s.t. loose around the neck. <i>Dílì maáyu nga magsuruysúruy sa kalying magtaklay ug tualya,</i> It is not good to go around the streets having a towel draped around one's neck.

<p><form>taklì</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> draw one's attention away from where it should be focused. <i>Ang nakataklì (nakapataklì) sa íyang intiris sa panulat mau ang súgal,</i> Gambling drew away his interest from writing. <i>Nataklì ang atinsiyun ni Míla ngadtu sa íyang katúpad,</i> Mila's attention was drawn away from me towards her seatmate. <number>2</number> <itype>[c]</itype> transfer temporary ownership of land from one mortgage-holder to another. <i>Ang pinirindang yútà gitaklì pagprinda diri kanákù,</i> The mortgaged lot was transferred to me.

<p><form>taklíad</form> (from <ix>liad</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> bend the body backward to the extent that the head is at the same level as the chest or lower. <i>Bantáyi nga dì mataklíad ang bátà,</i> Watch out that the baby doesn't throw himself backwards. <i>Ákung itaklíad (takliárun) ug maáyu ang ákung láwas sa sáyawng limburak,</i> I bend way back when I dance the limbo rock.

<p><form>taklid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> pin, tie s.o.'s hands behind his back. <i>Gitaklid ang mga dinakpan,</i> The prisoners had their hands tied behind their backs. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN]</itype> fold one's hands behind the back. <i>Mihinaklid siyang nagdiskursu,</i> He folded his hands behind his back while speaking. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; bN]</itype> do s.t. difficult with ease. <i>Panghinaklíran (hinaklíran) lang níya nang bungtúra,</i> He will climb that mountain with ease.

<p><form>taklíma</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> wrench the ankle or the foot. <i>Nataklíma ang ákung tiil sa danglug nga batu,</i> I wrenched my foot on a slippery stone.

<p><form>taklub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> cover s.t. over with s.t. enclosing it. <i>Akuy mutaklub sa basurahan,</i> I'll put the lid on the garbage can. <i>Ingun kug nawálà ang ituy apan natakluban diay sa kahun,</i> I thought the puppy got lost, but actually it had just gotten under the box. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lid</tr>. <number>2</number> basket-like pen for fowl.

<p><form>taklúbu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>giant clams</tr>, esteemed for food, large specimens of which furnish shells for baptismal fonts.

<p><form>taklung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b8]</itype> be caught by being covered by s.t. which falls. <i>Ang iring nataklungan sa kahun,</i> The cat was caught by a box that fell on it.

<p><form>taklus</form> <xr>= <sc>TAKGUS</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>takmag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> for a male animal to <tr>mount</tr> on the female. <i>Basta mangúlag ang anay, mutakmag giyud ang butù,</i> If the sow is in heat, the male will mount her.

<p><form>takmù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a3b8]</itype> hit one's chin on s.t. <i>Natakmù ku sa kurdísu pagkatumba nákù,</i> I hit my chin on the window sill when I fell down. <note>F1 Why takmù<sub>1</sub> if there's no takmù<sub>2</sub>?</note>

<p><form>takmul</form> <pos>a</pos> drawing the lips in or biting the lower lip in defiance, anger, or when making an effort. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> for the lips to <tr>purse</tr>. <i>Nagtakmul ang íyang simud,</i> He drew in his mouth. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> draw in the lips, bite the lower lip. <i>Nanakmul siyang nag-alsa sa kahun,</i> He bit his lower lip while heaving the box.

<p><form>takna</form> <xr>= <sc>TAKNÀ</sc>, <i>n2, 2a.</i></xr>

<p><form>taknà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>identifying mark</tr>. <i>Ang sáku nga may taknà átù,</i> The sack that has an identifying mark on it is ours. <number>1a</number> notch as an identifying mark. <number>2</number> <tr>hour</tr>. <number>2a</number> <tr>moment</tr>. <i>Sa taknang pul-an ka, byái siya,</i> The moment you get tired of her, leave her. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> put an identifying sign or label. <i>Kinahanglang taknáan ang mga garápa sa tambal,</i> We should <tr>label</tr> bottles containing medicine. <number>2</number> put a notch as an identifying mark. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>timepiece</tr>, <tr>watch</tr>.

<p><form>taksay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fishing <tr>net</tr>, cast in shallow water and dragged by four people towards the shore. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[N]</itype> go fishing with the <ix>taksay</ix> net.

<p><form>taksi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>taxi</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> take a taxi. <i>Mataksi ang pantalan gíkan dinhi,</i> We can take a taxi to the wharf from here. <number>2</number> make into a taxi.

<p><form>taksì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a game in which objects placed inside a circle are knocked out of the area. The ones displaced from the circle belong to the player that hit them. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> play <ix>taksì</ix>.

<p><form>taksì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> strip abaca, buri palm leaves, and the like of vegetable matter to get the fiber. <pos>n</pos> instrument for stripping. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> abaca <pb n=968>stripper. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> stripped stalks.

<p><form>taksikab</form> <xr>= <sc>TAKSI</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>taksinilya</form> <pos>n</pos> humorous word for <ix>tartanilya</ix>, used in contexts where one says he doesn't have money to take the taxi. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> take the <ix>tartanilya</ix>. <i>Taksinilya lang ta,</i> Let's just take the <ix>tartanilya</ix> brand of taxi.

<p><form>taktak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB26; ac]</itype> for small things or s.t. fastened or stuck to s.t. to detach and drop; cause to drop. <i>Kinsay nagtaktak ug ágiw sa sawug?</i> Who knocked cigarette ashes on the floor? <i>Nataktak ang íyang pilukpíluk sa sawug,</i> Her false eyelashes fell to the floor. <i>Taktáka ang mga tambis,</i> Knock the fruits off the tree. <i>Wà kataktákig balhíbu,</i> It was unharmed. (Lit. Not a feather was knocked off of it.) <number>2</number> <itype>[b4(1)]</itype> have a <tr>miscarriage</tr>. <i>Nataktakan siya sa dihang nadakin-as,</i> She had a miscarriage after she slipped and fell. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> cast a fishing net. <i>Itaktak ang púkut kay dúnay duut,</i> Cast the net because there's a school of fish. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> drop from a list. <i>Taktáka (itaktak) sa listahan ang mining bitiránu,</i> Drop the fake veterans from the list. <number>4a</number> <tr>fire</tr> from a position. <i>Mutaktak nà siyag impliyádung tapulan,</i> He fires lazy employees. <number>4b</number> drop a charge. <i>Ang sumbung gitaktak sa huwis,</i> The accusation was dropped by the judge. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. which has been detached and dropped. <number>2</number> action of casting a fishing net. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> designated place where the fishing net is emptied of catch. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> for coconuts to be mature enough for harvesting. <i>Hustu na sak-un nang mga lubíha kay taktakun na,</i> Now is the time to gather the coconuts because they are mature.[+]

<p><form>taktakun</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. edible starshell having a thin dark brown operculum.

<p><form>taktika</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>strategy</tr>, <tr>tactics</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>scheme</tr>, <tr>ruse</tr>. <i>Taktika lang tu nákù arun malipat siya,</i> It was just a ruse to deceive him. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make a clever plan. <i>Taktikaha giyug maáyu nga makumbins&icaron;r siya,</i> Make a clever plan to convince him.

<p><form>taktikal</form> <pos>n</pos> examination given by military officers to cadets. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> have a <tr>tactical inspection</tr>. <form>&mdash; inspiksiyun</form> <xr>= <sc>TAKTIKAL</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>táku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>billiard cue</tr>.

<p><form>takúan</form> <xr>= <sc>TAKÚGAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>takub</form> <pos>n</pos> a cover or lid of s.t. which has a different shape from the thing it is put over and is not attached. <i>Ang takub sa pawuntin pin,</i> The fountain pen cover. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> put a cover on. <i>Kinsay nagtákub sa kahun?</i> Who put the lid on the box? <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pseudonym</tr>, <tr>alias</tr>. <i>Ang <r>&lsquo;O. Henry&rsquo;</r> takuban ni Wilyam Sidni Purtir,</i> &lsquo;O. Henry&rsquo; is the <tr>pen name</tr> of William Sidney Porter. <number>2</number> <tr>disguise</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c6]</itype> <number>1</number> use an assumed or pen name. <number>2</number> wear a disguise. <i>Nagtakuban nga makililímus ang ditiktib,</i> The detective disguised himself as a beggar. <form>-an(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>-AN</sc>, <pos>v</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>takúb</form> <xr>= <sc>TAKÚGAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>takubu</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to cover the roof ridge. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put a cover over a roof ridge. <i>Sín itakubu,</i> Use galvanized iron sheets to cover the ridge of the roof.

<p><form>takúbu</form> <xr>= <sc>TAKLÚBU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>takubù</form> <xr>= <sc>TIKUBÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>takud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> <tr>attach</tr> s.t. to s.t. else, put it right next to s.t. so that it touches. <i>Nagtákud<note>Nagtákuá?</note><note>Nagtakud. corrected. P2</note><note>Magtákud?</note> ang duha ka daplin sa lamísa,</i> The two edges of the table <tr>are</tr> touching each other. <i>Takúra ang duha ka daplin sa panaptung himúung hábul,</i> Attach the two pieces of cloth at the ends to make them into a blanket. <i>Itakud ang kwadru sa bungbung,</i> Attach the picture to the wall. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>harness</tr> an animal, <tr>hitch</tr> it for work. <i>Ayaw takdi nang bakáha ug balsa kay gamay pa nà,</i> Don't harness the cow to a sled because it is still too small. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b4(1)]</itype> <tr>infect</tr> with disease. <i>Makatakud nang hanggà,</i> Chicken pox is <tr>contagious</tr>. <i>Hitakdan kag mudúul sa tibíhun,</i> You'll get infected if you go near a tubercular person. <number>3a</number> <itype>[C3]</itype> contaminate each other. <i>Nag-úsa lang mug unlan magtákud giyud nang inyung mga kútu,</i> You're both lying on the same pillow, so you'll get each other's lice. <number>3b</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> arouse or <tr>spread</tr> to s.o. else as if a contagious disease. Nahimuut siyang namínaw sa makatakud nga katáwa ni Rúsi, He was amused listening to Rosie's contagious laughter. <number>3c</number> <itype>[A12; b4(1)]</itype> influence so as to become like one. <i>Natakdan ku sa kahinúun níya,</i> I was influenced by his diligence in study. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b4]</itype> pass a supernatural attribute on to another person upon death. <i>Úngù na siya kay gipatakdan sa tigúlang úngù,</i> He is a vampire now because the old man passed his supernatural power on to him. <form>takdanan</form> <pos>n</pos> an animal trained to take the harness. <form>maN-r-(&larr;), matakdánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>contagious</tr>, tending to spread from person to person.

<p><form>tákud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> <tr>manage</tr> to do s.t. that requires strength or money. <i>Dì na siya makatákud ug alsa ug bug-at,</i> She can't manage to lift heavy things. <i>Makatákud kahà kag patunghà sa ímung anak?</i> Can you manage to send your child to school?

<p><form>takúg</form> <xr>= <sc>TAKÚGAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>takúgan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>chiton</tr> of rocks in tidal flats.

<p><form>takúkung</form> <xr>= <sc>SARUK</sc>, <i>n1, v.</i></xr>

<p><form>tákul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> for the chin to tremble causing <pb n=969>the teeth to chatter. <i>Nagtákul ang ákung suwang sa katugnaw,</i> My chin is chattering with cold.

<p><form>takuláhaw</form> <number>1</number> <tr>all of a sudden</tr>. <i>Sa takuláhaw lamang siya natumba,</i> <tr>Suddenly</tr> he collapsed. <number>2</number> not very long, just a few minutes ago. <i>Takuláhaw pa tu siyang milakaw. Maapsan pa tingáli nímu kun ímung sundan,</i> He left just a few minutes ago. You might still catch up with him if you go after him.

<p><form>takuling<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. stout <tr>vine</tr> commonly found on coconut trees, with glossy, deep green, runcinate leaves and dark brown roots that anchor the plant to the tree: <bio>Rhaphidophora merrillii</bio>.

<p><form>takuling<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> burned food particles sticking to the insides of cooking utensils. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> have burnt food particles. <i>Ug sigáhan nímu ug kusug, takulingun ang kaldíru,</i> If you turn the fire high, the pot will have burnt particles. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> encrusted with burnt food particles.

<p><form>tak-um</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; a12]</itype> close the mouth or lips. <i>Gihagkan ku ang nagtak-um níyang ngábil,</i> I kissed her tightly pursed lips. <number>2</number> <tr>keep silent</tr>. <i>Kwarta ray makatak-um (makapatak-um) sa íyang bàbà,</i> Only money can keep his mouth shut. <pos>a</pos> closed mouth or lips.

<p><form>takumba</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lean-to</tr>, <tr>hut</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>roof</tr> of a single pitch. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>pitch</tr> s.t. as a protection. <i>Nagtakumba silag hábul ug didtu sila mangatúlug,</i> They pitched a blanket and slept under it. <i>Gitakumbáhan níyag playwud ang irù arun dì mahumud sa ulan,</i> He set up a piece of plywood for the dog to get under to keep out of the rain. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lean-to</tr> or s.t. set up with a single-pitched roof.

<p><form>takun</form> <pos>n</pos> heel of shoes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put a heel on shoes.

<p><form>tákung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sheath of coconut fruits. <number>2</number> sheath-*like covering similar to that of coconuts. <form>takungtákung</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>TÁKUNG</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr> <number>2</number> the sheath-like covering on the back of grasshoppers and similar insects or the wing sheath of coleopterous insects.

<p><form>takup</form> <xr>= <sc>TAK-UP</sc>.</xr> <form>talakpun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shutters</tr>.

<p><form>tak-up</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB26; b]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>close</tr>, be <tr>closed</tr>. <i>Kinsay nagtak-up sa pultahan nga mipákà man?</i> Who closed the door banging it? <i>Tak-úpi ang bintánà kay tugnaw,</i> Close the window because it's cold. <number>2</number> for schools or business establishments to <tr>close</tr>. <i>Mutak-up ang klási karung Abril,</i> Classes will close in April. <pos>n</pos> lid that fits flat over or a shutter. <pos>a</pos> <tr>closed</tr>.

<p><form>takúpis</form> <pos>n</pos> an oval-shaped, large but not tall <tr>basket</tr> with a cover, made of pieces of bamboo and rattan or <ix>nítù</ix> vine, used as a container for clothing.

<p><form>takurì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>kettle</tr>.

<p><form>takus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>measure</tr> with a measuring vessel. <i>Taksa ang bugas arun hibaw-an pílay gibaylu,</i> Measure the rice so we'll know how much they borrowed. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> measure s.o.'s capability. <i>Gitakus níya ang ákung kahibalu kun madáwat ba,</i> He tested my knowledge to see if I was qualified. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c3]</itype> <tr>vie</tr> with one another, <tr>fight</tr> it out in a test of strength. <i>Makigtákus ku nímu kun kinsay hárì dinhi,</i> Let's fight it out to see who's the king here. <pos>n</pos> a <tr>measureful</tr>. <i>Gái kug duha ka takus kámay,</i> Give me two <tr>measures</tr> of sugar. <pos>a</pos> <tr>worthy</tr>. <i>Dì ku takus sa ímung gugma,</i> I'm not worthy of your love. <form>paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> claim to be, consider worthy. <i>Nagpakatakus aku sa pagdápit kanímu,</i> May I invite you? (Lit. I presume to consider myself worthy of inviting you.) <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>capability</tr>. <form>panaksan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bowl</tr>. <form>talaksan, taksanan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>measuring vessel</tr>. <form>tinaksánay</form> <pos>n</pos> test of strength. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> <xr>= <sc>TÁKUS</sc>, <pos>v</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>tákut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>coral reefs</tr>. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> full of coral reefs.

<p><form>takuyan, takúyan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a seed container used to hold corn when planting, usually from a short length of bamboo, and worn around the waist. <number>2</number> round-mouthed cylindrical container for farm products woven from buri strips. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make into a <ix>takuyan</ix>.

<p><form>takwáhaw</form> <xr>= <sc>TAKULÁHAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>takwal, takwar</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>money</tr> (word play on <ix>kwarta, kwalta</ix>).

<p><form>takway</form> <xr>= <sc>BUKWAY</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr>

<p><form>takyab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> cast a small fishing net into the sea, usually in the shallows. <i>Dakung duut sa isdà ang íyang gitakyában sa láya,</i> He cast the net on a big school of fish. <number>2</number> throw s.t. on and over s.t. as if casting a small net or throw s.t. with a similar motion. <i>Ákung gitakyában ug hábul ang káma,</i> I spread a blanket over the bed. <i>Ákù ta kang takyában sa tahup ug anhà ka lingkud dihà,</i> The chaff will fall off on you as I winnow it, if you sit there. <number>3</number> flap s.t. to shake s.t. off it. <i>Gitakyab níya ang sinínà kay abugun kaáyu,</i> She flapped her dress because it was so dusty.

<p><form>takyan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> toy which is similar to a shuttlecock in badminton and kicked with the instep of the foot. <number>2</number> game played with this shuttlecock which involves kicking it with the instep of the foot. A server is chosen by kicking the <ix>takyan</ix> a required number of times without missing. The one who misses is the server. The other player (or team) has to kick the <ix>takyan</ix> when it is served. If the server catches it, he serves the next player, and so forth, until all the players have been served, at which point the game starts again. <pb n=970>If he fails to catch it he must serve the same player again. If he is able to return the <ix>takyan</ix> kicking it, the person whom he returned it to must take his place. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> play <ix>takyan</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> kick as one would a <ix>takyan</ix>.

<p><form>takyap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2456; c]</itype> spread over so as to <tr>cover</tr>. <i>Mitakyap ang kangitngit sa kalibútan,</i> Darkness covered the earth. <i>Wà ka bisag tualyang ikatakyap sa ímung láwas?</i> Don't you even have a towel to cover your body?

<p><form>tál</form> <tr>full-fledged</tr>, <tr>genuine</tr>, <tr>through and through</tr>. <i>Tál nà siyang abugádu kay nakapasar sa bar,</i> He is a full-fledged lawyer because he passed the bar. <i>Tál nà siyang Árab,</i> He is a <tr>full-blooded</tr> Arab. <i>Mau nay tál nga amígu, maúnung,<note>2nd letter "a"?</note><note> muúnung ?,P3</note></i> That's what I call a real friend. He stands by you.

<p><form>tala<sub>1</sub></form> <tr>let's go</tr>. <form>&mdash; na</form> <ix>short forms:</ix> <form>tána, tana</form> let's go now. <i>Tala na (tana) kay malít ta,</i> Let's go now. We'll be late.

<p><form>tala<sub>2</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>a</pos> out of one's right senses. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be <tr>crazy</tr>. <i>Natala ka. Ngánung asin may ímung giságuls kapi?</i> Are you crazy? Why did you put salt in the coffee?

<p><form>talà</form> <pos>n</pos> a small surface depression on a toy top made by the nail tip of another top, pit mark. <i>Way kaláki ang ímung kasing kay daghan ug talà,</i> Your top is no good because it has lots of pit marks. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b8]</itype> for a top to get a pit mark in it.

<p><form>tálà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b4(1)]</itype> <tr>set foot</tr> in a place. <i>Nakatálà na ba ka ánang bukíra?</i> Have you set foot on that mountain? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>step</tr>, <tr>tread</tr> on. <i>Dì ka mutálà sa lápuk, ha?</i> Do not step on the mud puddle, O.K.?

<p><form>tálà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>list down</tr>. <i>Itálà ang mga ngálan sa aplikanti,</i> <tr>List</tr> the names of the applicants. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> <tr>enroll</tr>. <i>Ása man kang iskuylahána magpatálà?</i> In what school will you enroll? <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>list</tr>. <form>talaadláwan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>diary</tr>.

<p><form>tálab</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pen shells</tr>.

<p><form>talaba</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>oyster</tr>.

<p><form>talában</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> for a force to carry s.t. along with it. <i>Nalumus siya kay natában sa sulug,</i> He drowned because he got carried away by the current. <xr><ix>see also</ix> <sc>TÁBAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>talabánug</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>BANUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>talábun, talábung</form> <xr>= <sc>TULÁBUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tálad</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>table</tr>. <number>2</number> table in parliamentary usage. <i>Si Husi P. Lawril mauy nangúlu sa tálad,</i> José P. Laurel was the presiding officer.

<p><form>taladru</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. <tr>drill</tr> with grooves along which a handle is pushed up and down, causing the bit to turn. <number>2</number> a wooden <tr>eggbeater</tr> made like the <ix>taladru</ix> drill. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> use a <ix>taladru</ix> drill or eggbeater.

<p><form>talagabung</form> <xr>= <sc>TUGÁBUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>talagbagu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. delicious salt-water <tr>fish</tr>, yellowish-brown in color. It is flat-shaped and is as big as a palm, similar in appearance and taste to the <ix>kítung</ix>.

<p><form>talagsa</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>USA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>talaguy</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> one who keeps going out and neglects the chores at home. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become fond of going out. <i>Natalaguy siya tungud sa barkáda,</i> He started going out and neglected his duties because of his gang.

<p><form>taláhib</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> coarse, erect perennial <tr>grass</tr> with snowy white panicles which, like cogon, takes over lands denuded of forest cover: <bio>Saccharum spontaneum</bio>.

<p><form>taláid</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> do s.t. in an <tr>orderly</tr> manner covering progressively the area worked on. <i>Talaíra ug sanggì ang mais arun walay hisayluan,</i> Harvest the corn <tr>methodically</tr>, covering it square by square, so that you miss nothing.

<p><form>talakítuk</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>fish</tr>, name given to <tr>jacks</tr> and other good-sized carangoid fish.

<p><form>talalak</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>bird</tr>: the white-billed hornbill: <bio>Aceros leucocephalus</bio>.

<p><form>talampad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; a1]</itype> place things in a row across s.t. <i>Magtalampad tag butilya sa paril kay magpunta blangku ta,</i> Let us arrange bottles in a row because we will have target practice. <i>Italampad ning mga batu sa yanang arun náay átung katumban,</i> Arrange these rocks in a row across the mud puddle so we have s.t. to step on. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>compare</tr>. <i>Tampárun nátù sila ug kinsay kinagwapahan,</i> Let us compare them and see who is the prettiest. <i>Ayawg itampad ang ákung pinintal sa kang Amursúlu,</i> Don't compare my paintings with those of Amorsolo. <form>tamparay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c3]</itype> compare with each other. <i>Makigtamparay siya sa ákung núts,</i> He wanted to compare notes with me.

<p><form>tálang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <number>1</number> be <tr>embarrassed</tr>. <i>Natálang ku sa ákung tubag kay sayup kaáyu,</i> I was embarrassed because my answer was completely wrong. <number>2</number> <tr>blunder</tr> or lose one's way into. <i>Natálang siya ngadtu sa iskuylahan sa mga babáyi,</i> He blundered into a girl's school. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> trick coin with two heads. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a trick coin.

<p><form>talangígù</form> <xr>= <sc>HINGÍGÙ</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ÍGÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>talantar</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <xr>= <sc>TARANT&Acaron;R</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>talantun</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>talent</tr>, the unit of weight (Biblical).

<p><form>talapya</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <xr>= <sc>TILAPYA</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>tálas</form> <xr>= <sc>PATÁLAS</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=971>

<p><form>talatala</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <tr>foolish</tr>, slightly crazy. <i>Talatala, ngánung giusíkan nímu,</i> <tr>Stupid</tr>! Why are you wasting it? <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. small <tr>frog</tr> about 2&Prime;, of marshy areas, often seen in trees. <number>2</number> one who is constantly chattering about unimportant things sounding like the <ix>talatala</ix> frog. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become <tr>crazy</tr>. <i>Natalatala siya human bulagi,</i> He became crazy when his girl left him.

<p><form>taláuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>crow</tr>. <i>Sayu pa tu; nagtaláuk pa ang mga manuk,</i> It was still early; the cocks were still crowing. <pos>n</pos> the sound of <tr>crowing</tr>. <i>Ang taláuk sa manuk timailhan nga saylu na sa tungang gabíi,</i> The cock's crow means that it is past midnight.

<p><form>tálaw</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B456]</itype> <tr>back off</tr>, be afraid to do s.t. for lacking nerve. <i>Mitálaw siya maung wà musúkul,</i> He was afraid, so he didn't fight back. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> be <tr>cowardly</tr>. <i>Dì siya mangamural ni Biyay kay nanálaw siya,</i> He can't bring himself to propose to Biyay because he is a <tr>coward</tr>. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>cowardly</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be, become cowardly.

<p><form>talay</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put or sit next to. <i>Kinsa man tu nga nagtalay nímu?</i> Who was that who sat beside you? <i>Italay ni sa baril,</i> Put this beside the drum. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a loaf of bread made of easily separable sections baked together in a row in one mold. <number>2</number> one <tr>beside</tr> s.o. else. <i>Kinsa man tung ímung talay sa sini?</i> Who was it you were sitting next to in the movies? <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C; a]</itype> sit, set next to each other. <i>Nagtálay mi ug lingkud sa bátang,</i> We sat beside each other on the log. <i>Taláyun ta ning duha ka lamísa,</i> Let's put these two tables next to each other. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> fall, put in line. <i>Nagtálay ang mamalítay ug arsii,</i> Buyers of RCA rice are forming a line. <i>Gwápa siya kun itálay sa mga maksut,</i> She's pretty if you put her next to the ugly ones. <pos>n</pos> <tr>line</tr>, <tr>row</tr> of people or things. <form>hi-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> belong to a distinct group. <i>Nahitálay siya sa hataas nga katilingban,</i> She belongs to the upper class.

<p><form>tálay</form> <pos>n</pos> in hopscotch or basketball, the violation of stepping on the line. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> step on the line.

<p><form>talaytay</form> (from <ix>taytay</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> arrange things in a <tr>row</tr>. <i>Talaytáyun (italaytay) ta ning mga batu sa daplin,</i> Let's arrange the stones in a row along the edges.

<p><form>talayung</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> a length of tubing used to convey water from a spring that flows out from a slope. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> attach, make into a tube spout for a spring.

<p><form>talhà</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> splitting easily due to its parallel grain. <number>2</number> root crops that are dry and crumble easily in the mouth.

<p><form>talhung</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>shady</tr>, so as to retard the growth of trees. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13P; b4(1)]</itype> <tr>shade</tr> s.t. over. <i>Ang mangga mutalhung (mupatalhung) sa kamaisan,</i> The mango tree will shade the cornfield. <i>Natalhungan ang ákung sibuyasan sa mga ságing,</i> My onion bed is in the <tr>shadow</tr> of the banana plants.

<p><form>tali</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; a12]</itype> for fowl to wean their chicks, letting them go off on their own. <i>Ug sayu nga mutali ang mungáan sa pisù, dalì pud nga mangitlug,</i> If a hen lets her chicks get independent early, she will also lay eggs sooner. <pos>n</pos> chick that has gotten independent of the mother.[+]

<p><form>táli<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for root crops and the flesh of fish to be soft and moist. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> get to be soft and moist. <i>Mutáli (matáli) ang kamúti basta itanum sa yútà nga basà,</i> Sweet potatoes become soft and watery if they are planted in wet ground.

<p><form>táli<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>TÁLÌ<sub>2</sub></sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr>

<p><form>táli<sub>3</sub>, tálì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>tally</tr>, <tr>mark</tr>. <i>Dì ku makatáli kay kandidátu ku,</i> I can't do the <tr>tallying</tr> because I'm a candidate. <i>Gitálì ku ang ímung palta,</i> I have <tr>recorded</tr> your absences. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a3]</itype> have a note of a certain emotion. Ang íyang pagtubag daw sa nagtálì ug kasukù, His reply seemed to have a note of anger.

<p><form>tálì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>tie</tr>, <tr>bind</tr>. <i>Mga kawatan ang mitálì kaníla sa halígi,</i> The robbers tied them to the post. <i>Nakatálì na siya sa mga putus,</i> She has bound the packages. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> between, concerning two people or groups. <i>Tandugun ang rilasiyun tálì sa Amirika ug Pilipínas,</i> The relations between the U.S. and the Philippines are touchy. <number>2</number> <tr>concerning</tr>, <tr>with regards to</tr>. <i>Gisukutsukut siya níla talì sa nahitabù,</i> They interrogated him <tr>about</tr> the incident. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bond</tr>, <tr>tie</tr>.

<p><form>tali-</form> prefix to a verb forming adjectives meaning &lsquo;<tr>about to</tr> [do]&rsquo;. <i>Talilarga na ku sa Amirika,</i> I'm ready to leave for America. <i>Taliának,</i> About to give birth.

<p><form>taliadlaw</form> (from <ix>adlaw</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>hot season</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56]</itype> be the hot season.

<p><form>tálib</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> trim off or smooth around the end or the mouth of a container. <i>Talíbi ang bàbà sa plastik nga sudlanan,</i> Trim the mouth of the plastic container to make it even. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <form>walay &mdash;</form> untrimmed around the mouth or at the ends.

<p><form>talibud</form> (from <ix>líbud</ix>) a fond of going about the neighborhood. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be fond of going about the neighborhood. <i>Ang pagkatabian mauy nakatalibud (nakapatalibud) níya,</i> She is fond of going about because she <pb n=972>likes to spread gossip.

<p><form>talibugsuk</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>BUGSUK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>talibwag</form> (from <ix>bulag</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13P]</itype> <tr>disperse</tr>, run in different directions. <i>Nagtalibwag pagdágan ang kabatáan kay nahadluk sa búang,</i> The kids ran in all directions because they were afraid of the mad man.

<p><form>talidhay</form> <pos>n</pos> loud, prolonged, high-pitched <tr>laughter</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3c]</itype> laugh in a loud, high-pitched way. <i>Mitalidhay ang mga babáyi sa kataw-anan níyang isturya,</i> The ladies laughed at his funny stories.

<p><form>talidngan</form> <xr>= <sc>TALIRÚNGAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>talidúngan</form> <xr>= <sc>TALIRÚNGAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>taligamà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b8]</itype> <tr>overlook</tr>. <i>Dúnay mga sayup sa íyang tím nga ákung hitaligam-an,</i> There were lots of mistakes in his theme that I overlooked.

<p><form>taligátus</form> (from <ix>gatus</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. small <tr>mouse</tr> with a long snout. <number>2</number> k.o. roundish <tr>sweet potatoes</tr> with light pink skin and yellowish, sweet meat (so called because it produces an abundance of tubers).

<p><form>taligmata</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hallucination</tr> or <tr>vision</tr> where one sees s.t. not actually present. <i>Nakit-an nákù si Pidru apan walà man siya dinhi. Taligmata diay tu,</i> I saw Pedro, but he is not here. So it was just a hallucination. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b5]</itype> have a vision or hallucination.

<p><form>taligngan</form> <xr>= <sc>TALIRÚNGAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>taligráma</form> <xr>= <sc>TILIGRÁMA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>taligsik</form> <pos>n</pos> large raindrops which fall in a scattered way, usually before or after a tropical rainstorm. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b4]</itype> rain in large scattered drops. <i>Bukasa ang hinayhay kay mitaligsik na,</i> Bring in the laundry because it is <tr>raining</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> fall in large scattered drops. <i>Manaligsik íyang láway kun musulti,</i> He sprays saliva when he speaks.

<p><form>taligsuy</form> <pos>a</pos> long and tapering. <i>Taligsuy kaáyu ka ug ilung,</i> You have a long, tapering nose. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3; b6]</itype> be, become long and tapering. <i>Mutaligsuy ang pálu ug usa ka tumuy ra ang sipilyáhan,</i> The mast will come out long and tapering if only one end is planed.

<p><form>talíis</form> <xr>= <sc>TILÍIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>talikála, talikalà, talikálà</form> (from <ix>tálì</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>chain</tr>, <tr>fetter</tr>. <i>Hugut ang talikalà sa ámung pagminahalay,</i> Our love is held together by a strong bond.

<p><form>talikìtikì</form> (from <ix>tikì</ix>) <xr>= <sc>TABILI SA DÁGAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>talikud<sub>1</sub></form> (from <ix>likud</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[aP1]</itype> turn the back, turn s.o. around. <i>Gwápa siyag magtalikud, pirug mag-atubang pastilan,</i> She's pretty when she turns her back, but when she's facing you, ouch! <i>Italikud (ipatalikud, talikda) nang ispíkir kay mabúngul ta,</i> Turn that speaker around or it will deafen us. <number>1a</number> <formx>(&larr;)</formx> <itype>[C2; c6]</itype> stay, put two things with the backs against each other. <i>Nagtalíkud silag lingkud arun isig sandig sila,</i> They are sitting with their backs against each other so they can lean on each other. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>go away</tr> from. <i>Bag-u pa siyang mitalikud pag-abut níla,</i> She had just <tr>left</tr> when they arrived. <number>2a</number> <tr>pass away</tr>, <tr>die</tr>. <i>Maanyag nga bálu ang íyang gitalikdan,</i> He left behind a beautiful widow. <number>2b</number> <tr>abandon</tr>, turn one's back on. <i>Talikdan ku ang bisyu,</i> I will abandon my vices. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>decline</tr> a good opportunity. <i>Ug mutalikud ka ánang trabahúa dì ka na makakità ug láin,</i> If you do not take that job, you will not find another one like it. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> eye of a fish hook to which the leader or line is attached, facing in a direction opposite to the barb.

<p><form>talikud<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a variety of <tr>banana</tr>, smooth-skinned, similar in form to the <ix>alitundan</ix> but bigger, consumed uncooked and particularly tasty.

<p><form>talimughat</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>BUGHAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>talínga</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ear</tr> (dialectal). <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>notice</tr>, pay <tr>heed</tr>. <i>Gisampit ku níya piru wà ku mutalinga,</i> He called me but I didn't pay him any mind. <i>Nakatalinga ku nga dinhay táwu sa ákung luyu,</i> I noticed there was s.o. in back of me. <number>2</number> <tr>look after</tr>, <tr>pay attention</tr> to. <i>Kinsay mutalinga sa mga manuk kun wà ka,</i> Who will <tr>take care of</tr> the chickens while you're away?

<p><form>talinggab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> cut, chip or saw off s.t. long at an angle so that the end is pointed. <i>Talinggába pagsapsap ang káhuy arun mutalínis ang tumuy,</i> Cut the piece of wood at an angle so the end will come out pointed. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a cut made so that the result is pointed. <number>2</number> s.t. cut at a diagonal with a pointed tip.

<p><form>*talinghug</form> <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>listen</tr>, <tr>heed</tr>. <i>Patalinghúgi ang púlung sa tigúlang,</i> Listen to the words of your elders.

<p><form>talingting</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> separate the very fine corn starch (<ix>tiktik</ix>) from the grits by shaking in a winnower, or separate the very fine grains from coarser ones. <i>Nagtalingting pa ku sa ginaling,</i> I'm still separating the corn starch from the grits. <pos>n</pos> the very fine corn starch that sticks to the winnower.

<p><form>talingtíngun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> long-legged, medium-sized <tr>bird</tr> frequently found in tidal flats. It feeds on small fish.

<p><form>talingtíngun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. stinging <tr>fish</tr> of shallow waters.

<p><form>talínis</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sharp-pointed</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>shrill</tr> in voice or sound. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; ug luyug luyu</formx> one who reports whatever <tr>gossip</tr> he hears from one person and then relays it to others (lit. sharp at <pb n=973>both ends). <i>Ayawg kumpiyansahi nang bayhána kay talínis nà ug luyugluyu,<note>in previous page, these are two words. P2</note></i> Don't trust that woman because she's a snake. <form>&mdash; maglúyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>two-faced</tr>, <tr>double-dealing</tr>. <pos>n</pos> pointed portion of s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> make s.t. sharp pointed. <i>Talinsi nang lagduk únà itagsuk,</i> <tr>Sharpen</tr> the peg before sticking it into the ground. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> of a <tr>pointed</tr> type.

<p><form>talintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>talent</tr>, <tr>ability</tr>.

<p><form>talinugù</form> (from <ix>dugù</ix>) <pos>n</pos> uterine hemorrhage. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> suffer a uterine hemorrhage. <i>Talinug-an giyud ka basta mangusug ka human ug anak,</i> You'll suffer a uterine hemorrhage if you exert effort too soon after delivery.

<p><form>talínum</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small <tr>shrub</tr> with thick, lanceolate, pale-green leaves, planted as an ornamental and for its leaves which are used as a vegetable: <bio>Talinum triangulare</bio>.

<p><form>talinupsan</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>TUPUS<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><form>talinùtinù</form> <xr>= <sc>ALUNDRIS<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tálip</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> slice root crops into thin strips to dry them under the sun. <i>Talípa ang kamúti arun ibulad,</i> Slice the sweet potatoes to be dried in the sun.

<p><form>talipsay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B356; b4]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>glance off</tr>. <i>Mitalipsay ang bála nga mitámà sa puthaw,</i> The bullet glanced off when it hit the metal. <i>Hitalipsayan ku sa pákul pagbughà nákù,</i> The hatchet glanced off on me while I was chopping firewood. <number>2</number> slip in talking. <i>Mitalipsay giyud sa íyang bàbà ang matúud nga kantidad,</i> He let the actual price slip out of his mouth.

<p><form>talipsay<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>TULIPSAY<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>taliptip</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> tip or peak of a roof or mountain. <number>2</number> <tr>tip</tr> of s.t. pointed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>sharpen</tr> s.t. to make it pointed. <i>Way mitaliptip sa mga káhuy nga himúung bagduk,</i> Nobody sharpened the wooden sticks to make into pegs. <i>Taliptípun ku ang mga tumuy,</i> I will make the tips pointed.

<p><form>talirúngan</form> (from <ix>dúngan</ix>) <pos>n</pos> people of the same age. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C23]</itype> be of the same age. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> one who is the same age as s.o. else.

<p><form>talis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>maggots</tr>, larvae of housefly. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infested with maggots. <i>Gitalis ang patay nga irù,</i> The dead dog has maggots crawling over it.

<p><form>talísay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large <tr>tree</tr> similar to an almond tree, growing by the seashore, bearing edible nuts: <bio>Terminalia catappa</bio>. <form>-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rooster</tr> with black, dark green, and dirty white splotches.

<p><form>talisik</form> <xr>= <sc>TALIGSIK</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>talithi, talithì</form> <pos>n</pos> very fine <tr>drizzle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; b4]</itype> <tr>drizzle</tr>. <i>Tána, nagtalithi ra bítaw,</i> Let's go, it's just drizzling. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> <tr>spit</tr> with force, usually in derision. <i>Gitalithian (gitalithían, gipanalithían) lang ku níya pag-abla nákù,</i> She just spat derisively at me when I proposed to her.

<p><form>taliti</form> <xr>= <sc>TALITHI</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>talìtì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>encrustation</tr> of sediments, <tr>tartar</tr> sticking to a surface. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a4b4]</itype> be <tr>encrusted</tr> with sediments. <i>Gitalìtian (gitalìtì) ang takurì tungud kay gisigíhag gámit nga way hugashúgas,</i> The kettle is encrusted with sediment because they kept using it without washing it. <i>Ngípun nga nagkatalìtì sa tantung tinabakù,</i> Teeth covered with tartar from smoking so much. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> encrusted with tartar and tobacco tars.

<p><form>taliunduk</form> (from <ix>unduk</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); c1]</itype> be <tr>heaped</tr> up. <i>Nagtaliunduk ang labhanan,</i> The soiled clothes are <tr>piled</tr> up high. <i>Ayawg italiunduk (taliundúka) ang kan-un sa ímung kutsára,</i> Don't put so much food on your spoon at one time. <i>Akuy nataliundukan sa tanang búhat sa balay,</i> All the housework was heaped on me. <pos>n</pos> <tr>heap</tr> of s.t.

<p><form>taliwálà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>middle</tr>, <tr>center</tr> part. <i>Ig-a ang taliw[=â]<note>note the accent. P2</note> sa targit,</i> Hit the center of the target. <i>Taliwálà sa kakuyaw nangaliyúpù siya,</i> In the <tr>midst</tr> of her danger, she prayed. <form>&mdash; sa kámay</form> in the height of excitement or ecstacy<note>typo: ecstasy</note>, esp. sexual intercourse. <i>Bahálà nang mamatay basta taliwálà sa kámay,</i> I don't care if I die as long as it's at the height of sexual excitement. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> be situated <tr>in between</tr>, <form>the</form> middle of. Gitaliwad-an kug lingkud sa ákung mga badigard, I was seated in <tr>between</tr> my bodyguards. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> do s.t. to s.t. at its center, in its middle part. <i>Taliwáa (taliwad-a) ug bángag ang kwarta,</i> Make a hole in the coin at the center. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> go, stay at the center or middle. <i>Mipataliwálà sila sa baylihan ug nagsáyaw,</i> They went to the center of the floor and danced. <i>Ipataliw[=â]<note>note the accent. P2</note> siya paglingkud arun way makatupad,</i> Seat her in between us so that no one else can sit beside her. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> put oneself between people fighting. <i>Mipataliw[=â]<note>note the accent. P2</note> ang amahan paghúnung sa áway,</i> The father cut in to stop the fight. <form>kinataliwad-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>very middle</tr> of s.t.

<p><form>talíwan</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> for work to be disposed of or finished. <i>Ayaw ug súgud ug láin ug dì pa matalíwan kanang ímu rung gitrabáhu,</i> Don't start anything else as long as you haven't finished what you started there. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> for feelings to vanish (literary). <i>Mitalíwan kanákù ang kalípay pagtalikud nímu,</i> When you left, all the joys of life departed with you. <number>3</number> <itype>[B2346]</itype> for a person to <tr>pass away</tr>. <i>Mitalíwan na ang ákung mga ginikánan,</i> My parents have passed away. <form>-um-r-</form> <pos>a</pos> about to disappear or vanish. <i>Tumatalíwan <pb n=974>nga kaháyag sa kahapúnun,</i> A <tr>fading</tr> afternoon sunlight.

<p><form>taliwtiw</form> <pos>a</pos> elongated and <tr>pointed</tr> with tapering sides. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> become pointed with tapering sides. <i>Mutaliwtiw (mataliwtiw) ang tumuy sa wating mag-aginud,</i> The end of the earthworm becomes pointed and tapering when it stretches forward. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> pointed and <tr>tapering</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> for the nose to become narrower and pointed. <i>Manaliwtiw ang ilung sa táwung himatyun,</i> The nose of a dying person gets narrow and pointed.

<p><form>taliyir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>repair shop</tr>. <number>2</number> tailor, <tr>dressmaking shop</tr>.

<p><form>taliyuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> turn the body around. <i>Taliyuk kunu. Átung tan-áwun ug haum ba nímu ang <note>can't identify first <number>2</number> letters</note>amirkána,<note>amirkana. corrected. P2</note></i> <tr>Turn around</tr>. Let's see if your jacket fits you.

<p><form>talyir</form> <xr>= <sc>TALIYIR</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>talku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>talc</tr>.

<p><form>taltag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> set out, forth several things in order, one at a time. <number>2</number> deduct a debt from one's wages. <i>Bayinti ang italtag sa ákung swildu,</i> Deduct twenty pesos from my salary. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> tap s.t. off, esp. the ashes. <i>Aku ray mutaltag sa bága sa agipu,</i> I'll tap off the embers from the firebrand myself. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>raddle</tr>, a rod with pegs used to separate the warp threads and guide them into the desired position around the warp beam. <number>2</number> <tr>ash tray</tr>.

<p><form>taltal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> knock off s.t. that is attached or set. <i>Taltáli ang ligid sa karitun sa yapak nga nakakápal niánà,</i> Scrape off the mud from the wheels of your pushcart. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> deduct from one's wages to pay for a debt. <i>Taltálig diyis ang íyang swildu arun siya kabayad,</i> Deduct ten pesos from his salary so that he can pay his debt. <number>3</number> <itype>[c]</itype> divide land, property informally among prospective heirs without legal papers. <i>Ang tibuuk datag tampi sa subà mauy báhin nga gitaltal álang kanákù,</i> All the level land along the riverbank was my share of the inheritance.

<p><form>*talu</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>), <form>talutalu, talúun</form> <pos>a</pos> having or showing little sense or judgement. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become <tr>stupid</tr>.

<p><form>tálu</form> (not without l) <pos>n</pos> <tr>tallow</tr>, the hard fat in animals or the wax from beehives, used for making candles, soap, et al. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> gather or obtain tallow. <form>talúun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sticky</tr>, like tallow. <i>Yútang talúun,</i> <tr>Clay soil</tr>.

<p><form>talù</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>scratch</tr>, dot, impression made by scratching lightly. <number>2</number> marks made to keep a record of petty purchases on credit. <i>Tan-áwa sa listahan ug pilay ákung talù,</i> Look it up to see how much I owe. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> <number>1</number> make scratches, dots. <i>Kinsang kasing nakatalù niíni?</i> Whose top made the impressions on this one? <number>2</number> make small purchases on credit. <i>Nakatalù ku sa tindáhan gabíi,</i> I bought s.t. on credit at the store last night. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> marked with dents all over.

<p><form>talubig</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>&mdash;from <ix>túbig</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> small yellowish pustules appearing individually on the skin. <number>2</number> other watery and itchy eruptions on the skin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> have a pustule of this sort. <i>Dílì ku makasulat kay gitalubigan ang ákung tudlù,</i> I cannot write because my finger has a pustule on it.

<p><form>taludtud</form> <pos>n</pos> the lower portion of the human spinal column. <i>Sakit ákung taludtud kay nahapalingkud ku sa asíras,</i> The bottom part of my spine hurts because I fell down on my buttocks on the sidewalk.

<p><form>talukbuy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> hand s.t. to s.o. <i>Italukbuy ra ning suwat níya,</i> Please hand this letter to her.

<p><form>talukbuy<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>BALUYBUY</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>taluktuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>peg</tr>, <tr>stake</tr>. <i>Gilibutan níyag taluktuk ang bag-ung turuk nga lísu,</i> He put stakes all around the bed of the newly sprouted seedlings. <number>2</number> bar for gathering sweet potatoes. <number>3</number> in dugout boats, reinforcing studs stuck into the sides to which additional planking is nailed to make the hull higher. <number>4</number> top of a hill, cliff. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b6(1)]</itype> enclose stakes. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> make a peg or stake. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> attach studs into the sides of a dugout. <number>4</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be, become <tr>steep</tr>. <i>Ug mutaluktuk ang dálan, dílì na makaági ang dyíp,</i> If the road gets too steep, the jeep won't go any further. <pos>a</pos> <tr>steep</tr>. <i>Taluktuk nga pangpang,</i> A steep cliff. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>summit</tr>.

<p><form>*talulu</form> <xr>= <sc>*TALU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>talumbang</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> a length of bamboo with holes at both ends used to keep a pig from getting his tether rope hopelessly entwined. One end of the bamboo is attached to a short piece of the rope tied to the feet, and the other end of the bamboo is attached to a rope tied to the stake. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> put, make into a <ix>talumbang</ix>.

<p><form>talumtum</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>mildew</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>freckle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> get <tr>mildewed</tr>. <i>Gitalumtuman ang hinamugan kay wà tiwasag utaw,</i> The moistened clothes got mildewed because they were left unironed. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> mildewed, freckled.

<p><form>talumus</form> (from <ix>lumus</ix>&mdash;not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> anything used to cover the body when bathing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put on s.t. during bath. <i>Dílì magtalumus ang mga bátang mangalígù,</i> Children don't put on anything when they swim.

<pb n=975>

<p><form>talun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> pad of paper. <number>2</number> <tr>booklet</tr> of s.t. <i>Gihurut kug palit ang usa ka talun nga tíkit sa swipstik,</i> I bought a whole booklet of sweepstake tickets.

<p><form>talung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>eggplant</tr>: <bio>Solanum melongena</bio>. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>eggplant patch</tr>. <form>talungtalung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>shrub</tr> planted for its ornamental orange or yellow fruit: <bio>Solanum mammosum</bio>. <form>-un</form> <pos>n</pos> wild <tr>shrub</tr> similar to eggplant, producing a spiked inedible fruit, used as a protection around the trunk of the coconut tree (hulud): <bio>Solanum sp</bio>. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>KATYUBUNG</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>talungan</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>pipe stem</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a pipe stem. <i>Makatalungun ka sa bukug nga may lungag sa tungà,</i> You can make a pipe stem out of a bone that has a hole in its center.

<p><form>talúnung</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b3]</itype> momentarily stop from one's work to give close thought or attention to s.t. <i>Usa ka manánuyng sunáta ang gitalunúngan sa mga trabahanti,</i> The workers stopped to listen to the sweet music. <form>hi-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BP1256]</itype> stop, pause when taken back. <i>Nahitalúnung (nahipatalúnung) aku pagkakità sa abling kaha,</i> I was <tr>taken aback</tr> when I saw the open safe.

<p><form>tal-up</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> cover or block the opening of a tube-like structure. <i>Lápuk ang nagtal-up sa imburnal,</i> Mud is blocking the end of the culvert. <i>Tal-úpi ang íyang ilung arun malumus,</i> Cover his nose so he'll suffocate. <pos>n</pos> <tr>trumpet mute</tr>.

<p><form>talupì</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <xr>= <sc>TUBIGTÚBIG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>talusì</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>hornbill</tr>: <bio>Penelopides panini</bio>.

<p><form>talùtalù</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b(1)]</itype> <tr>flatter</tr> s.o. to get him to do s.t. for one. <i>Dì ka makatalùtalù (makapanalùtalù) ánang tigulánga sa íyang kwarta,</i> You can't flatter money out of that old man. <i>Kahibáwu kung mutrabáhu nag talùtaluan,</i> I know he will work if you give him <tr>sweet talk</tr>. <pos>a</pos> <tr>mentally weak</tr>, <tr>stupid</tr>.

<p><form>taluthu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>spit out</tr> what one has in the mouth in an explosive manner. <i>Ayaw nag italuthu nang ímung gikaun dihà sa salug,</i> Don't spit what you're eating out on the floor. <number>2</number> shoot with a pellet from a blowgun. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> cure s.o. with <ix>taluthu</ix>. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> treatment for skin ailments or swellings of natural or supernatural origins whereby a sorcerer chews ingredients and spits them out on the afflicted area as he utters magical prayers. <number>2</number> pellet from a blowgun. <form>maN-</form> <pos>n</pos> sorcerer who can cure with <ix>taluthu</ix>.

<p><form>talùtù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. house <tr>lizard</tr>.

<p><form>talùtù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large <tr>tree</tr> of secondary forests.

<p><form>taluut</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large spreading ficus <tr>tree</tr>.

<p><form>talyáda</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> putting on a lot and highly made up. <number>2</number> <tr>effeminate</tr>, <tr>homosexual</tr>. <i>Ang mga talyáda dinaugdáug sa katilingban,</i> Society treats <tr>fairies</tr> with contempt.

<p><form>tama</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; b4]</itype> be, become tired, sick or <tr>fed up</tr> with. <i>Natamhan (hitamhan) na tingáli sa íyang pagkaulitáwu maung nagminyù,</i> He must have become <tr>tired of</tr> being single so he finally got married. <i>Gitamhan na kug kináug inasal,</i> I'm <tr>sick of</tr> eating roast pig all the time.

<p><form>tamà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>imprint</tr> or <tr>mark</tr> left on. <i>Kining uwáta ang tamà sa ímung pagkatampásan,</i> This scar is a mark of your cruelty. <number>2</number> identifying <tr>sign</tr> or mark. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>TAMLÀ</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> leave a mark on. <i>Mitamà ang latigu níya sa ákung láwas,</i> His whip left a mark on my body. <form>(&larr;)<sub>1</sub></form> <number>1</number> put an identifying mark on. <i>Akuy mitámà sa ámung kargamintu<note>ka[**can't identify</note>amintu]<note>corrected. P2</note>,</i> I <tr>marked</tr> our cargoes. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>TAMLÀ</sc>, <pos>v</pos>.</xr> <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>marker</tr> or identifying sign.

<p><form>támà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23; c1]</itype> for s.t. to hit squarely on s.t. <i>Mitámà ang suntuk sa apapángig sa buksiyadur,</i> The fist hit the boxer squarely on the jaw. <i>Tamáa (itámà) pagdukduk ang martilyu sa lansang,</i> Hit the nail squarely on the head. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23C3; c1]</itype> be just exactly on time. <i>Mitámà ang pyista sa ámung lungsud sa ákung adlaw,</i> The fiesta of our town fell exactly on my birthday. <number>3</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> make s.t. <tr>fit</tr>. <i>Tamáa (itámà) pag-áyu ang sinínà sa ákung sukud arun dì ku magyàyà,</i> Fit my dress according to my measurements so that it won't hang loosely on me. <number>4</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> stop doing s.t. bad. <i>Tamáa (itámà) na nang ímung pagpamabáyi,</i> Put a stop to your romantic exploits. <pos>a</pos> squarely hit, <tr>on time</tr>, <tr>fitting</tr> perfectly. <form>&mdash; na</form> <tr>that's enough</tr>. <i>Támà na ánang ímung binúang,</i> That's enough of your foolishness.

<p><form>tamâ</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>TAMALÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tamad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> feel too lazy to do s.t. <i>Gitamaran kung muadtu sa dawuntáwun kay ínit,</i> I don't feel like going downtown because it is too hot. <form>tamaran</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lazy</tr>. <i>Tamaran, gustu lag síging katúlug,</i> He is lazy. All he likes to do is sleep. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become lazy and <tr>indolent</tr>.

<p><form>tamáing</form> <xr>= <sc>LIGWAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>támak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3S; b]</itype> <tr>step on</tr> s.t. <i>Aruy! Ímung gitamákan ang ákung kalyu,</i> Ouch! You stepped on my corn. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23S; a12]</itype> <tr>come to</tr>, <tr>set foot on</tr> a place. <i>Wà matámak sa mga Katsílà ang kamurúsan,</i> The Spaniards never set foot on Muslim soil. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>trample</tr> down by abuse of position or authority. <i>Tamákan ka kun magpaubus ka,</i> People will step on you if you don't assert your rights. <form>&mdash; sa dungug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>dishonor</tr>, <pb n=976><tr>insult</tr>. <i>Ang ímung pagkadisgrasya nagtámak sa átung dungug,</i> Your pregnancy has brought dishonor to us. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> place s.t. beneath a religious image in the belief that the saint will do to the owner of the object whatever the person who put the object there prayed for him to do (good or bad). <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. placed beneath a saint's image in this belief. <form>-l-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>doormat</tr>.

<p><form>tam-ak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>dump</tr>, throw a large quantity of s.t. in a heap s.w. <i>Dì ka makatam-ak ug sagbut sa agiánan,</i> You can't dump the rubbish in the street. <number>2</number> fill up a hole in the ground. <i>Íyang gitam-ákan ang atábay ug mga sagbut,</i> He filled the well with trash. <number>3</number> heap work, blame, abuse on s.o. <i>Akuy natam-akan sa tanang kasábà,</i> All the abuse was heaped on me.

<p><form>tam-ak<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b5]</itype> <tr>wind up</tr> s.w. one would not expect to be. <i>Ngánung mitam-ak ka ning dapíta?</i> How come you wound up in this place? <i>Sa panahun sa kampanya gitam-ak (gitam-ákan) níla ang kinahilitang baryu,</i> During the campaign they penetrated to the remotest villages. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> <tr>come across</tr> by chance. <i>Nakatam-ak siyag bahandì pagkálut níyag lubung,</i> He <tr>discovered</tr> a treasure while digging a grave. <i>Hitam-akan námù ang duut sa isdà,</i> We came across a school of fish.

<p><form>tamalà</form> <pos>n</pos> very small <tr>octopus</tr> the head of which is less than an inch in diameter. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> go catch <ix>tamalà</ix>.

<p><form>tamális</form> <pos>n</pos> dish of ground roasted rice and peanuts mixed with coconut milk, meat, eggs, and other ingredients, wrapped in a banana leaf and boiled. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, have <ix>tamális</ix>.

<p><form>táman</form> <number>1</number> <tr>until</tr>, <tr>up to</tr> a certain part. <i>Lakaw táman sa kural,</i> Walk up to the fence. <i>Butangi ug túbig táman sa pagkapunù,</i> Fill it up with water until it is full. <form>&mdash; sa ginháwa, kusug</form> to the limit of one's capacity. <i>Dágan táman sa ginháwa,</i> Run as fast as you can (lit. your breath allows). <number>2</number> be only up to doing s.t. less than one wants to. <i>Táman ra ka sa tan-aw ug dì ka mudíga,</i> You'll only get to look if you don't propose. <number>3</number> <form>&mdash; na</form> it is <tr>enough</tr>. <i>Táman na ang usa ka bukag,</i> One basket is enough. <i>Táman na sa paghílak,</i> That's enough crying. <number>4</number> [verb] <form>ug &mdash;</form> [do] <tr>exceedingly</tr>. <i>Mikáun ug táman sa útan,</i> He ate <tr>lots</tr> and lots of vegetables. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> do more than what is usually necessary. <i>Íyang gitamánan ug kálut íyang buktun,</i> He scratched his arm <tr>too much</tr>.

<p><form>tamaraw</form> <pos>n</pos> tamaraw, a k.o. wild <tr>water buffalo</tr>.

<p><form>tamarindu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tamarind preserves</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> make tamarind preserves. <form>tamarinduhun</form> <pos>n</pos> tamarinds good for making into preserves.

<p><form>tamarung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. carangoid <tr>fish</tr> with a tuna-shaped body, green dorsal and white ventral portion.

<p><form>*támas panamastámas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>despise</tr>, <tr>insult</tr>. <i>Daghang nanamastámas sa bag-u níyang tinuúhan,</i> Many people heap insults on him for his new faith. <number>2</number> <tr>molest</tr> physically. <i>Naghíkug ang babáying gipanamastamásan,</i> The girl that was <tr>raped</tr> committed suicide. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>slander</tr>, <tr>insult</tr>. <number>2</number> physical <tr>molestation</tr>. <form>mapanamastamásun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>slandering</tr>, <tr>molesting</tr>.

<p><form>tamasak</form> <xr>= <sc>TAMBASÁKAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tamásuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> rot affecting jackfruit caused by insect larvae. <number>2</number> k.o. <tr>worm</tr> that infests the wooden parts of ships. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infested with <tr>rot</tr> or <tr>shipworm</tr>. <pos>a</pos> infested with this sort of rot.

<p><form>tamátis</form> <xr>= <sc>KAMÁTIS</sc>.</xr> <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> for a baby's feces to be like squashed tomatoes. <i>Mutamatis ang tái sa bátà ug magngipun,</i> The baby's <xr><sc>B.M</sc>.</xr> is like tomato juice when it teethes.

<p><form>támay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3S; a12]</itype> <tr>despise</tr>, <tr>look down on</tr>, usually with derision. <i>Gitámay siyang pubri,</i> He was despised because of his poverty. <form>-l-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>contemptible</tr>. <i>Talamáyun ang ímung pagpanápaw,</i> Your adulterous affair is <tr>shameful</tr>. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>scornful</tr>, <tr>contemptuous</tr>.

<p><form>tamba</form> <xr>= <sc>TANGBA</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>tambag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>advise</tr>. <i>Mitambag ang duktur nga mupahúlay siya,</i> The doctor advised him to rest. <pos>n</pos> <tr>advice</tr>, <tr>counsel</tr>. <form>paki-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> ask for advice. <i>Nagpakitambag siya báhin sa íyang suliran,</i> He asked for advice about his problem. <form>-l-un, paN-un</form> <pos>n</pos> piece of <tr>advice</tr>. <form>mag-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> giver of advice.

<p><form>tambagísa, tambagísà</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>shrub</tr> of waste places, the leaves of which are used as a poultice: <bio>Cassia sp</bio>.

<p><form>tambak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>dump</tr> a large number of things in or over s.t. <i>Siyay nagtambak sa basúra sa ámung duwaánan,</i> She dumped garbage over our playground. <i>Gitambakan ug yútà ang atábay,</i> The well was filled with soil. <i>Itambak ku ning mga kartun nganhà nímu,</i> I'll push this pile of cardboard boxes over on you. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dumping ground</tr>. <i>Ang Hungkung mau ang tambakan sa mga upyum,</i> Hong Kong is the dumping ground of opium. <number>2</number> <tr>gathering place</tr>. <i>Ang bwangan mauy tambakan sa mga táwu matag Duminggu,</i> The cockpit is where the people gather on Sundays.

<p><form>tambal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>treat</tr> an illness, wound. <i>Tambáli (tambali) nang ímung samad,</i> <tr>Dress</tr> your wound. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b2]</itype> <tr>reform</tr>, <tr>correct</tr> s.o. <pb n=977><i>Unsay itambal ning íyang katapulan,</i> What <tr>remedy</tr> is there for his laziness? <number>2a</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> get punished as a cure for being naughty. <i>Hingtambalan ka lagi human ka latiguhi,</i> Your whipping was just what the doctor ordered. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>medicine</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>remedial measures</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>practice medicine</tr>. <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> medical <tr>doctor</tr>. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>TAMBÁLAN</sc>.</xr> <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>folk doctor</tr>, specializing in diseases of supernatural origin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> become a <ix>tambálan</ix>. <form>-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hospital</tr>, <tr>clinic</tr>. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>medicinal</tr>.

<p><form>tambalígay</form> <xr>= <sc>BALANTÍYUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tambaliyug</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>blenny</tr>, greyish in color with large eyes, which jumps about.

<p><form>tambalíyung</form> <pos>n</pos> club-shaped, edible <tr>squash</tr>: <bio>Lagenaria leucantha var</bio>.

<p><form>tambalùlù, tambaluslus</form> (from <ix>lùlù</ix> and <ix>luslus</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> supernatural being in human form that has lips so large that they turn inside out covering the face when he laughs. <number>2</number> <tr>jerk</tr>, a stupid, contemptible guy. <i>Pagkadakung tambaluslus nímu. Wà nímu syáta,</i> You jerk! You didn't make the basket.

<p><form>tamban</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to <tr>sardines</tr> of several species. <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> solve a problem by counting or by looking at and manipulating s.t. representing the thing counted (analogous to the way <ix>tamban</ix> are sold&mdash;by counting out each piece individually). <i>Tinambana (itinamban) pagkwinta,</i> <tr>Reckon</tr> it by tallying or counting on your fingers. <pos>n</pos> method of counting by manipulation of pieces. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> fish for <ix>tamban</ix>. <pos>n</pos> occupation of fishing for <ix>tamban</ix>. <form>panalamban, pangtamban</form> <xr>= <sc>PAN-</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>tambangúngu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large, fleshy <tr>catfish</tr> living in marine estuaries.

<p><form>tambasákan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mudskipper</tr>, a k.o. small fish that lives in shallow water, salt or fresh, with protruding eyes and spiny fins. It crawls out of the water, may travel considerable distance over land and is often perched on mangrove branches: <bio>Periophthalmus sp</bio>.

<p><form>tambaúlì</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. <tr>magic oil</tr> for open wounds which is said to make the wound close instantly. <number>2</number> condition in which a circumcised penis gets covered over again.

<p><form>tambaw</form> <xr>= <sc>TAMBAL</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>tambawu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>frog</tr> that thrives on land.

<p><form>tambayáwan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>spider</tr> found in and inhabiting thickets, 3&Prime;&ndash;5&Prime; in diameter including the feet, mottled green and black in color.

<p><form>tambayáyung</form> (from <ix>yáyung</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1C; b(1)]</itype> work together sharing the labor, share in expenses. <i>Dílì siya mutambayáyung sa buluhatun sa balay,</i> He does not <tr>help out</tr> with household chores. <i>Nagtambayáyung mi sa ábang,</i> We each pay a share of the rent. <pos>n</pos> one whom one works together with to accomplish s.t. <form>ka-</form> <xr>= <sc>TAMBAYÁYUNG</sc>, <pos>n</pos>.</xr>

<p><form>tambid</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC2; c]</itype> lay s.t. long across s.t. else. <i>Nagtambid ang duhang nangatúlug,</i> The two put their legs over each other as they slept. <i>Itambid nang lipak sa láin, kurus na,</i> Lay a stick across another, and you get a cross. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> carry a child astraddle one's side. <i>Ayawg itambid nang bátà kay mapakaw,</i> Don't carry the child on your hips. He might become bowlegged. <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> sit with an ankle crossing each other or one on the other knee. <i>Makítà ang gising midiyas ug magtinambid ka,</i> Everyone will be able to see your torn socks if you sit with your ankle on your knee. <form>-in- ságing</form> <pos>n</pos> fried banana fritters consisting of bananas cut lengthwise and laid across one another. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> sit with legs crossed at the knees. <form>tambiray</form> <pos>n</pos> game of rubber bands in which one band is flicked with the fingers over another band.

<p><form>tambilagaw</form> <xr>= <sc>TAGILHAW</sc></xr>.</xr>

<p><form>tambilágaw</form> <pos>a</pos> for the vision to be blurred. <i>Tambilágaw íyang panan-aw sa lúhà,</i> Her vision is all blurred from the tears. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for the vision to become blurred.

<p><form>tambis</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fruit tree with bell-shaped, pinkish fruits, about 2&Prime; long: <bio>Eugenia aquea</bio>. <form>&mdash; nga putì</form> variety with white fruit. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56]</itype> for the external genitalia of a sow that is in the heat to redden like a <ix>tambis</ix> fruit. <form>-un</form> <pos>n</pos> full and pinkish. <i>Tambísun ang íyang ngábil,</i> She has full and red lips.

<p><form>tambiyúlu</form> <xr>= <sc>KAMBIYÚLU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tambling</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tumbling</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> do tumbling. <i>Maáyu siyang mutambling kúmu sirkadur,</i> He's good in tumbling being an acrobat. <i>Gitamblíngan lang níya ang íyang pagkahúlug,</i> He broke his fall by tumbling.

<p><form>tambù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> appear, lean out of a window or s.t. similar. <i>Mitambù (nanambu)<note>missing accent? P2</note> siya sa bintánà,</i> He was in the window. <i>Lúhà nga nanambù (mitambù) sa íyang mga mata,</i> Tears that formed in her eyes. <i>Itambù ang bátà sa bintánà,</i> Put the child in the window. <form>-l-an, -anan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>window</tr>.

<p><form>tambù<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>TANGBÙ<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tambúbu</form> <pos>n</pos> a building used for storing ears of corn. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> construct, make into a <tr>granary</tr>.

<p><form>tambubúan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large <tr>wasp</tr>.

<p><form>tambubúkag</form> <xr>= <sc>HAMBUBÚKAG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tambud</form> <xr>= <sc>TABILI SA DÁGAT</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>TABILI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tambug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> throw s.t. heavy or bulky into s.t. deep. <i>Silay mitambug sa gipatay sa <pb n=978>dágat,</i> They threw the murder victim into the sea. <i>Maáyu itambug sa pangpang ning gubaung kutsi,</i> Better throw this rickety car over the cliff. <number>2</number> give animals feed or fodder. <i>Tambúgi lang ug pakpak ang kábaw,</i> Just give corn husks to the carabao. <number>2a</number> drop a coin into a piggy bank. <number>3</number> <itype>[B12; b8]</itype> <tr>fall</tr>. <i>Ubang búnga matambug ug mahinug,</i> Some fruits fall when ripe. <i>Natambug ang bátà sa hagdanan,</i> The child fell down the stairs.

<p><form>tambuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fat</tr>. <i>Bábuyng tambuk,</i> A fat pig. <i>Paridy&ucaron;s kay tambuk ka ra,</i> Go on a diet because you're too fat. <i>Tambuk pay dyís, miswa,</i> Thinner than a dime, a noddle<note> noodle?</note>. <number>2</number> fertile soil. <i>Tambuk ang yútang daplin sa subà,</i> The soil near the riverbank is fertile. <number>3</number> growing vigorously, lush. <i>Tambuk ang tanum inabunúhan,</i><note>not sure: "b"? 2 words?</note> Fertilized plants are vigorous. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[BN; b3(1)]</itype> get fat. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; b3(1)]</itype> become fertile, vigorous in growth. <i>Makahayblad ang pagsingárig káug tambuk,</i> You can get high blood pressure from eating fat all the time. <form>&mdash; nga nagdág luib</form> <pos>a</pos> fat but sickly person. <form>&mdash; ug, ang sulti, manulti</form> <pos>a</pos> exaggerating, bragging. <i>Dílì katuúhan nang tawhána kay tambuk nà ug sulti,</i> You can't believe him because he is a braggart. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> <tr>brag</tr> or <tr>exaggerate</tr>.

<p><form>tambuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> throw s.t. out. <i>Kinsay nagtambuk ug basúra dinhi?</i> Who disposed of his garbage here?

<p><form>tambukàkà, tambukákà</form> <pos>n</pos> fat (derisive). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become obese. <i>Nagkatambukàkà siya human maminyù,</i> She turned into a fat slob after she got married.

<p><form>tambukíkuy</form> <pos>a</pos> plump and chubby. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become plump and chubby.

<p><form>tambúku</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. grass of waste spaces bearing white tassels: <bio>Kyllinga monocephala</bio>. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>BULUBUTÚNIS</sc></xr> <ix>under</ix> <xr><sc>BUTÚNIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tambul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bass drum</tr>. <number>2</number> pregnant woman (humorous). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; b6]</itype> become pregnant. <form>-in-</form> <pos>a</pos> s.t. made in the shape of a bass drum, more or less. <form>-iru(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> drumbeater. <number>2</number> one who beats the drums (is an apologist) for a politician. <i>Kanang kumintadúra tambulíru sa administrasiyun,</i> That radio commentator is an apologist for the administration.

<p><form>tambul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> dam, put s.t. across a stream to stop the flow of water. <i>Ayaw ug tambúli ang sapà kay mawalay túbig sila sa ubus,</i> Don't dam the brook because they will have no water downstream. <pos>n</pos> <tr>dam</tr>.

<p><form>tambula</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. play performed during Christmas depicting the Nativity, performed by an all-male cast wearing masks. It is in verse and accompanied by music. <number>2</number> participants of such a play.

<p><form>tambúli, tambúlì</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>melongena</tr>, k.o. conch. <number>2</number> horn made from the horn of a water buffalo or a conch. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> call with a <ix>tambúlì</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make a <ix>tambúlì</ix> horn.

<p><form>tambulingaw</form> (from <ix>lingaw</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> overlook s.t. due to preoccupation or distraction. <i>Natambulingaw siyag panuklì tungud sa kadaghan sa mamalítay,</i> She got mixed up in giving change because there were so many customers.

<p><form>tambúluk</form> <pos>n</pos> the hackles of roosters.

<p><form>tambun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> cover over, fill up with soil. <i>Ayúhag tambun ang gamut arun sigúrung mutúbù,</i> Cover the roots well so that they will be sure to grow. <i>Tambúni ang písak arun dílì maghítak,</i> Throw sand in the puddle so it will not turn into a mire. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small bamboo fish trap placed on the sea floor with its top covered with corals and stones. <form>paN-an</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> catch, trap fish using such a fish trap.

<p><form>tambung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> attend a gathering. <i>Mutambung ta sa íyang lubung,</i> Let's attend his funeral.

<p><form>tambur</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>TAMBUL</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> cylinder of a revolver. <form>pistúla nga di-</form> <tr>revolver</tr>.

<p><form>tamburábug</form> <xr>= <sc>TAMBUKÀKÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tamburabuy</form> <xr>= <sc>BABUYBABUY</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p><form>tamburábuy</form> <xr>= <sc>TAMBUKÀKÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tamburin</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tambourine</tr>. <number>2</number> round fancy earrings or necklace in tambourine shape or highly ornate filigree. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> wear earrings of this sort.

<p><form>tambutsu</form> <pos>n</pos> exhaust pipe of motor vehicles. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> use, attach an exhaust pipe.

<p><form>tam dyuns</form> <pos>n</pos> men's long hair style patterned after the singer, Tom Jones. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear one's hair in the Tom Jones style.

<p><form>tamhan</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>TAMA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tamhang</form> <pos>a</pos> carelessly inattentive, <tr>neglectful</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> be careless, neglectful. <i>Labihan nímung nakatamhang sa ímung pamilya!</i> How you have been neglecting your family! <i>Gitamhángan níya ang íyang pagmaníhu maung nadisgrasya,</i> He was careless when he drove so he had an accident. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> damage, destroy maliciously. <i>Gitamhángan sa mga ilagà ang mga libru,</i> The rats destroyed the books. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> bent on destroying, breaking things. <i>Ang dúlun tamhangan sa tanum,</i> Locusts are destructive to plants. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become destructive.

<p><form>tamhung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b2]</itype> make a plant be in the shade. <i>Dakung káhuy nga nagtamhung sa mga tanum,</i> The tall tree that shades the plants.

<p><form>támì</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> sticky and moist. <i>Támì nga armirul,</i> Sticky laundry starch. <i>Támì nga panahun,</i> <pb n=979>Humid weather. <number>2</number> dirt-soaked. <i>Támì nga sinínà,</i> Soiled clothing. <number>3</number> wet and muddy. <i>Támì ang ílang tugkaran kun mag-ulan,</i> Their yard becomes wet and muddy when it rains. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b5]</itype> become sticky and moist, dirt-soaked, or muddy. <i>Mutámì (matámì) ang kalámay kun hitun-ugan,</i> Brown sugar becomes moist and sticky when exposed to damp. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for rain to fall. <i>Nagtámì na sad,</i> It's raining again. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> moist or partially melted brown sugar.

<p><form>tamíaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> visit s.o. or a place. <i>Gitamiáwan (gitamíaw) nákù ang ákung apuhan,</i> I visited my grandparents.

<p><form>tamíhid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> stick out the lower lip in derision. <i>Nahiubus ang nangulitáwu nímu kay ímung gitamihíran,</i> Your suitor was hurt because you stuck out your lower lip at him. <form>matamihírun, matinamihírun</form> <pos>a</pos> characterized with derision<note> "<tr>derisive</tr>"?</note>. <i>Napikal ku sa íyang matamihírun nga katáwa,</i> I got irked at her derisive laughter.

<p><form>tamilì</form> <xr>= <sc>HIMILÌ</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PÍLÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tamíluk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>shipworms</tr>, edible marine mollusks that bore into wood. <number>2</number> k.o. edible insect grub, usually found in rotten logs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> be infested with shipworms.

<p><form>tamíluk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> mucous discharge when one has colds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> have a cold.

<p><form>taming</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>shield</tr>. <number>2</number> s.t. used as defense. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c6]</itype> use a shield. <i>Naigù siya kay wà magtaming,</i> He was hit because he didn't use a shield.

<p><form>tam-is</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sweet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; a2]</itype> become, make sweet. <i>Mutam-is (matam-is) ang prútas kun lihian kinig kámay,</i> Fruits become sweet if sugar is injected into the tree when young. <pos>n</pos> sweets, such as candy, jam, et al. <form>paka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> consider an unpleasant experience sweet (literary). <i>Pakatam-ísun kung mamatay álang sa bulawánung tingúhà,</i> I would consider it sweet to die for a lofty cause. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> sweet in a figurative sense. <i>Matam-ísung yuhum,</i> A sweet smile.

<p><form>tamislat</form> <pos>n</pos> <note> <number>1</number></note> k.o. brachiopod found burrowing in the sand, used in soup. <number>2</number> facetious term for s.o. with a flat nose. <i>Tamislat kaáyu ning ákung palangging,</i> My little darling has a flat nose.

<p><form>tamlà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fingerprint</tr>, <tr>thumbprint</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> affix the thumbprint. <i>Gawas sa pirma tamláan pa giyud,</i> You have to sign and affix your thumbprint as well.

<p><form>tampa, tampà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> put a ladle into s.t. that is boiling over to settle it. <i>Way nitampà sa linúgaw pagbúkal,</i> Nobody came to take care of the porridge when it boiled over.

<p><form>tampà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> cover or patch an opening with a flat sheet. <i>Tampái lang ug kartun ang lungag,</i> Just cover the hole with a piece of cardboard. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> lay s.t. flat over another flat surface. <i>Ang lubut sa aparadur wà mutampà sa salug,</i> The bottom part of the cabinet did not lay flat on the floor. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> flatten or strike with the palm of the hand. <i>Tampáun ta ang íyang dughan kun nagginhawa pa ba,</i> Let us press the palm of our hands to his breast to see if he is still breathing.

<p><form>tampà<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bride price</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> give, pay the bride price. <i>Gitampáan siya ug usa ka balay ug usa ka lunà nga yútà,</i> They paid a house and a piece of land for her.

<p><form>tampad</form> <xr>= <sc>TALAMPAD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tampak</form> <pos>a</pos> square, straight on the path<note>pa?</note> or focus of. <i>Nahúlug ang butung tampak sa íyang úlu,</i> The coconut fell smack on his head. <i>Tampak sa habágat ang baybáyun sa Talísay,</i> The southwest wind blows squarely across the beach at Talisay.

<p><form>tampal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> overlay a patch on clothing at places of great wear to add strength. <i>Gitampálan nákù ang samput sa purul,</i> I put a patch on the seat of the short pants.

<p><form>tampálas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b(1)]</itype> maltreat severely. <i>Mutampálas (manampálas) sa asáwa ang bánang palahúbug,</i> A drunkard husband maltreats his wife. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> s.o. who maltreats. <number>2</number> <tr>foul-mouthed</tr>, obscene in speech. <i>Tampásan siyang manulti báhig babáyi,</i> He speaks obscenely about women. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> become severely abusive toward s.o. <i>Nagkatampásan ang way uwaw nga inaína,</i> The shameless stepmother is getting more and more abusive. <number>2</number> become foul-mouthed.

<p><form>tampaling</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> slap the face. <i>Walà kay katungud mutampaling nákù,</i> You had no right to slap me in the face. <i>Kaáyu giyud níyang tampalingun,</i> How nice it would be to slap her in the face. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>slap in the face</tr>. <number>2</number> insult like a slap in the face.

<p><form>tampalung</form> <xr>= <sc>TAMPALING</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>tamparus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; c1]</itype> do s.t. hurriedly and carelessly. <i>Ug tamparusun (itamparus) ninyu pagtáud ang bungbung mangatangtang lang nà dáyun,</i> If you put the wall up hurriedly and carelessly, it will get loose right away. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> slap the face hard. Tamparusun ta kag magtubagtubag ka, I'll slap you in the face if you talk back. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> hard slap in the face. <number>2</number> <tr>insult</tr>. <i>Tamparus álang kanátù ang íyang pagbalíbad,</i> His refusal is a slap on the face.

<p><form>tampi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> bank of a body of water. <number>2</number> edge of a surface. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>nearby</tr>, close by. <i>Ang kumbintu <pb n=980>tampi sa simbahan,</i> The convent is near the church. <number>2</number> close to the edge. <i>Tampi ra kaáyung pagbutang mu sa básu sa lamísa. Mah&umacracu;g,</i> You put the glass much too close to the edge of the table. It's going to fall.

<p><form>tampì<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>TAMPI</sc>, <i>n1,</i> <i>2.</i></xr>

<p><form>tampì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> tuck a piece of cloth into another to hold it in place, e.g. a shirt that sticks out or s.t. wrapped around the waist. <i>Tampía (itampì) ang karsúnis kay luag ang hawakan,</i> Fold your trousers and tuck in the folds because they are loose at the waist.

<p><form>tampihak</form> (from <ix>pihak</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>temple</tr> of the head. <number>2</number> severe headache on one side of the head. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4b4]</itype> get a headache of this sort.

<p><form>tampil</form> <pos>n</pos> milled or pounded rice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cook rice. <i>Nakatampil ka nag ipaniudtu?</i> Have you cooked rice for lunch? <i>Dì nátù tampílun ang paniudtu kay dì paígù ang usa ka litru,</i> Let's not have rice for lunch because a liter isn't enough.

<p><form>tamping</form> <pos>n</pos> flat cake made of fine corn flour (<ix>tiktik</ix>) or buri flour (<ix>unaw</ix>) mixed with coconut milk and sugar. It is either fried in coconut oil or wrapped in banana leaves and put over live embers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make this sort of cake.

<p><form>tampípì</form> <pos>n</pos> a covered wicker suitcase. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> make into a wicker suitcase.

<p><form>tampiri</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <tr>lean</tr>, <tr>tilt</tr>. <i>Mitampiri (natampiri) ang lubi sa paghángin ug kusug,</i> The coconut tree tilted during the strong wind. <i>Kun magtanum kag kamúting káhuy, tampiriha (itampiri) ang láwas sa yútà,</i> When you plant cassava, plant the stem into the ground at an angle.

<p><form>tampu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB3C; ac]</itype> join in a group, <tr>put together</tr>. <i>Kinsay nagtampu íning bulingun sa inutaw?</i> Who put this dirty laundry together with the ironed things? <i>Tampúha lang ang tanan arun usa ray sudlanan,</i> Put them all together so there will be just one container. <i>Itampu nang bakláa sa mga babáyi,</i> Put that sissy together with the girls. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give a contribution. <i>Magtampu (magtampuhay) ta pára sa parti,</i> Let's contribute for the party. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> contribute to a publication. <i>Sugilánun ákung itampu sa sunud gulà,</i> I'll contribute a short story for the next issue. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> send in an entry to a contest. <i>Gitampu námù ang basíyung káha sa sigarilyu,</i> We sent the empty cigarette packs as entries to the contest. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>contribution</tr>. <number>2</number> entry in a contest. <form>tampuhan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> contribute to s.t. regularly. <i>Magtampuhan siya sa Bisayà,</i> He contributes regularly to Bisaya. <form>tampuhay</form> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>TAMPU</sc>.</xr>