<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN" [

<!ENTITY larr       CDATA "&#x2190;"            -- leftwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY rarr       CDATA "&#x2192;"            -- rightwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY glots      CDATA "&#x0294;"            -- glottal stop -->

<!ENTITY amacr      CDATA "&#x0101;"            -- a with macron -->
<!ENTITY imacr      CDATA "&#x012B;"            -- i with macron -->
<!ENTITY umacr      CDATA "&#x016B;"            -- u with macron -->

<!ENTITY amacrgra   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0300;"    -- a with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY imacrgra   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0300;"    -- i with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY umacrgra   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0300;"    -- u with macron and grave -->

<!ENTITY amacracu   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0301;"    -- a with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY imacracu   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0301;"    -- i with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY umacracu   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0301;"    -- u with macron and acute -->

<!ENTITY acaron     CDATA "a&#x030C;"           -- a with caron -->
<!ENTITY ucaron     CDATA "u&#x030C;"           -- u with caron -->
<!ENTITY icaron     CDATA "i&#x030C;"           -- i with caron -->

<!ENTITY schwa      CDATA "&#x0259;"            -- schwa (turned e) -->

]><TEI.2 lang=en>
<teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
        <titleStmt>
            <title>A Dictionary of Cebuano Visayan</title>
            <author>John U. Wolff</author>
        </titleStmt>
    </fileDesc>
    <profileDesc>
        <langUsage>
            <language id=en>English</language>
            <language id=en-US>English (United States)</language>
            <language id=ceb>Cebuano</language>
        </langUsage>
    </profileDesc>
</teiHeader>
<text>
<body>
<pb n=709>


<div1 id=letter-p>
<head>P</head>


<p><form>pa<sub>1</sub></form> <number>1</number> still, yet: up to now, up to a specific point in the past. <i>Natúlug pa si Pidru,</i> Pedro is still asleep. <i>Si Huwan pay naabut,</i> So far only John has arrived. <number>1a</number> with measurements: only [so-and-so much] up to now. <i>Tungà pa ug túbig ang baril,</i> The barrel is still only half full of water. <number>1b</number> <formx>dílì, walà &mdash;</formx> <number>1b1</number> not yet. <i>Ang linung-ag nga ságing walà pa malútù,</i> The boiled bananas are not cooked yet. <number>1b2</number> before. <i>Hipúsa ang libru sa dílì pa si Pápa muabut,</i> Put the book away before Dad arrives. <i>Sa wà pay gíra,</i> Before the war. <number>2</number> else, in addition. <number>2a</number> <ix>with future verb:</ix> [so-and-so] will still happen. <i>Sulatan pa nákù si Husi,</i> I still have to write to José. <number>2b</number> with a past verb: [did] besides. <i>Human siya sagpáa, gisultían pa ug pait,</i> He was slapped and bitter words were said to him as well. <number>2c</number> <ix>with existential:</ix> [so-and-so] also is in existence. <i>Náa pa bay túbig sa baril?</i> Is there any more water in the barrel? <number>2d</number> <i>interrogative &mdash;:</i> <number>2d1</number> what, where, why, etc. else. <i>Kinsa pay muadtu?</i> Who else will go? <number>2d2</number> what, where, why, etc. could it be. <i>Unsa pa ug dílì kwarta?</i> What could it be <corr sic=it>if</corr> not money? <i>Ngánu pa nga ikaw giyud?</i> Why, oh why, was it you, of all people? <number>2d3</number> <formx>unsa, háin -y</formx> <i>[noun]-un</i> what [noun] are you talking about? <i>Unsa pay radiyúhun nga dúgay nang gikáwat,</i> What <pb n=710>radio are you talking about when it was stolen long ago. <number>2e</number> <ix>in phrases bringing up a new subject:</ix> <form>láin &mdash;y átù</form> by the way, to change the subject. <i>Láin pay átù, minyù ka na ba?</i> By the way, are you married? <form>mau &mdash; diay átù</form> by the way, I just thought of it. <i>Mau pa diay átù, wà ta kadág abridur,</i> It just occurred to me. We didn&apos;t bring a can opener. <form>úsà, ísà, tayim &mdash;</form> excuse me a second (lit. one more second). <i>Ísà pa kay ákung pagngun ang radiyu,</i> Excuse me. I am going to turn off the radio. <number>2f</number> <ix>in phrases meaning in addition:</ix> <form>bísan &mdash;</form> even ... too, despite. <i>Bísan pa ang mga bátà giapil,</i> Even the children were included. <i>Bísan pa niánà, dì ku muadtu,</i> Despite that, I won&apos;t go! <form>gawas, lábut &mdash;</form> besides. <i>Gawas (lábut) pa niánà, unsa pa may púlung níya?</i> Besides that, what else did he say? <form>labaw &mdash;</form> in addition to. <i>Labaw pa niánà tagáan tikag primiyu,</i> And in addition, I will give you a reward. <number>3</number> [predicate] is superflous;<note>typo: superfluous</note> [do] when one shouldn&apos;t or shouldn&apos;t have to. <i>Ug nagbayadbáyad pa siya nga wà man tu kinahanglána,</i> And he was paying for it when there was no need. <i>Sus! Ipakítà pa giyud níya mu rag dílì baratuhun,</i> Heavens! She has to show off, as if it weren&apos;t s.t. cheap. <number>3a</number> [do] some more so that [such-and-such] a bad thing will happen again. <i>Nasagpaan ka. Panabì pa,</i> You got yourself a slapping. Go on. Blabber some more. <i>Nadagmà ka núun. Sígi, dágan pa,</i> You fell down. Go on. Keep on running around (so you can fall again). <number>3b</number> that&apos;s what happens when you do [so-and-so]. <i>Minyù pa. Mu ra na kag irung panit,</i> That is what you get for getting married. You&apos;re no better off than a mangy dog. <number>3c</number> <formx>walà nay</formx> [<ix>doubled verb</ix>] &mdash; didn&apos;t even do [so-and-so] though it is customary. <i>Gipalit níya ang kutsi dihàdihà nga wà nay hangyùhangyù pa,</i> He bought the car, then and there, without even bargaining. <number>3d</number> <formx>mau &mdash;y</formx> [<ix>verb</ix>] [so-and-so] was the case, which was bad enough, but then.... <i>Mau pay kisì, ímu pung iuran ug sígi, nadúnut,</i> It was already torn. You kept wearing it, so it was ruined. <number>3d1</number> <formx>mau &mdash;y <r>[<ix>verb, adj.</ix>]</r> ... mau &mdash;y <r>[<ix>verb, adj.</ix>]</r></formx> he [did, does] and yet dared, dares to do [so-and-so] in addition. <i>Mau pay sad-an mau pay mangísug,</i> He is at fault, but he dares to get mad. <i>Mau pay nangáyù mau pay mipílì,</i> He is asking the favor and yet he is choosy. <number>4</number> [subject] is still in a group with other things mentioned. <i>Ang íhu isdà. Isdà pa ba ang pági?</i> Sharks are fish; are rays also considered fish? <number>4a</number> <formx>málu &mdash; nà</formx> that&apos;s not so bad, is it? <i>Sígi málu pa nà ug makadiyis ka,</i> Go ahead. If you make ten bucks on it, that ain&apos;t bad. <number>5</number> <ix>in comparisons:</ix> even more. <i>Gwápa pa ka kang Maríya,</i> You are more beautiful than Mary. <number>5a</number> <formx><r>[<i>adj.</i>]</r> pay <r>[<ix>subject</ix>]</r></formx> [subject] is more [adj.] than.... <i>Lamì pay lamaw niíni,</i> This is worse than garbage. (Lit. Garbage is more delicious than this.) <i>Lisud pay magkaug mani,</i> It&apos;s harder to eat peanuts than do this. <number>6</number> <i>in quotations, preceded by gen.:</i> [gen.] said. <i>Ug mau tu ang nahitabù, níya pa,</i> And that is all what happened, he said. <number>6a</number> <formx>mátud &mdash;</formx> [<ix>gen.</ix>] [gen.] says, said. <i>Mátud pa níla aku dílì ángay,</i> They say I am not worthy. <number>6b</number> <formx>siya &mdash;</formx> he said. <i>Kay na, siya pa, unsáun man nákù?</i> Well, said he, what can I do? <number>6c</number> <formx>sa átù &mdash;</formx> in other words. <i>Aw, sa átù pa diyis ákung ibáyad nímu,</i> Oh, in other words, ten is what I pay you. <number>7</number> with the apodosis of a condition contrary to fact. <i>Ug walà pa nímu kawáta, ngánung náa man nà nímu?</i> If you hadn&apos;t stolen it, why do you have it? <number>7a</number> <formx><r>[<ix>noun</ix>]</r> &mdash;y</formx> [<i>noun, pronoun, adj.</i>] if [noun] were [noun, pronoun, adj.]. <i>Aku pay Huwan,</i> If I were John. <i>Aku pay ikaw (aku pa nímu),</i> If I were you. <i>Aku pay dátù,</i> If I were rich. <i>Aku pa nímu, níya,</i> If I were you, him. <i>Kami pa ninyu, níla,</i> If we were you, them. <number>7b</number> <formx><r>[<ix>predicate</ix>]</r> &mdash;y ímu</formx>! [so-and-so] is stupendous in quantity, quality (lit. if you could only see [such-and-such]). <i>Mais pay ímu, sus kadaghan!</i> If you could only see my corn. My! There&apos;s a lot. <i>Si Pidru pay ímu, káun giyud tug irù,</i> Believe me, Pedro will eat dog meat, and how! <number>7b1</number> <formx><r>[<ix>noun</ix>]</r> &mdash;y ákù</formx> I never thought [so-and-so] was what he was. <i>Si Pidru pay ákù may kirída diay nà siya,</i> I never thought it was possible, but Pedro has a mistress. <number>7c</number> <formx>&mdash; lámang</formx> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>LÁMANG</sc>, <i>4b, c.</i></xr> <number>7d</number> <formx>agad, maáyu &mdash;</formx> it would be, would have been better if, it would have been good. <i>Maáyu (agad) pa untà ug átung napintálan ang kahun úsà gawía,</i> It would have been better if we had painted the box before we used it. <i>Agad (maáyu) pa ug magtuun ka kay sa magkantakanta,</i> You would do better to study than just sit around singing. <number>7e</number> <formx>hináut, básin, básun &mdash;</formx> I hope that. <i>Hináut pang dílì muulan,</i> I hope it won&apos;t rain. <number>8</number> <ix>modifying a phrase referring to time:</ix> [so-and-so] recently happened, won&apos;t happen until.... <i>Dílì madala ug bálik ugmà, Huybis pa,</i> I cannot bring it back tomorrow. Not until Thursday. <i>Bag-u pa siya nga milakaw,</i> He left just now. <i>Gíkan pa siya sa Manílà,</i> He is just back from Manila. <i>Karun pa siya muabut gíkan sa Buhul,</i> <pb n=711>He arrived just now from Bohol. <number>8a1</number> <formx>ayhà, anhà &mdash;</formx> only then [will so-and-so] happen. <i>Ayhà (anhà) pa siya mulíhuk ug pakit-an ug latigu,</i> He only moves if he sees a whip. <number>8a2</number> <formx>dihà &mdash;</formx> only then [so-and-so] happened. <i>Dihà pa siya mutuun nga hápit na ang iksámin,</i> He only started to study when it was nearly exam time. <number>8b</number> <formx>mau &mdash;y <r>[<ix>abstract form</ix>] or [<ix>instrumental passive</ix>]</r></formx> that is the first time [abstract] happened, [instrumental passive] will happen. <i>Mau pay pagkadungug nákù niánà,</i> That is the first time I heard that. <i>Mau pay ilung-ag ug mudtu na,</i> Don&apos;t cook it until noon. (The first time to cook it when it&apos;s noon.) <number>8c</number> <formx><r>[<ix>future verb abstract form</ix>] &mdash;</formx> but then when [so-and-so] was done. <i>Dúgay nákung limpiyu sa salug. Baldiyúhan pa nákù, human dáyun,</i> It took me a long time to clean the floor. But then when I hosed it down, it was finished right away. <i>Pag-abri pa nákù sa subri, wà diay sulud,</i> When I opened the envelope, there was nothing in it after all. <form>dáan &mdash; <r>[subject]</r></form> knew [so-and-so] in advance. <i>Dáan pa lagi ku,</i> I knew that long ago! <number>9</number> much less [do]. <i>Dì gánì aku makasulti, kanta pa,</i> I cannot even talk, much less sing. <i>Dì gánì aku makahímù niánà, ikaw pa,</i> I can&apos;t even do that, much less you.

<p><form>pa<sub>2</sub></form> short form for <sc>PÁPA<sub>1</sub></sc>. <i>Pa, háin man si Máma?</i> Pa (Dad), where is Mommy?

<p><form>pa<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fa</tr>. <form>&mdash; mayur</form> F major. <form>&mdash; minur</form> F minor. <form>&mdash; sustinídu</form> F sharp.

<p><form>pá</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tiny ant, smaller than the <ix>utitud</ix>, pale yellow in color and does not bite, found swarming over food. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> for food to get <ix>pá</ix> over it. Cf. <xr><sc>PALA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>p&amacrgra;</form> <xr>= <sc>PÁLÀ<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pa-</form> derivational verb-forming affix to which inflectional affixes are added without morphophonemic alternation. <number>1</number> referring to actions one has caused s.o. to do (either to s.t. else or to oneself). <i>Palútù ta ug sud-an,</i> Let&apos;s have s.o. prepare (<ix>lútù</ix>) some food. <i>Palutúun nátù si Maríya,</i> Let&apos;s have Maria cook. <i>Ipalútù ang sud-an,</i> Have the food cooked. <i>Patupi ta,</i> Let&apos;s get a haircut (cause s.o. to cut hair [<ix>tupi</ix>]). <number>1a</number> added to adjectives. <number>1a1</number> have s.o. make s.t. [adj.]. <i>Ipaitum ang ákung sapátus,</i> Have s.o. dye my shoes black. <number>1a2</number> have s.t. become [adj.]. <i>Patambúkun ta ka sa uma,</i> We&apos;ll fatten you up on the farm. <number>1b</number> <ix>added to nouns:</ix> cause s.o. to do [the action that verbs derived from the noun refer to]. <i>Gustu ka ba pabakyà?</i> You want me to hit you with a wooden slipper (cause me to use the <ix>bakyà</ix>)? <i>Dì ku paulípun,</i> I will not let myself be made a slave. <number>2</number> <ix>added to doubled adjectives:</ix> pretend to be. <i>Ayaw pasakitsákit dihà,</i> Don&apos;t pretend to be sick! <i>Nagpadiyusdiyusnun ang sungáyan,</i> The devil is pretending to be saintly. <number>3</number> <ix>added to nouns:</ix> go to [noun]. <i>Padaplin ug dì ka gustung hiligsan,</i> Get out of the way if you don&apos;t want to get run over. <i>Papiliw ba ang ímung sakayan run?</i> Is your boat headed for the shallow waters now?

<p><form>páa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>thigh</tr>, legs from the knees up. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain a thigh for one&apos;s effort in slaughtering domestic animals. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> hit in the thighs. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> the way the thighs are. <i>Hastilag pamáa ning bayhána. Makabúngug,</i> My, how huge this woman&apos;s thighs are. They&apos;re absolutely amazing (lit. deafening). <form>paahan</form> <pos>n</pos> the upper leg of a pair of pants.

<p><form>paagpaag</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>staggering</tr>, <tr>tottering</tr> walk. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> <tr>stagger</tr>, <tr>totter</tr>. <i>Nagpaagpaag ang hubug,</i> The drunk staggered in his walk.

<p><form>páak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>bite</tr>, <tr>sting</tr>. <i>Gipáak aku sa bátà,</i> The child bit me. <i>Hipaakan ku sa kasag,</i> I got bitten by the crab. <number>2</number> <itype>[b2]</itype> be caught in s.t. <i>Hipaakan (napaakan) ákung karsúnis sa kadína sa bisiklíta,</i> My pants got caught into the bicycle chain. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> charge high prices on s.t. sold. <i>Ayaw sad kug paákag maáyu íni,</i> Don&apos;t charge me too much for this. <number>4</number> <itype>[A]</itype> buy or ask for a small amount of s.o. else&apos;s purchase, just enough to meet one&apos;s needs. <i>Mupáak kug singkwinta stábus sa ímung isdà,</i> Let me buy fifty centavos worth of the fish you have bought. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> claw, pincer of crustaceans. <i>Paak sa kasag,</i> Crab&apos;s claw. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> allow to bite. <number>2</number> <itype>[c]</itype> hold s.t. with pliers. <i>Ipapaak ang twirka sa alikáti samtang hugtan ang pirnu,</i> Hold the bolt with the pliers while you turn the screw. <form>paN-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <number>1</number> be biting with heat. <i>Nagpamaak ang kaínit sa adlaw,</i> The heat of the sun is scorching (biting). <number>2</number> bite one&apos;s lips or tongue. <i>Nagpamaak siya sa íyang ngábil sa kasukù,</i> He is biting his lips in anger. <form>-in-ay(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C23]</itype> biting each other, kissing lovingly. <i>Lábing kaáyu sila nga nagpinaakay,</i> They were very loving and kept kissing each other. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. acquired from the things s.o. has just bought. <form>-in-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> bite. <i>Wà muskitirúhi si Bungbung. Dì daghag pinaakan sa lamuk,</i> Bongbong wasn&apos;t given a mosquito net, so he got lots of mosquito bites.

<p><form>paas, páas</form> <pos>a</pos> having a tired voice, <tr>hoarse</tr> from overuse. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> for the voice to be tired and hoarse from overuse. <i>Mupaas (mapaas) ímung tíngug ug magsígig tábì,</i> Your voice will become hoarse if you keep talking too <pb n=712>much.

<p><form>páaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be <tr>anxious</tr> about s.t. over which one has no information or over which one has little control. <i>Mapáaw giyud ku níya ug wà siya sa balay sa alas nuybi,</i> I get worried about him if he isn&apos;t home at nine. <i>Napáaw ang amahan kay diyútay na lang ang bugas,</i> The father got worried because there was little rice left. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> need of s.t. which one cannot do without. <i>Way nakatábang sa ákung kapáaw. Wà kuy masangpit,</i> No one helps me in my great need. I have no one to turn to. <number>2</number> anxiety for s.t. over which one has a great concern.

<p><form>páaw<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PÁLAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pabalúnan</form> <xr>see <sc>BÁLUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pabhas</form> <xr>= <sc>PAHUBAS</sc>, <pos>n</pos>, <i>v1.</i></xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>HUBAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pabílu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>wick</tr> of a lamp. <number>1a</number> drainage, sterile gauze inserted into a wound. <number>1b</number> <tr>fuse</tr> of dynamite. <number>2</number> cause, agent of intensity. <i>Siya ang pabílu sa kasámuk sa ámung balay,</i> She is the cause of the troubles in our house. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> put a wick in a lamp, fuse in dynamite, drainage in a dressing. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> give a cause for a quarrel or misunderstanding. <i>Wà tà tu siya mangísug apan ímu pung gipabilúhan,</i> He wouldn&apos;t have gotten angry if you hadn&apos;t given him cause.

<p><form>pablik</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>public school</tr>. <i>Paiskuyláhun ku siya sa pablik,</i> I&apos;ll have him attend public school. <number>2</number> <ix>in phrases:</ix> <form>&mdash; bíding</form> public bidding. <form>&mdash; disturbans</form> public disturbance. <form>&mdash; iskúl</form> public schools. <form>&mdash; markit</form> government-run market. <form>&mdash; sirbis</form> government service.

<p><form>pablikar</form> <xr>= <sc>PUBLIKAR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pabliku</form> <xr>= <sc>PUBLIKU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pablísir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>publisher</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be, become a publisher.

<p><form>pablisiti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>publicity</tr>.

<p><form>pablum</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pablum</tr>, cereal for children.

<p><form>pabrika</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>factory</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> put up, operate a factory. <number>2</number> <itype>[a2]</itype> make into, put up a factory. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> manufacture goods in a factory.

<p><form>pábu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>turkey</tr>. <i>&mdash; riyal</i> <pos>n</pos> <tr>peacock</tr>.

<p><form>pabur</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> advantageous to. <i>Ang kasabútan pabur kanátù,</i> The agreement is advantageous to us. <form>&mdash; sa hángin</form> have the wind at one&apos;s back. <i>Túlin ang sakayan kay pabur sa hángin,</i> The boat sails fast when the wind is in back. <number>2</number> in favor of, on the side of. <i>Ang disisiyun pabur kang Rimutígi,</i> The decision was in favor of Remotigue. <number>3</number> within easy reach. <i>Pagbantay! Kay pabur ka ra ba sa ákung tuu!</i> Watch out! You&apos;re in easy reach of my right hand! <number>4</number> move towards. <i>Iirug-irug ang lamísa pabur sa tuu,</i> Move the table more to the right. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> advantage, concession. <i>Nangáyù siyag pabur sa kumpári níyang mayur,</i> He asked a favor from his friend who was the mayor. <number>2</number> port, left side of a ship. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> <number>a</number> have the edge or winning trend. <i>Kusug ming musyágit ug makapabur nag ámung manuk,</i> We shout boisterously when our cock gets the edge. <number>b</number> be in a position to hit, strike well. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> favor, take sides. <i>Ayawg paburi ang bísag háing grúpu,</i> Don&apos;t take sides with either group. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> turn a boat to the left side. <form>pur-</form> please (said in asking a favor). <i>Purpabur ayaw na kug samúka,</i> Please, don&apos;t bother me any more. <i>Purpabur ikúhà kug túbig,</i> Please, get me a glass of water. &dagger;

<p><form>paburíta</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. salt cracker.

<p><form>paburitismu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>favoritism</tr>. <i>Dúnay paburitismu ang pagdumálà sa ámung prinsipal,</i> Our principal practices favoritism in the way he runs the administration.

<p><form>paburítu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>favorite</tr>. <i>Ang adúbu mauy paburítu kung sud-an,</i> Adobo is my favorite dish. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become one&apos;s favorite.

<p><form>pad</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pad of paper</tr>.

<p><form>pád</form> <xr>= <sc>PÁLAD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>padayugdug</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>DAYUGDUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>páding</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>padding</tr>. <number>2</number> padding of the payroll. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put, use, make into padding. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> pad the payroll. <i>Mipáding sila sa pírul,</i> They padded the payroll. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> having padding.

<p><form>padir</form> <pos>n</pos> cemented fence.

<p><form>pádir</form> <pos>n</pos> title for a priest. <form>(&rarr;)</form> vocative.

<p><form>padlak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>padlock</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> padlock s.t. <i>Padláki ang kusína,</i> Padlock the kitchen.

<p><form>padlas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> drive s.o. out of the house. <i>Ímu gánì kung padlásun (padlasun) dì ku magduhadúha paglakaw,</i> If you ask me to leave, I will not hesitate to do so. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> fish in the <ix>padlas</ix> way. <pos>n</pos> k.o. fishing in shallow or moderately deep waters where a rectangular net is set, into which fish are driven.

<p><form>padpad</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> for wind or water to carry s.t. in the current. <i>Ang dag-um nga walà makabundak ganíha gipadpad,</i> The rain clouds did not fall a while ago and were dispersed. <number>1a</number> bring s.o. s.w. <i>Unsang hangína ang mipadpad nímu nganhi?</i> What (wind) brought you here? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> remove s.t. from whatever it was mixed with or stuck to. <i>Padpára ang amursíku sa ímung sinínà,</i> Pull the burrs from your dress. <i>Padpárig pasì nang bugas,</i> Pick out the unhusked grains from the rice.

<p><form>padpád</form> <xr>= <sc>PALADPALAD</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>PÁLAD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>padri</form> <pos>n</pos> title for a <tr>priest</tr>. <i>Si Padri Rudrígis Hiswíta,</i> Father Rodriguez is a Jesuit. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pb n=713>vocative. <ix>short form</ix>: <bx>dri</bx>.

<p><form>padr&icaron;</form> short for <ix>kumpadri</ix>, vocative.

<p><form>padri dipamilya</form> <pos>n</pos> male head of the family. <i>Ang amahan mauy padri dipamilya sa balay,</i> The father is the head of the family in the house.

<p><form>padrínu</form> <pos>n</pos> sponsor in marriage, baptism, or other religious ceremony. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; a2]</itype> become the sponsor in baptism or marriage.

<p><form>padri nwistru</form> <pos>n</pos> the Lord&apos;s Prayer.

<p><form>padrun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> pad of paper. <number>2</number> padding, lining. <i>Butangig padrun ang abága sa amirkána,</i> Put padding in the shoulders of the coat. <number>3</number> dress pattern. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> put a lining or padding. <i>Siyay mipadrun ug gápas sa lingkuránan,</i> He put cotton padding on the seats. <number>2</number> make a pattern for s.t. <i>Ákung gipadrúnan ang tahiúnun,</i> I made a pattern for the dress.

<p><form>padrun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> registry books for newly-born babies of a parish, town, or locality.

<p><form>padyáma</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pajamas</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> wear, use pajamas. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make into pajamas.

<p><form>pag-</form> prefix added to most bases which take the verbal inflectional affixes. <number>1</number> forming imperatives (used esp. after <ix>ayaw</ix> &lsquo;don&apos;t&rsquo;). <ix>short forms:</ix> <number>g</number>, or <form>ug</form>. <i>Ayaw paglakaw (ug lakaw, glakaw),</i> Don&apos;t go away. <i>Ayaw siya pagpatya,</i> Don&apos;t kill him. <number>2</number> forming infinitives. <i>Gisugdan níya pagtágik ang íyang bálak,</i> He began to compose his poem. <i>Arun sa pagbutyag sa íyang tinagúan,</i> In order to make his secrets public. <number>3</number> forming nouns meaning the action of [do]ing. <i>Dílì maáyu ang pagpalabi,</i> It&apos;s no good to do things to excess. <i>Nakabungkag sa ílang pagpúyù,</i> Destroyed their life together. <i>Ang pagburunda sa simbahan dì na kinahanglan,</i> It is no longer necessary to wear a veil to church. <number>4</number> forming words which mean &lsquo;when [so-and-so] was done&rsquo;. <i>Pag-abut nákù sa balay, mau say íyang paglakaw,</i> When I arrived at the house, he left.

<p><form>pág</form> <xr>= <sc>PALAG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>paga, pága<sub>1</sub></form> exclamation shouted in a game of marbles or for other kinds of pieces, when a player has hit a piece not intended, thus nullifying the game for the player. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> to commit <ix>paga</ix>.

<p><form>pága<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>pay in full</tr>. <i>Gipagáhan na nákù ang bayranan sa iskuylahan,</i> I have paid the tuition fees in full. <form>&mdash; distínu</form> <xr>= <sc>PAGÁDU DISTÍNU</sc>.</xr> <form>midiya &mdash;</form> <tr>half fare</tr>. <form>-du</form> <pos>n</pos> paid off. <i>Pagádu na ang útang,</i> The debt has been paid off. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125]</itype> get paid up. <form>-du distínu</form> for a passenger&apos;s fare to be paid on arrival. <i>Pagádu distínu ang ákung paglakaw,</i> My trip was on the payment-upon-arrival basis. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> travel on the payment-upon-arrival basis. <form>-díru distínu</form> <xr>= <sc>PAGÁDU DISTÍNU</sc>.</xr> <form>-dur</form> <pos>n</pos> paymaster. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> become the paymaster.

<p><form>pága<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>shelf</tr> put above the stove. <i>Limpiyúhi ang mga kúlun ug ibutang sa pága,</i> Clean the pots and place them on the shelf. <number>2</number> <tr>platform</tr> built close to the roof forming a loft but not extending the entire length of the house. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> put a shelf, loft in a house.

<p><form>paga-a</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>PAGA-UN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>paga-an</form> local passive durative affix, future. (<ix>Past</ix>: <bx>gina-an</bx>. <ix>Subjunctive</ix>: <bx>paga-i</bx>.) <ix>For the use of the durative passive forms see the entry under</ix> <bx>paga-un</bx>. <i>Pagabantayan ang dáwang anihun,</i> Millet that is ready for harvest should be looked at every so often. <i>Ingun sa pagahitan-awan sa íyang hunàhúnà,</i> It was as if it kept appearing in his mind. <i>Ang maung hitabù nahímung ginahisgútan sa mga táwu,</i> That event became the subject of conversation for these people. <i>Pagaabunuhi ang lubi,</i> Keep putting fertilizer to the coconut trees every once in a while.

<p><form>paga-i</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>PAGA-AN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pagakpak</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sound produced by clapping, clapping of wooden sandals, clopping of horses, and the like. <i>Limpiyang pagakpak,</i> Shoeshine done by slapping a piece of cloth over the shoes with a popping sound. <number>2</number> instrument for making a clapping sound. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a clapping, clip-clop sound. <i>Ikaw bay mupagakpak sa humayan?</i> Will you sound the clapper in the rice field? <i>Nagpagakpak ang ílang bakyà pag-ági níla,</i> Their wooden sandals made a clapping sound as they passed by. <i>Pagakpákan nátù ang nakadaug,</i> Let&apos;s applaud the winner.

<p><form>págal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be broke (slang). <i>Miundang siyag súgal sa dihang napágal na siya,</i> He stopped gambling when he went broke. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> flat broke.

<p><form>pagan, págan</form> <xr>= <sc>PAGA</sc>.</xr> <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> involve s.o., cause s.o. to be included in a misfortune. <i>Kanang ímung tinuntu mupágan sa uban,</i> That mischief of yours will likely involve the others. <i>Pagkasúnug sa dakung balay napágan ang mga balay nga silíngan,</i> When the large house burnt, the neighboring houses were included.

<p><form>pagang</form> <pos>a</pos> for hair to be dry and lack oil. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> for hair to become dry and lose its gloss. <i>Mupagang (mapagang) ang buhuk kun sabunan,</i> The hair will lose its luster if you wash it with soap. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> easily getting dry and losing luster.

<pb n=714>

<p><form>paganti</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>paid off</tr>. <i>Paganti na ang útang,</i> The debt has been paid off.

<p><form>pagánu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pagans</tr>.

<p><form>pagapak</form> <xr>= <sc>PALAGUPAK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pagari</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. payable on an installment basis. <i>Mukúhà kug tíbi nga pagari,</i> I will get a T.V. set on an installment basis. <number>2</number> <tr>promissory note</tr>. <i>Pirmáhi ring pagari arun masigúru,</i> Sign this promissory note to be sure. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> sell, pay for s.t. on an installment basis. <i>Nakapagari aku ug sininaun,</i> I got a piece of dress material on an installment basis.

<p><form>págas</form> <pos>n</pos> hardened crust on top of a wound. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3]</itype> form a crust on top of a wound.

<p><form>pagatpat</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tree of mangrove swamps: <bio>Sonneratia caseolaris</bio> and <bio>acida</bio>.

<p><form>paga-un</form> direct passive durative affix future time. (Past: <bx>gina-</bx>. <ix>Subjunctive</ix>: <bx>paga-a</bx>.) <ix>Literary style except in Southern Leyte and Bohol where it is colloquial</ix> (<ix>with the dialectal prefix</ix> <bx>a-</bx> <ix>substituting for</ix> <bx>paga-</bx>). <ix>Forms with</ix> <bx>paga-un</bx> <ix>are used to refer to actions repeated at intervals or after preposed forms meaning &lsquo;it is good, proper, necessary,&rsquo; and the like</ix>. <i>Ságad pagabasáhun níya ang Biblíya sa dì pa matúlug,</i> She usually reads the Bible before she goes to sleep. <i>Unsay ángay nátung pagabuhátun?</i> What is the proper thing to do? <ix>Forms with</ix> <bx>gina-</bx> <ix>refer to an action which goes on in time</ix>. <i>Ginapasundáyag pa gihápun ang mga dúlà ni Piyuks,</i> Piux&apos;s dramas are still performed. <ix>The forms with</ix> <bx>paga-a</bx> <ix>are used when the subjunctive is required, or for the imperatives, in contexts referring to repeated or enduring actions</ix>. <i>Ang humay adtu pagadagamíha sa búus,</i> They take the rice on the stalks to the granary, and there they get the rice grains (as they need them).

<p><form>pagaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>hoarse</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN]</itype> become hoarse. <i>Mipagaw (napagaw, namagaw) ang ákung tíngug sa pagsinyágit,</i> My voice got hoarse from shouting. <form>ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be very hoarse. <i>Undang na lang ug kanta dihà uy. Nagkapágaw lang ang ímung tíngug,</i> Stop singing. Your voice is hoarse. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> of a hoarse sort.

<p><form>pagáwal</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>GÁWAL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pagawpaw</form> <pos>a</pos> for soil to be used up. <i>Ang yútang pagawpaw gamay nag abut,</i> Leached-out land has a low yield. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be, become barren. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> worked-out k.o. soil.

<p><form>pagba</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> fire objects in a kiln. <i>Ikaw bay mupagba sa mga kúlun?</i> Will you fire the pots? <number>2</number> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> tan, darken the skin in the sun. <i>Napagba siyag kinalígù sa dágat,</i> His skin got dark from bathing in the sea so much.

<p><form>paghid</form> (from <ix>páhid</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> put s.t. on by spreading. <i>Ikaw bay nagpaghid ug mantikilya sa pán?</i> Did you spread butter on the bread? <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> brush against momentarily. <i>Nakapaghid kug bátà sa ákung pagdalìdalì,</i> I brushed against a child because I was rushing about.

<p><form>paghut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>bark</tr>. <i>Gipaghut mu sa irù kay sábà man mu kaáyu,</i> The dog barked at you because you were very noisy. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>cough</tr> (humorous). <i>Nagpaghut ka lang ánang tantu nímung pag-inubu,</i> You are coughing so much, you sound like you&apos;re barking. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>barking</tr>. <number>2</number> action of coughing (humorous).

<p><form>pági</form> <pos>n</pos> general term for rays.

<p><form>pagiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ornamental bulb, the spider lily: <bio>Crinum asiaticum</bio>.

<p><form>pagka-<sub>1</sub></form> affix added to most bases which occur with the verbal inflections in one or more of the following usages. <number>1</number> forming a noun meaning the action of having had [so-and-so] done or happen to it. <i>Maáyu ang pagkalútù níya sa kík,</i> He baked the cake well. (Lit. The action of his having baked the cake was good.) <i>Ang kabílin wà maángay pagkabáhin,</i> The inheritance was not divided fairly. <i>Dalì rang pagkamatay,</i> He died quickly. <number>1a</number> forming a noun meaning &lsquo;having done [so-and-so]&rsquo;. <i>Hustu ra giyud ang pagkaabut ninyu kay dáyun na námung paniudtu,</i> You arrived just in time because we are about to eat dinner<note>P2: isn&apos;t paniudtu lunch?|F1: a.k.a. &lsquo;dinner&rsquo;!</note>. <number>2</number> forming a word meaning when [so-and-so] had happened, had been done. Pagkapalit níya sa pán, When he had bought the bread (lit. when the bread was bought). <i>Pagkakità níya niánà,</i> When he saw that. <number>3</number> forming an infinitive referring to completed action or the coming into a state. <i>Walà maángay pagkabáhin ang kabílin,</i> The inheritance had not been fairly divided. <i>Misamut siya pagkahubug,</i> He got all the more drunk.

<p><form>pagka-<sub>2</sub></form> prefix added to adjectives to form exclamations. <i>Pagkadakù bayà niíning syudára,</i> Gee! What a huge city this is! <i>Pagkabuútan giyud nímu,</i> How awfully nice of you!

<p><form>pagka-a(&larr;)</form> forms with the prefix <ix>pagka-<sub>1</sub></ix> and <ix>pagka-<sub>2</sub></ix> to which <bx>-a(&larr;)</bx> has been added. <number>1</number> prefix added to adjectives to form exclamations, with a greater degree of emotion or intensity of the exclamation than <ix>pagka-<sub>2</sub></ix>. <i>Pagkadakúa sa ílang bag-ung balay!</i> Their new house is absolutely tremendous! <number>2</number> form meaning particular action of having done [so-and-so]. <i>Hustu giyud tung pagkaabúta <pb n=715>ninyu,</i> Your arrival (lit. that particular arrival of yours) was just at the right time.

<p><form>pagkang</form> <xr>= <sc>PAKGANG<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pagkut</form> <xr>= <sc>PAKGUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pagpag</form> <pos>a</pos> for hair to be dishevelled. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[BN; c1]</itype> for hair to be dishevelled. <i>Mipagpag (napagpag, namagpag) ang ákung buhuk sa hángin,</i> My hair became dishevelled in the wind. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> agitate to remove dust. <i>Íyang gipagpágan ang ílang mga butang sa abug,</i> She shook the dust out of their things.

<p><form>pagtung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[BN; a12]</itype> <tr>burn</tr>, <tr>scorch</tr>. <i>Napagtung siya sa kaínit sa adlaw,</i> He got burned by the heat of the sun. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> for popcorn to fail to pop. <i>Napagtung ang bitì ug walà mubukad,</i> The corn turned brown and did not pop. <pos>a</pos> thoroughly burnt from baking or being otherwise exposed to heat. <i>Pait ang ságing nga pagtung pagkasugba,</i> Burnt bananas taste bitter.

<p><form>pagu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>burnt to a crisp</tr>. <i>Dì na ni makáun kay pagu na kaáyu,</i> You can&apos;t eat this any more because it has been burnt to a crisp. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be burnt to a crisp.

<p><form>págu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>welsh on a bet</tr>, <tr>delay payment</tr>. <i>Kinsay nagpágu sa tanang pusta nga nahánaw man lang?</i> Who ran away without paying the bets? <i>Ákù lang úsà ning pagúhun (ipágu) nga pusta,</i> I won&apos;t pay my bet for the time being. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> amount which one failed to pay. <i>Pilay ímung págu kaníya?</i> How big an amount did you welsh on? <number>2</number> comeuppance, just deserts. <i>Mau kanay págu nímu,</i> That&apos;s what you get!

<p><form>pagù</form> <pos>n</pos> a small brownish bird of the bush, with a body about 2&Prime; in length.

<p><form>págud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB12; a12]</itype> <tr>burn</tr>, <tr>burnt</tr>. <i>Baliha ang adúbu arun dílì mapágud,</i> Turn the fried meat to the side so that it will not get burnt. <i>Ínit sa adlaw muy nakapágud (nakapapágud) sa ákung pánit,</i> The heat of the sun burnt my skin. <i>Nagkapagud na ang pán. Dalia pagháun,</i> The bread is burning. Take it out quickly. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> roast cereals black. <i>Magpágud tag mais pára ikapi,</i> Let&apos;s roast some corn grits for coffee. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>burnt</tr>. <i>Akuy káun sa pagud nga pán,</i> I&apos;ll eat the burnt bread. <i>Kasagáran sa mga mananagat pagud ug pánit,</i> Most fishermen have deeply tanned skin. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> cereal roasted black, esp. corn grits. <i>Pinágud ra giyuy ámung kapi,</i> All we have for coffee is burnt corn grits.

<p><form>pag-ud</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>tough</tr>, <tr>strong</tr>, <tr>hardy</tr>. <i>Pag-ud ang simintu kay sa káhuy,</i> Cement is stronger than wood. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a12]</itype> become tough, strong. <i>Nagkapag-ud na ang íyang láwas,</i> He is getting stronger now.

<p><form>pagudpud</form> <pos>a</pos> crumbling, but hard; <tr>brittle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> be brittle. <i>Mupagudpud (mapagudpud) ang tiratíra ug butangan ug mani,</i> Taffy becomes brittle if you put peanuts in it.

<p><form>pagúha</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. wild banana with yellow fruit when ripe, with sweet but seedy flesh: <bio>Musa errans</bio>.

<p><form>pag-uk</form> <pos>a</pos> grayish, darkened due to dirt. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be, become grayish or darkened due to dirt. <i>Nagkapag-uk na ang mga bisti nga wà ikaladlad,</i> The clothes that are not bleached are becoming discolored.

<p><form>pag-ulíngun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small tree or shrub of the secondary forest: <bio>Cratoxylon blancoi</bio> and <bio>celebicum</bio>.

<p><form>pag-umangkun</form> (from <ix>anak</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>niece</tr>, <tr>nephew</tr>: son or daughter of one&apos;s siblings or of a cousin of one&apos;s own generation of any degree. <form>&mdash; sa pag-agáwan (panag-agáwan)</form> child of a cousin of one&apos;s own generation.

<p><form>pagupak</form> <pos>n</pos> clapper made from bamboo, banana, or wood. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make such a clapper.

<p><form>pagúrut</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>*GURUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pagut</form> <pos>a</pos> for a woman to be forward in making advances to men. <i>Ug manghagad kag láki, pagut ka,</i> If you make advances to men, you are forward.

<p><form>pagutput</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> put-put sound. <number>2</number> croaking sound of frogs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make a put-putting or croaking sound. <i>Mupagutput giyud ang makina basta may dipirinsiya,</i> The machine goes put-put if s.t. is wrong with it.

<p><form>pagya, pagyà</form> <pos>n</pos> way of referring to s.o. in a humorous, but indirect way. <i>Layágun ug dunggan si Pidru mu nay nahímung pagyà,</i> Pedro has large ears so that became the way they used to refer to him. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c]</itype> refer to s.t. by making a joke about it but not naming it. <i>Napagyà karun nga ang dalágang mamatay pabawnan ug alhu,</i> It is a common joke to say that when a spinster dies, they should put a pestle at her side. <i>Gipagyà (gipagyáan) námù siyang pahak,</i> We used to refer to him as scar head.

<p><form>páha</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>girdle</tr> or abdominal binder. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear a girdle, binder; make into a binder.

<p><form>páhak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a3b]</itype> make a gash, slash or gorge a piece out of s.t. <i>Ang kalabaw mauy nagpáhak sa ámung tágud,</i> The carabao consumed a portion of our seed bed. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the space left in an area after a piece has been removed. <i>May pahak ang ímung agigísing,</i> There&apos;s a spot on your temples with very short hair. <i>Dakug pahak ang kík, mu rag gikan-an,</i> There&apos;s a piece missing in my cake. I think s.o. touched it. <number>2</number> scar on the <pb n=716>head. <i>Nipsa pagtupi ang buhuk arun dílì makítà ang pahak,</i> Just trim the hair off so you can&apos;t see the scar.

<p><form>pahamtang</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>BUTANG<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><form>pahang, páhang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> smell of food beginning to rot. <i>Napahang na ang sud-an sa paradur úsà níya hikit-i,</i> The food got rancid in the pantry before he found it. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> having the smell of s.t. rotting. <i>Kapahang sa pípì sa bátà, wà hugási,</i> The baby&apos;s vagina smells terrible because no one washed it.

<p><form>páhat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3S; ac]</itype> divide food, property, money into allocations. <i>Ang gubyirnu mupáhat nímu ug dúsi iktariyas,</i> The government will allocate you twelve hectares. <i>Paháta ang kík sa lima ka báhin,</i> Divide the cake up into five portions. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b6]</itype> get a portion, allocation. <i>Nakapahat (napahatan) siyag dakùdakù kay sa ákù,</i> He managed to get a slightly larger allocation than mine. <pos>n</pos> <tr>allocation</tr>, <tr>portion</tr>. <form>-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> mail section in the post office where mail is sorted and placed in different bags.

<p><form>pahaw</form> <xr>= <sc>PAGAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pahawin</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>HÁWIN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>páhi</form> <pos>n</pos> personal <tr>valet</tr>, <tr>servant</tr> to wait on hand and foot. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> be a personal valet.

<p><form>páhid</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> rub on, apply by wiping. <i>Akuy mupáhid ug mantikilya sa pán,</i> I will spread butter on the bread. <i>Pahírig túbig ang inasal,</i> Wipe water over the roasted pig. <i>Ipáhid kini sa tutunlan,</i> Rub this on the throat. <number>1a</number> <formx>&mdash; ug salà</formx> lay the blame on s.o. else. <i>Ayaw ipáhid ang ímung salà nákù,</i> Don&apos;t put the blame for what you did on me. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ab1]</itype> wipe slightly to remove s.t. <i>Pahíra ang mumhu sa lamísa,</i> Wipe the morsels off the table. <i>Pahíri ang ímung lúhà,</i> Wipe your tears. <i>Pahíri ang lamísa arun mauga,</i> Wipe the table lightly so that it will get dry. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to wipe. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b1]</itype> wipe oneself to remove s.t. <i>Namáhid siya sa lúhà,</i> She wiped her tears away. <form>pahiran, pahiránan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>doormat</tr>. <number>2</number> rags to wipe the hands.

<p><form>pahilihíli bágu kíri</form> <ix>set phrase from Tagalog:</ix> saying one doesn&apos;t want to, but actually be dying to do it.

<p><form>pahimangnù</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>MANGNÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pahimulus</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>PULUS<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><form>pahimús</form> <xr>= <sc>PAHIMULUS</sc>.</xr> <xr>see <sc>PULUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pahína<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>page</tr>, <tr>leaf of a book</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> mark, number pages. <i>Gipahináhan ku na ang ripurt,</i> I have already numbered the pages of the report.

<p><form>pahína<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2; a2b]</itype> for a group to work on s.t. without compensation. <i>Magpahína pagpatay sa ilagà ang tibuuk baryu káda Sabadu,</i> The whole village works on a project to exterminate rats every Saturday. <i>Gipahinahan sa Pitii ang pagtrabáhu sa iskuylahan,</i> The P.T.A. volunteered to work on the school building. <pos>n</pos> work bee to accomplish a certain project.

<p><form>pahináhin</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>*HINÁHIN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pahinanti</form> <pos>n</pos> worker that does heavy unskilled labor, esp. hauling. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> do heavy unskilled labor. <i>Íya kung pahinantíhun sa ílang trák,</i> He&apos;ll put me to work as a laborer on their truck.

<p><form>pahinar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> fix the hair. <i>Dì ku makapahinar sa ákung buhuk ug aku ra,</i> I don&apos;t know how to fix my hair alone. <form>pahinadur, pahinadúra</form> <pos>n</pos> one who fixes the hair. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> become a hairdresser.

<p><form>pahit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a2b7]</itype> <number>1</number> bite using the front teeth, for insects or animals to bite. <i>Gipahit ku sa mga umígas,</i> The ants bit me. <i>Pahitan nákug gamay ang ímung pán,</i> I&apos;ll take a bite from your piece of bread. <number>2</number> for animals to go at young corn. <i>Gipahit sa irù ang mais sa anagun pa,</i> The dog went at the young corn. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1</number> bite one&apos;s lips. <i>Nakapamahit ang sarhintu sa íyang ngábil sa kasukù,</i> The sergeant bit his lips in anger. <number>2</number> for heat to be biting. <i>Nagpamahit nga kaínit sa adlaw,</i> The scorching heat of the sun. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> bite inflicted on one. <i>Pinahitan sa lamuk,</i> Mosquito bites.

<p><form>pahiyum</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>HÍYUM</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>páhù</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small, fibrous mango: <bio>Mangifera altissima</bio>.

<p><form>pahugpahug</form> <pos>a</pos> somewhat stupid. <i>Dílì siya makahímu niánang buháta kay pahugpahug,</i> He is not capable of doing the work because he is such a stupid fellow. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> roam around aimlessly. <i>Tibuuk adlaw nákung pahugpahug sa syudad,</i> I roamed around the city the whole day.

<p><form>pahúlì</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>HÚLÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pahung</form> <pos>a</pos> a person who acts strange or does things people would consider stupid. <i>Báhu ning pahung nagyasyas lang nang kinarsunisan,</i> Of course he&apos;s a fool, he wears pants too big for him. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> become foolish.

<p><form>pahunpáhun</form> <pos>n</pos> general appearance, actions. <i>Mu rag giputul nang batáa sa amahan kay amahan giyud ang pahunpáhun,</i> That child is a chip off the old block. He acts and looks just like his father. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> <number>1</number> for the hazy outline of s.o. or s.t. to appear at a distance. <i>Mamahunpáhun ang kabukíran sa sayung kabuntágun,</i> The mountains loom clear in the early morning light. <number>2</number> <pb n=717>carry oneself. <i>Mu ra giyud nà siya sa íyang inahan nga mamahunpáhun,</i> She moves just like her mother. <pos>n</pos> general outline, contours.

<p><form>pahut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>lace shoes</tr>. <i>Pahuti sa listun ang sapátus sa bátà,</i> Lace the child&apos;s shoes. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> tie with any interweaving knot. <i>Pahuta ang písì pára dílì mabadbad,</i> Make the rope into a looped knot so it won&apos;t come undone. <pos>n</pos> knot which is interlooped so that it cannot slip, like a square knot or a slipknot. <form>pahutpahut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> darn a tear with big temporary stitches. <i>Dalìdaliag pahutpahut ang gising hábul,</i> Stitch the torn blanket quickly. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> travel in and out across s.t. as if describing the course taken by a needle in darning. <i>Nagpahutpahut sa kabukíran ang mga girilyíru,</i> The guerillas traveled across the mountains.

<p><form>pahuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>scarecrow</tr>. <number>2</number> a person who is manipulated by others. <i>Insik ang tag-iya niánà. Pahuy lang nà siya,</i> A Chinaman owns that. He&apos;s just a dummy. <i>Si Markus usa ka pahuy sa mga impiryalista,</i> Marcos is an imperialist lackey. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1N]</itype> put up a scarecrow.

<p><form>páig</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> roast s.t. till it becomes charred. <i>Magpáig kug bugas nga kapihun,</i> I will roast some rice to make into coffee. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> scorch the skin. <i>Ang adlaw nakapáig (nakapapáig) sa pánit sa mananagat,</i> The sun burnt the fisherman&apos;s skin. <number>3</number> for a business to fail or go bankrupt. <i>Nagsígi mag paútang maung napáig ang ílang tindahan,</i> Their store went bankrupt because they allowed so many people to credit. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> totally burnt with only charred remains. <i>Ang kík paig kaáyu,</i> The cake was completely burnt. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. roasted till charred, esp. corn grits, for making into coffee. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> dark in complexion.

<p><form>paílub</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>patience</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>endure</tr>, be <tr>patient</tr> with. <i>Nagpaílub siya bísag kápuy ang trabáhu,</i> He is patient although his work is wearisome. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>patient</tr>, <tr>enduring</tr>.

<p><form>pais</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> cook s.t. by wrapping it in leaves and burying it in live coals. <i>Gustu kung paisan lang ang útuk,</i> I want the brains prepared by broiling them in leaves. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. cooked broiled in live coals.

<p><form>paisánu</form> <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s <tr>compatriot</tr>, s.o. from the same town or village.

<p><form>pait</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bitter in taste</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>bitter in situation</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> be bitter in taste. <i>Mipait (napait) ang atay kay napusà ang apdu,</i> The liver became bitter because the gall bladder broke. <i>Paita ang timpla sa ákung kapi,</i> Make my coffee strong (lit. bitter). <number>2</number> be a bitter situation. <i>Ang nakapait nímu kay dì ka mamátig katarúngan,</i> What&apos;s bad about you is that you don&apos;t listen to reason. <form>-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for pork liver to taste bitter on account of what was fed to the pig. <number>2</number> k.o. 1&Prime; vase shell, the meat of which tastes bitter. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> for liver to get bitter in taste. <form>pa-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> dish of Ilocano origin made from goatskin, cut into tiny pieces, and cooked in vinegar with spices and made to taste very bitter by mixing spleen into it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> prepare <ix>papáit</ix>.

<p><form>pak</form> <pos>n</pos> word used in writing to represent the sound of a slap, or explosion of firecrackers.

<p><form>paka</form> <pos>n</pos> pincers of shellfish.

<p><form>páka</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; a]</itype> break s.t. off from the thing to which it is attached, become broken off. <i>Mapáka giyud ang pul-an sa kutsilyu ug itigbas sa bukug,</i> The handle of the knife will surely break off if you use it to chop bones. <pos>n</pos> cuttings for planting, usually of sugar cane. <i>Ákung itanum ang mga páka sa tubu,</i> I&apos;ll plant the cuttings of the sugar cane.

<p><form>pakà</form> <xr>= <sc>PALAKÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pákà</form> <pos>n</pos> loud cracking sound like that of guns, wood cracking, slapping sound. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> make a cracking sound. <i>Mupákà giyud nang ímung nawung ug dílì ka patúu,</i> Your face will resound with a crack if you don&apos;t listen. <i>Mipákà ang butu sa pusil,</i> The gunshot resounded with a crack. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6P]</itype> for a language to be spoken fast and fluently like a machine gun. <i>Mupákà lang ang ininglis kay Amirikánu siya,</i> His English comes fast and fluent because he is an American. <form>&mdash; ang inamang</form> not talking in a situation where conversation would be normal. (lit., talking like the mutes). <i>Pulus man gud sila mauwáwun, pákà lang ang inamang,</i> They were both shy and they just sat there in silence.

<p><form>paka-</form> derivational verb forming prefix. <number>1</number> added to adjectives or nouns referring to a person in a certain capacity, forming verbs which occur with the durative active affixes (<ix>mag-<sub>1</sub></ix>) and the direct passive affixes (<ix>-un<sub>1</sub></ix>). With the durative active affixes, verbs with <ix>paka-</ix> mean &lsquo;pretend to be, act like [so-and-so]&rsquo; and with the direct passive affixes they mean &lsquo;consider as [so-and-so]&rsquo; or &lsquo;treat like [so-and-so]&rsquo;. <i>Nagpakadakung asyindíru,</i> Pretended to be a big plantation owner. <i>Nagpakatigúlang,</i> Acted like an old man. <i>Ángayng pakabathaláun ang bána sa asáwa,</i> A wife should consider her husband a god. <i>Gipakasayun lang nímu ang kaminyúun,</i> You think marriage is an easy thing. <number>2</number> added to most verbs to form verbs with potential meanings (see <ix>maka-<sub>1</sub></ix>) to which the durative active affixes (<ix>mag-<sub>1</sub></ix>) are added. <pb n=718>This form is literary and usually refers to several agents. <i>Nagpakapusta sila sa manuk nga napildi,</i> They bet on a cock that lost. <i>Nagpakabatì sila apan nagpakabungulbúngul,</i> They heard but remained silent. <number>2a</number> added to a few verbs meaning see, hear, smell, sense, and the like to form verbs which mean &lsquo;cause s.o. to hear, etc.&rsquo;. Verbs with <ix>paka-</ix> of this sort occur only with the potential active affixes. <i>Suntuk nga nakapakakità ug aniníput,</i> A blow that made him see stars. <number>3</number> added to roots referring to a state to form verbs meaning &lsquo;bring oneself or s.o. else into [such-and-such] a state purposely.&rsquo; Verbs with this <ix>paka-</ix> occur with the active durative and local passive affixes. <i>Nagpakabúhì siya álang sa íyang mga anak,</i> He lived for his children. <i>Nagpakaúlaw kug panghangyù,</i> I lowered myself to beg. <i>Gipakamatyan níya ang yútang natawhan,</i> He gave his life (lit. caused himself to die) for the sake of his country. <number>3a</number> added to roots referring to a time of day or life: stay s.w. until [such-and-such] a time. Usually with <form>(&rarr;)</form>. <i>Magpakatigulang ku dinhing dapíta, piru adtu ku magpakamatay sa ámù,</i> I will stay here until my old age, but I will go home to die. <i>Didtu sa barku pagpakakaadláwun,</i> Stay on the boat until daybreak. &dagger;

<p><p>pákal</p> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> put a large piece into the mouth. <i>Ayaw ipákal ug hurut ang kan-un sa ímung bàbà,</i> Don&apos;t put all the food into your mouth. <number>2</number> stuff a hole. <i>Pakálig batu ang lungag sa ilagà,</i> Put rocks into the rat hole.

<p><form>pakang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; ab2c]</itype> hit with s.t. fairly good-sized. <i>Nagkapákang ang ílang úlu,</i> Their heads slammed into each other. <i>Pakngag hínay ang silsil,</i> Tap the chisel lightly. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> rap s.o. on the head. <i>Sira sa kabinit ang nakapakang sa ákung úlu,</i> I bumped my head on the cabinet door. <i>Pakngun ta ka run ug dílì ka mutúu,</i> I&apos;ll rap you on the head if you don&apos;t obey me. <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to tap or drive s.t. in. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; ac]</itype> set off one&apos;s debts against each other. <i>Átù na lang pakángun ang átung útang. Ang ímung singku kuntra sa ákung usa ka lungnik,</i> I owe five pesos and you owe me a fifth, so let&apos;s just say we&apos;re even. <form>hiN-(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of rapping.

<p><form>pakang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> flat, pocket-sized bottle of liquor holding 350 cc. (slang).

<p><form>pak-ap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> pack up. <i>Nagpak-ap na mi kay mularga,</i> We&apos;re packing up because we are about to leave.

<p><form>pákas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> slice a fish in two, lengthwise, to dry it. <i>Ákù lang pakásun ning subrang isdà kay ákung ibulad,</i> I&apos;ll split the extra fish to dry them. <number>2</number> break s.t. in two. <i>Pakása ang pán,</i> Break the loaf in two. <number>3</number> <itype>[c]</itype> share in a bet. <i>Nagpákas sila sa usa ka tíkit,</i> They went in together on one ticket. <pos>n</pos> half of a pair. <i>Pákas sa karsúnis,</i> One of the trouser legs. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> dried fish.

<p><form>pakat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b8]</itype> <tr>snag</tr> s.t., <tr>catch</tr>. <i>Ayúha ug lábay ímung pasul kay hipaktan ta sa tagà,</i> Throw your fishline carefully because the hook might snag me.

<p><form>pakaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bowlegged</tr>, <tr>pigeon-toed</tr>. <number>2</number> have an inarticulated elbow, such that one can not straighten his arm. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be bowlegged, pigeon-toed. <i>Mapakaw giyud ang bátà basta pirming sap-ángun,</i> A child will become bowlegged if it is always carried astride.

<p><form>pákaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>corncob</tr>. <number>2</number> handle stuck into a frying pan with a rounded bottom (<ix>kaláhà</ix>).

<p><form>pákaw<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> buoy or float made of a long bamboo node 1&frac12;&Prime; to 2&prime; used principally as a marker for fishing equipment. <number>2</number> the part of a floating anchor (<ix>paladyaw</ix>) that offers a drag, consisting of <corr sic="a "></corr>woven coconut fronds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> tie this sort of float to s.t., buoy.

<p><form>pakdul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b8]</itype> <number>1</number> knock s.o. on the top of the head. <i>Sakit ákung úlu nga napakdul sa halígi,</i> My head hurts because I bumped it against a post. <number>2</number> stub one&apos;s toes. <i>Mapakdul giyud kag mulakaw ka sa ngitngit,</i> You will stub your toes if you walk in the dark. <number>2a</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> mispronounce a word in speech due to haste in speaking or due to the difficulty of pronouncing the word.

<p><form>pakgang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> stop s.t. short. <i>Way nakapakgang sa íyang batásan nga laksut,</i> No one has put a stop to his ugly ways. <i>Gipakgang ku ang íyang pamakak,</i> I put a stop to his lies.

<p><form>pakgang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> dried sugar cane leaves. <number>2</number> frond of a buri palm.

<p><form>pakgut<sub>1</sub></form> (from <ix>gákut</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> tie s.t. tightly around several things or over an opening so that nothing can budge. <i>Pakgúti ug maáyu ang kináhuy,</i> Tie the firewood together securely. <pos>n</pos> s.t. to tie around. <i>Ang uway maáyung pakgut sa kartun,</i> Rattan is good for tying around boxes.

<p><form>pakgut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab7]</itype> cut, slice with a sickle. <i>Pakgútan sa manananggut ang buluk káda buntag,</i> The toddy gatherer slices a piece off the young coconut blossom every morning. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> strip an abaca trunk into fibers. <i>Ayaw pakgúta kanang abaka nga butung pa ang tugdan,</i> Don&apos;t strip an abaca plant with a young stem. <pos>n</pos> action of cutting.

<p><form>pakha</form> <pos>n</pos> Chinese woman whose feet have been bound from birth to make them tiny.

<pb n=719>

<p><form>paki-</form> prefix added to nouns to form adjectives meaning &lsquo;extremely fond of [noun]&rsquo;. <i>Paki Núra giyud ning mga batan-un run,</i> The youngsters these days are very fond of Nora Aunor. <i>Pakiayiskrim,</i> Very fond of ice cream.

<p><form>páki, pakì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a bar made of bamboo or other light wood put between the upper and lower sail in two- or more-piece sails. <number>2</number> the lower sail in a two- or more-piece sail, which is rolled up when the skipper wishes to reduce the amount of wind which can hit the sail. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac1]</itype> <number>1</number> roll up the lower sails. <number>2</number> make or attach a <ix>páki</ix> bar or lower sail.

<p><form>pakì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>stiff</tr>. <i>Pakì ra ning sinináa pagkaarmirul,</i> This shirt has been starched too stiff. <number>2</number> <tr>recently dead</tr>, stiff. <i>Pakì na siya pag-abut nákù,</i> He was dead when I arrived. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ABN; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> be stiff, cause s.t. to become stiff. <i>Namakì ang karni nga gisulud sa prísir,</i> The meat in the freezer became stiff. <number>2</number> be <tr>dead</tr>.

<p><form>pakíbut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c16]</itype> send letters by the paquebot mail service, formerly provided by the Post Office, whereby a mailbox was placed on a boat in which letters destined for the port of call or interior ports are placed.

<p><form>pákids</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>package</tr>, esp. sent by mail.

<p><form>pakig-(&larr;)</form> (<ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>MAKIG-</sc></xr> <ix>for illustrations of the tense forms of the active voice</ix>.) Derivational verb forming affix, added to almost all roots which refer to an action and also to bases with <ix>-ay</ix>, (<ix>-anay</ix>) to form verbs which mean &lsquo;engage s.o. in [such-and-such] an action&rsquo;. <i>Ayaw pakigkítà níyag usab,</i> Don&apos;t go see him again. <i>Dakù ang ákung tingúhà pakiglákaw níya sa plása,</i> I am very intent on taking her for a walk in the plaza. <i>Ayaw pakigsumbagay ug gamay,</i> Don&apos;t pick a fight with s.o. smaller than you.

<p><form>pakig-an(&larr;)</form> local passive future prefix added to some bases with a prefix <ix>pakig-</ix>. (<ix>Past</ix>: <bx>gipakig-an(&larr;)</bx>. <ix>Subjunctive</ix>: <bx>pakig-i</bx>.) <i>Pakigsabútan ku siya,</i> I will make an agreement with him. Gipakigbungúlan ku siya, I got onto bad terms with him. <i>Ayaw siya pakigkitái,</i> Don&apos;t go to see her.

<p><form>pakig-i</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>PAKIG-AN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pak-il</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>hard and compacted</tr>. <i>Pak-il ang kamúti kay wà nímu tabúni paglung-ag,</i> The sweet potatoes came out hard because you boiled them without a cover. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> become hard and compacted.

<p><form>páking<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>packing plant</tr>. <i>Nanarbáhu didtus páking sa Dil Munti, magdilatag pinya,</i> Working at the Del Monte packing plant, canning pineapples. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>PÁKING</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>páking<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> apply packing to a hemorrhage. <i>Dukt&ucaron;r ang mipáking níya kay nagdugù man siya humag panganak,</i> The doctor applied packing because she had a hemorrhage after her delivery.

<p><form>pákit</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> pocket in billiards. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>PÁKIT SÁYIS</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> pocket money dishonestly. <i>Kinsay nagpákit sa inyung swildu?</i> Who pocketed your salary? <i>Pakítun (ipákit) kunu sa tisuríru ang kwarta sa kapunúngan,</i> They say the treasurer will pocket the money belonging to the organization. <form>&mdash; buk</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>paperback book</tr>. <form>&mdash; máni</form> petty cash one has for s.o.&apos;s sundry expenses. <form>&mdash; sáyis</form> <pos>n</pos> flat bottle of liquor holding 350 cc. <form>sayid &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> side pocket of a billiard table. <form>sikrit &mdash;</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>SIKRIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pakíti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>package</tr>. <i>Usa ka pakíting sigarilyu,</i> A pack of cigarettes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put in a package.

<p><form>paklang</form> <pos>n</pos> petiole of a buri palm frond.

<p><form>paklay</form> <pos>n</pos> dish made from goats&apos; or dogs&apos; entrails and blood, cut up and sautéed with spices. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make <ix>paklay</ix>.

<p><form>paklì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> turn s.t. that is flat. <i>Ang kusug hángin mauy nakapaklì (nakapapaklì) sa páwud sa atup,</i> The strong wind turned the shingles of the roof over. <i>Paklía ang sunud panid,</i> Turn the next page.

<p><form>paklid</form> (from <ix>kílid</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> remove a thick, heavy sheet which has been attached to or lodged against s.t. <i>Ang kawatan ang nagpaklid sa mahalung kwadru nga gilansang sa bungbung,</i> The thief knocked off the expensive frame that was nailed to the wall. <i>Gipaklid níyag hínay ang tabun sa bugásan,</i> He opened the cover of the rice container slowly.

<p><form>pakling</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> knock over s.t. erect and not rooted, usually to a lower place. <i>Kinsay nagpakling sa masitíra?</i> Who knocked the flower pots over? <i>Napakling ang makililímus kay nasabdan sa irù nga milabay,</i> The beggar was knocked down by a passing dog that brushed against him.

<p><form>pakluy</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> tending to loaf, take it easy when not watched. <number>2</number> lacking the energy to improve one&apos;s lot. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>idle</tr>, be <tr>loafing</tr>. <i>Mahímu rang paklúyan nátù ning buháta, walà bítaw tay súhul,</i> We can take it easy on this job. We&apos;re hardly paid anyway. <number>2</number> be slow and unaggressive. <i>Ug magpakluy ka sa kinabúhì, dì ka madiyus,</i> If you are not sufficiently aggressive, you&apos;ll never succeed.

<p><form>paknit</form> (from <ix>aknit</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> peel off s.t. thin with care, flake in small bits, peel. <i>Akuy mupaknit sa mga silyu arun dílì madáut,</i> I&apos;ll be the one to take the stamps off so they won&apos;t get damaged. <i>Napaknit ang pintal <pb n=720>sa bungbung,</i> The paint on the walls peeled off.

<p><form>pakpak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>husk</tr>, <tr>bark</tr> of trees. <i>Pakpak sa mais,</i> Corn husks. <number>2</number> by extension, peels. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ABN; a2]</itype> <tr>peel off</tr>, <tr>shell</tr>. <i>Nagkapakpak ang íyang pánit tungud sa ínit,</i> He is peeling because of his sunburn. <i>Isirbi ang mani nga gipakpákan,</i> Serve the peanuts that we shelled. <form>-an(&rarr;), -un, -un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> nearly ripe tamarinds, the peelings of which are loose.

<p><form>pakpak<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PALAKPAK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pakshul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>foxhole</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> dig a foxhole. <i>Nagpakshul dáyun ang mga sundálu,</i> The soldiers dug foxholes right away.

<p><form>paksì, paksit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> rip off s.t. flexible that is adhering firmly to s.t. <i>Kinsang buánga ang nagpaksì (nagpaksit) sa anunsiyu?</i> Who is the fool that ripped off the announcement? <i>Paksíun (paksítun) ku nang ngábil mung nagbagà,</i> I will rip your thick lips off your snout.

<p><form>paksiw</form> <pos>n</pos> dish of meat or fish cooked with vinegar and spices. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make <ix>paksiw</ix>. <i>Paksíwun nátù ang subrang inasal,</i> We&apos;ll make <ix>paksiw</ix> of the extra roasted pig.

<p><form>paksiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>faction</tr>.

<p><form>paksul</form> <xr>= <sc>PAKSHUL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>paksut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; a]</itype> <tr>peel off</tr> s.t. which is adhering in a film or layer over s.t. else. <i>Akuy mupaksut sa mga ritrátung ímung gipapilit sa bungbung,</i> I&apos;ll peel the pictures off that you pasted on the wall. <i>Napaksut ang íyang túhud sa pagkadam-ag níya,</i> His knees were bruised when he stumbled. <pos>n</pos> place s.t. was peeled off. <i>Dúnay paksut ang káhuy nga napingsan sa bala,</i> There is a slight bruise on the tree that the bullet grazed.

<p><form>paktaw</form> <xr>= <sc>PATÁNÌ<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>paktu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pact</tr>, an agreement between two or more parties. <form>&mdash; diritru</form> sale of land subject to repurchase within a period of time. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> execute a deed of sale with the right to repurchase.

<p><form>paktul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> knock the head with s.t. <i>Paktúlan ku nang ímung úlu arun makasabut ka,</i> I will conk you on the head so you can understand. <number>2</number> <itype>[b4(1)]</itype> have <ix>paktul</ix> practiced on one. <pos>n</pos> k.o. sorcery whereby s.t. is done to a skull, doll, or some other representation of a person, and the person against whom it is practiced feels the effects of whatever is done to the image. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> practice <ix>paktul</ix>. <form>maN-r-, maN-l-</form> <pos>n</pos> sorcerer who practices <ix>paktul</ix>.

<p><form>paktúra</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>invoice</tr> of goods bought. <number>2</number> label attached to merchandise indicating the price in code. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> make <tr>price tags</tr> for goods to be sold.

<p><form>paku<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fern, the young leaves of which are eaten as a salad: <bio>Athyrium esculentum</bio>.

<p><form>paku<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> plaster of belladona: k.o. plaster applied locally for muscular aches. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> apply a plaster of belladona.

<p><form>pakù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>wings</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>ventral fin</tr>. <number>3</number> means or instrument to achieve s.t.: money, credentials, ability (colloquial). <i>Dì ku makapamyista kay wà man kuy pakù,</i> I can&apos;t attend the fiesta because I don&apos;t have the money for the fare. <i>Dì ka mauwaw nga murikumind&acaron;r níya kay hustu nà sa pakù,</i> You need not be ashamed to recommend her because she has the qualifications. <number>4</number> <tr>armpit</tr> (humorous euphemism). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> put wings on. <form>pakùpákù</form> <pos>n</pos> upper part of back just below the shoulder. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>grow wings</tr>. <form>pak-an</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>winged</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>devilish</tr>. <i>Pak-an bayà nímung dakù!</i> You are a devil.

<p><form>pákù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> be frustrated in one&apos;s efforts to accomplish s.t. <i>Wà ku mapákù sa ákung pagpanágat gabíi kay nakadá kug diyútay,</i> It was worthwhile going fishing last night because I managed to catch some.<note>ex. does not illustrate a frustrating event!</note>

<p><form>pakug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> bang the head against s.t., bang heads together. <i>Pakúgun ta mu kay paríhu mung sad-an,</i> I&apos;m going to bang your heads together. You are both guilty. <i>Íyang ipakug ang íyang úlu sa halígi ug sapútun,</i> He bangs his head against the post when he is angry. <form>pakugpákug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; c1]</itype> for things hanging loosely to bang repeatedly against each other. <i>Magpakugpákug ang mga buwad nga binítay ug hangínun,</i> The dried fish which are hung up knock against each other when the wind blows.

<p><form>pakul</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to good-sized triggerfishes with a larger mouth than the <ix>pugut</ix>.

<p><form>pákul</form> <xr>= <sc>PAGÚHA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pakúma</form> <pos>n</pos> FACOMA, the acronym for Farmers&apos; Cooperative Marketing Association.

<p><form>pakung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; ab2c]</itype> give s.t. a light rap with s.t. else, bump a small part of the head against s.t. <i>Kanang maistrang saputun ang nagpakung nákù,</i> That irate teacher rapped me on the head. <i>Napakung ang ákung úlu sa nag-abring sira,</i> I knocked my head against the open door. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> bang repeatedly.

<p><form>pakupak</form> <xr>= <sc>PALAGUPAK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pákut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>bind s.t. tightly</tr>. <i>Tulisan ang nagpakut níla sa haligi<note> halígi?</note>,</i> The robber bound them to the post. <i>Pakúta ang mga bulus sa kawáyan arun sayun dad-un,</i> Bind the bamboo stems together so they will be easy to carry. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> be of all different kinds, do s.t. to all different kinds. <i>Ug pakútun (ipákut) ninyu ang prútas nga inyung kan-un maimpatsu giyud mu,</i> If you eat all different <pb n=721>kinds of fruit at one time you&apos;ll surely have indigestion. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bond</tr>. <form>ka-</form> <pos>a</pos> of various kinds put together. <i>Kapákut lang ang ímung pamalíbad,</i> You have run the full gamut of excuses. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> be of various kinds put together. <i>Nagkapákut ang íyang sinínà sa mga tapak,</i> Her dress was all patches of every sort and shape.

<p><form>pákut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wild boar</tr>.

<p><form>pakwan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>watermelon</tr>. <number>2</number> dried watermelon seeds.

<p><form>pakyas</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>failed</tr>, come to nothing. <i>Pakyas na ang ákung panganduy,</i> My dreams have come to naught. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>fail</tr>, make s.t. fail. <i>Dílì aku mupakyas nímu,</i> I will not fail you. <i>Dílì ka mapakyas,</i> You cannot fail. <i>Ayawg pakyása ang ákung tingúhà,</i> Don&apos;t cause my aspirations to fail. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b5]</itype> fail to do s.t. <i>Gipakyas (gipakyásan) níya ang íyang pagsimba,</i> He missed going to church. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>failure</tr>.

<p><form>pakyaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> hire for the whole job, buy the whole lot. <i>Nagpakyaw mig usa ka trák pára sa ámung ikskursiyun,</i> We chartered a bus for our excursion. <i>Magpakyaw tag panday paghímug aparadur,</i> Let&apos;s hire a carpenter to make the cabinet, paying him for the job. <i>Pakyáwun ku ang pagtúkud sa balay,</i> I&apos;ll have the house constructed, paying a lump sum for the whole job. <i>Pakyáwun ku ang tanang ságing basta itúgut ug barátu,</i> I&apos;ll buy all your bananas if you let me have them cheap. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> finish a game by making all the points consecutively without changing balls or hands. <i>Ug aku nay makasirbi, pakyáwun giyud nákù,</i> If I serve, I&apos;ll do it to the end of the game (the other side won&apos;t get the ball again). <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> skip doing s.t. one regularly does. <i>Way bugas, pakyáwun na lang nátù ang átung paniudtu,</i> We don&apos;t have any rice. Let&apos;s just skip our dinner. <pos>n</pos> s.t. hired or paid for as a whole. <i>Dílì ni inadlaw. Pakyaw ni,</i> We are paid for doing the whole job, not on a daily basis. <form>maN-r-, maN-ay</form> <pos>n</pos> whole lot buyer or worker of jobs under agreement.

<p><form>pál<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s <tr>pal</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c]</itype> be pals.

<p><form>pál<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for Philippine Air Lines. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> take a PAL flight; by extension, take a plane.

<p><form>pala</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. black ant, the size of an ordinary red ant (<ix>hulmígas</ix>) infesting fruits. It does not bite but secretes an acid which can sting the eyes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infested with black ants. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>PA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pála<sub>1</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>flatter</tr>, <tr>sweet talk</tr>. <i>Akuy mupála ni Nánay arun ta palitan ug bag-ung sinínà,</i> I&apos;ll sweet talk Mother into buying us new dresses. <pos>n</pos> flattery. <form>palapála</form> <xr>= <sc>PÁLA<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pála<sub>2</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>spade</tr>, <tr>shovel</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> move s.t. with a shovel. <i>Paláha nang balas dihà,</i> Shovel that sand away. <i>Ipála ang balas ngari,</i> Shovel the sand over here. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>PÁLA<sub>2</sub></sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr>

<p><form>pála<sub>3</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>propeller</tr>.

<p><form>pálà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>erase</tr>. <i>Mam, akuy mupálà sa blakburd,</i> Ma&apos;am, I&apos;d like to erase the board (for you). <i>Lisud kang pad-un (paláun) sa ákung panumdúman,</i> It&apos;s difficult to erase you from my mind. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> eraser for pencil or typewritten figures. <form>-in-an, pinad-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>erasure</tr>. <i>Daghan rag pinalaan (pinad-an) ang ímung tinayip,</i> Your typing has too many erasures. &dagger;

<p><form>pálà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a3b2]</itype> get s.t. as a result of one&apos;s actions or behavior. <i>Makapálà kag maáyung kapaláran ug magtinarung ka,</i> You will get good fortune if you are a good and upright person. <i>Way láing hipaláan sa táwung burukintu kun dì áway,</i> A trouble-*maker gets nothing but trouble.

<p><form>palábad</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>*LÁBAD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>palabangáhan, palabanghan</form> <xr>= <sc>BALBANGÁAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>palabra</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>word of honor</tr>. <i>Wà siyay palabra kay dílì mutúman ug sáad,</i> He has no word of honor because he does not hold to his promises. <number>2</number> talk as opposed to action. <i>Palabra lang, way nabúhat,</i> It&apos;s all talk, no action. <form>&mdash; diunur</form> <tr>word of honor</tr>. <form>-s</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>SÍTI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>palábu</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>LÁBU<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><form>pálad</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>palm</tr> of the hand. <number>2</number> one&apos;s <tr>fate</tr>. <i>Dì ku madátù kay mau nay ákung pálad,</i> I will not get rich because it&apos;s my fate not to. <number>2a</number> <formx>pilay &mdash;</formx> who knows? <i>Ayaw siyag sawaya. Pilay pálad ug maprisidinti siya,</i> Do not scorn him. Who knows, he might one day become president. <number>2b</number> <formx>walay &mdash;</formx> <tr>unfortunate</tr>. <form>Mis &mdash;</form> name Miss Palm, the hand as used in masturbating (humorous). <i>Napildi kung Mis Pálad gabíi,</i> I gave my all to Miss Palm last night (i.e. masturbated). <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> general name given to various flatfishes: flounders, brills, soles. <number>2</number> k.o. creeping grass: <bio>Cynodon dactylon</bio>. <form>paladpalad</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>PALAD</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>BILABILA</sc>.</xr> <form>panim-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>venture</tr>, try one&apos;s luck. <i>Adtu ku sa Manílà manimpálad,</i> I will go to Manila to try my luck. <i>Panimpalári ug hangyù si Pidung básig musugut,</i> Try your luck in asking Pedong to do it. He might agree to. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b(1)]</itype> read the palm. <i>Human siya kahimadli naghingári lang siyag hinuktuk,</i> Ever since he had his fortune read, he has moped. <form>panghiN-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>palmistry</tr>. <form>manghihimalad</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>palmist</tr>.

<pb n=722>

<p><form>paláran</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>fortunate</tr>. <i>Paláran ka kay ikay napílì,</i> You&apos;re lucky you were chosen. <form>kapaláran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fate</tr>, <tr>destiny</tr>. <i>Súgù sa kapaláran ang nahitabù,</i> What happened was the decree of fate. <i>Balud sa kapaláran,</i> The cruelty of fate. <form>palárun</form> <pos>a</pos> turning out lucky, successful. <i>Ug palárun ang plánu,</i> If the plan is successful.

<p><form>paladyaw</form> (from <ix>layaw</ix>) <pos>n</pos> k.o. floating anchor attached to a line, consisting of a float and s.t. tied to it to offer resistance (<ix>pákaw</ix>), the purpose of which is to slow down s.t. drifting or hold back s.t. moving. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a2]</itype> attach a <ix>paladyaw</ix>. <i>Paladyawi ang palíhan arun malúya dáyun ang íhu,</i> Attach a float to the harpoon line so the shark will tire easily.

<p><form>palag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> <xr>= <sc>HI-</sc>.</xr> <form>hi-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12C3; b8c3]</itype> <tr>meet</tr> with, <tr>run into</tr>. <i>Nakapalag (nakahipálag) na ku sa hustung tubag,</i> I found the right answer. <i>Hipalgan sa mga pulis ang patayng láwas sa nalumus,</i> The policemen found the dead body of the drowned person. <i>Gikahipálag ku siya didtu,</i> I ran into him there.

<p><form>palagpag<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> tray made of bamboo lattice-*work that is hung s.w. for various uses, e.g. in the kitchen as a storage place for food, or hung in the garden as support for vines, et al. <number>2</number> bamboo stretcher for carrying corpses, the flooring of which is made of bamboo slats. <i>Palagpag ang gikargáhan sa minatay,</i> The corpse was carried on a bamboo stretcher. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> put in, make into a tray of this sort or in a bamboo stretcher.

<p><form>palagpag<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac2]</itype> agitate s.t. to remove dust. <i>Ipalagpag (palagpági) ang sinínà arun makúhà ang abug,</i> Beat or shake the dresses to remove the dust.

<p><form>palagupak</form> <pos>n</pos> clapper made of bamboo or a banana leaf stalk. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> sound the <ix>palagupak</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make a <ix>palagupak</ix>.

<p><form>palahúta</form> <xr>= <sc>PLAWTA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pal-ak</form> <pos>n</pos> <pos>a</pos> leafstalk and its leaf. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> remove the leafstalk from the mother plant. <i>Pal-áki kug pila ka dáhun sa pitsay,</i> Take some Chinese cabbage leaves off of the plant for me.

<p><form>palakà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>frog</tr>.

<p><form>palakáya</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>trawling</tr> with a V-shaped net (<ix>púkut</ix>) usually in deep waters. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a2]</itype> <tr>trawl</tr>, catch by trawling.

<p><form>palakíru</form> <xr>= <sc>PALIKÍRU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>palakpak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>applause</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>clap</tr>. <i>Ang gipalakpákan ug maáyu mauy nakadaug,</i> The one who got the most applause won.

<p><form>palakpalak</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> croaking of frogs, flapping of wings of fowls, clacking of wooden slippers. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>PALAGUPAK</sc>.</xr> <number>2a</number> <tr>lesbian</tr>, so called from the bamboo clapper which consists of two like-shaped pieces of bamboo. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make the <ix>palakpalak</ix> sound. <number>2</number> <itype>[C]</itype> engage in Lesbian<note>lesbian -P2</note> behavior.

<p><form>palakul, palákul</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>hatchet</tr>. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12b2]</itype> hit with a hatchet. <i>Palakulun ku nang irúa,</i> I&apos;ll hit that dog with an axe. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> like a hatchet. <form>-un ug tiil</form> having feet with spreading toes.

<p><form>palakupak</form> <xr>= <sc>PALAGUPAK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>palamban</form> <xr>= <sc>PANGTAMBAN</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>TAMBAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>palamingku</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> long, sharp, pointed knife, of light weight, about 8&Prime; long, used for slaughtering or slicing meat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> strike, stab with a <ix>palamingku</ix>.

<p><form>palanas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> flat, smooth rock or stone cliff. <number>2</number> eroded untillable area where large stones stick out. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> for the soil to become barren, eroded. <i>Mupalanas (mapalanas) ang yútà ug mabahaan,</i> A piece of land becomes infertile if it is subject to floods.

<p><form>palandung</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>LANDUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>palanggà</form> (from <ix>danggà</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> love and care for s.o. <i>Mupanggà ku sa bátang buútan,</i> I&apos;ll love a good child. <i>Palanggáun ku ikaw hangtud sa kahangtúran,</i> I will love and care for you till the end of time. <pos>n</pos> <tr>dearest</tr>, <tr>darling</tr>. short form: <bx>langg&amacrgra;</bx>. <i>Natúlug ka na ba, palanggà?</i> Are you asleep, darling? <form>ma-in-un</form> <pos>a</pos> bestowing loving care, full of love. <form>-in-</form> <xr>= <sc>PALANGGÀ</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p><form>palanggána, plangganíta</form> <xr>= <sc>PLANGGÁNA</sc>.</xr> <xr><sc>PLANGGANÍTA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>palangging, palanggingging</form> <pos>n</pos> form of endearment for <ix>palanggà</ix>. <i>Unsa may gustu nímung kan-un palangging?</i> What do you want to eat, little dear?

<p><form>palangka<sub>1</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> religious offering or pledge in the form of prayers, sacrifices, and penance for the success of a <ix>kursilyista</ix> (<xr>see <sc>KURSILYU</sc></xr>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a <ix>palangka</ix>.

<p><form>palangka<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PLANGKA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>palangkì</form> <xr>= <sc>PULANGKÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>palangri</form> <pos>n</pos> general name for longline fishing in deep waters. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> go longline fishing.

<p><form>palanhay</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <tr>sloping gradually</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a12]</itype> be, become a <tr>gradual slope</tr>. <i>Abunúhig yútà sa ubus arun mapalanhay ang baháda,</i> Put in filling in the part below so that it will be an easy grade.

<p><form>palansa</form> <xr>= <sc>PLANTSA</sc>.</xr> <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> flat-topped hair-*cut with short sides.

<p><form>palantig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> throw s.t. at s.t. <i>Gipalantig nákung manuk nga mituktuk sa binlad,</i> I threw stones at the chicken that was pecking <pb n=723>at the rice.

<p><form>palantígun</form> <xr>= <sc>BALANTÍGUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>palàpà</form> <xr>= <sc>PALÀPÁLÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>palapag</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> strong, permanent trellis, with posts, usually made of metal or hardwood, used as a support for climbing plants or as a screen. <number>2</number> matting made of closely woven bamboo slats. <i>Katága sa palapag ang kupras,</i> Spread the copra on the bamboo slats. <number>3</number> a round winnowing tray.

<p><form>palápag</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> improvised litter. <i>Ang masakitun gibutang sa palápag ug gibayúngan ngadtu sa tambalánan,</i> The sick person was placed on the improvised carriage and was taken to the hospital. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>PALAGPAG<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> carry in a litter. <number>2</number> make a litter.

<p><form>palapála</form> <xr>= <sc>PALÀPÁLÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>palàpálà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> horizontal trellis for plants to grow on. <number>2</number> temporary shed without walls with a flat roof. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> make such a shed or trellis for climbing plants. <i>Magpàpà lang tas sílung nga pára kan-anan sa bisíta,</i> We&apos;ll make a pergola in the yard for the dinner guests.

<p><form>palàpálà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> advantage given an opponent whereby the stronger player agrees to make a certain multiple of the score gotten by the weaker, e.g., he must make five points for every one point of his opponent. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give this advantage.

<p><form>palaríti</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <xr>= <sc>PLARÍTI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pálas<sub>1</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a]</itype> <tr>erase</tr> writings, memories. <i>Ákù ta kang palásun sa ákung listahan,</i> I&apos;ll erase your name from my list. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>eraser</tr>. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>erasure</tr>.

<p><form>pálas<sub>2</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> summon people to work. <i>Palásun ku ang mga silíngan kay maglálung ta sa balay,</i> I will go notify the people to come because we&apos;re going to move the house.

<p><form>pálas<sub>3</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> continue weaving s.t. already started. <i>Nasugdan ku na man, ikaw na lay magpálas,</i> I started it. Now you continue weaving it.

<p><form>palásan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. rattan with a stem as big around as the arm, and the nodes approximately 1&frac12;&Prime; apart. The heart stem is edible but bitter. The stalk is used for furniture and the split stems for tying.

<p><form>palasíbu</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <xr>= <sc>PLASÍBU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>palast&acaron;r</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> lay flat, lie down flat. <i>Kinsa man nang nagpalast&acaron;r dihà sa katri?</i> Who&apos;s that lying down on the bed? <i>Ipalast&acaron;r (palastára) ang panaptun sa lamísa úsà nímu tabása,</i> Lay the cloth flat on the table before you cut it. <number>2</number> set in proper place. <i>Palastáran ku sa ákung tinda kining ímung lamísa, ha?</i> May I set my goods up here on your table?

<p><form>palásu</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>PLÁSU</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>PALATSU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>palasyu</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> palace. <number>2</number> archbishop&apos;s residence. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a palace.

<p><form>palata</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish found around rocks in shallow waters, not particularly good eating.

<p><form>palatik</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> outrigger boom to which the float (<ix>kátig</ix>) is attached. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make or attach an outrigger boom<corr>.</corr>

<p><form>palatíru</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <xr>= <sc>PLATÍRU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>palatsu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. flowing gown for women consisting of a flaring, full skirt modified to form two pant legs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> wear this sort of gown.

<p><form>palátu</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <xr>= <sc>PLÁTU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>palatun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> plate, 9&Prime; to 12&Prime; in diameter, made of enamel-coated tinplate, round and deep like a shallow soup plate. <number>2</number> any <tr>plate</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> use a <ix>palatun</ix>. <number>2</number> make into a <ix>palatun</ix>. <pos>a</pos> eating a lot.

<p><form>palaw</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> feel disappointment tinged with embarrassment at the failure of s.t. to happen. <i>Napalaw ang mangunguut kay way sulud ang pitáka,</i> The pickpocket was disappointed because the wallet contained no money. <i>Napalaw mi pagkanta námug hápi birtdi kay dì diay adlaw níya,</i> We were embarrassed when we sang happy birthday because it wasn&apos;t his birthday.

<p><form>pálaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large, vigorous growing aroid, the tubers and leaves of which are eaten, esp. in times of scarcity: <bio>Cyrtosperma merkusii</bio>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> plant <ix>pálaw</ix>. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>PÁLAW</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> name for a similar aroid.

<p><form>palaw-a</form> <xr>= <sc>PALWA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>paláwir</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> female genitalia. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> adorn with flowers. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b3]</itype> make oneself up pretty, dress to kill (humorous). <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> for a young girl to do s.t. appropriate to grown-ups. <i>Ngánung nangmik-ap ka? Namaláwir ka na ba?</i> Why are you putting make-up on? You want to act like a grown-up? <number>4</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> gather fallen coconuts, esp. from plantations not one&apos;s own (humorous&mdash;word play on <ix>pamúlak</ix> &lsquo;gather fallen coconuts&rsquo; which looks as though the root is <ix>búlak</ix> &lsquo;flower&rsquo; [whereas actually the root is <ix>púlak</ix>]).

<p><form>palaypay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> spread s.t. out or hang it up to air, dry. <i>Didtu sa gawas ipalaypay ang hábul,</i> Spread the blanket out outside. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> place where laundry is hung out to dry.

<p><form>palbangáan, palbangáhan</form> <xr>= <sc>BALBANGÁAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>palda</form> <pos>n</pos> skirt. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, obtain, make into a skirt. <form>&mdash; iblúsa</form> <pos>n</pos> skirt and blouse. <pos>v</pos> <pb n=724><itype>[A; c]</itype> wear a skirt and blouse.

<p><form>paldíyas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> brim of a hat. <number>2</number> part of the leg of the trousers from the knees to the cuffs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> make the brim of a hat.

<p><form>paldu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> pack into bales. <i>Átung paldúhun ang mga pamantaláan,</i> Let&apos;s bale the newspapers. <pos>n</pos> <tr>bale</tr>, <tr>bundle</tr>. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. packed in bales.

<p><form>palhi</form> <pos>a</pos> for a place to be inhabited by supernatural beings that can get easily angered and inflict diseases on the object of their ire. <i>Giila ra ba ning yutáang palhi. Buháti únà úsà darúha,</i> This land is notorious for the supernatural beings that guard it. Make an offering before you plow it.

<p><form>palhug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> slip s.t. long under or in between s.t. else, usually not tightly placed. <i>Ayawg palhúgi ug malíta ang ilálum sa hagdanan,</i> Don&apos;t keep a suitcase under the stairs.

<p><form>palì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> large <tr>scar</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b4a4]</itype> form, have a scar. <i>Mupalì ang kabahung ug mataptan ug mík,</i> The infection will form a scar if you treat it with a coin.

<p><form>palì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> for the upraised hands to be bent back with some force. <i>Kusug ra kaáyu tung pagkapasáha sa búla, makapalì (makapapalì) man pud sa magsáwù,</i> You really threw the ball with force. It can bend the hand over backwards.

<p><form>palias</form> <pos>a</pos> having pale and very dry lips. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26N; b4]</itype> for the lips to be, become pale and very dry. <i>Ang táwung masakitun mipalías (namalías) ang ngábil,</i> A sick man&apos;s lips turn pale and get dry. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> of a pale and powdery sort.

<p><form>palibkas</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>LIBKAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>palid<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sheet of paper, metal. <i>Duha ka palid nga sín,</i> Two iron sheets. <number>2</number> door or window shutter. <number>3</number> installment of a story. <i>Dì ku saypan ang matag palid sa sugilánun,</i> I won&apos;t miss a single installment of the story.

<p><form>palid<sub>2</sub>, pálid<sub>1</sub> &mdash; sa luwag</form> <pos>n</pos> handle of a ladle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make the handle of a ladle.

<p><form>pálid<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for the wind to blow s.t. away. <i>Gipálid sa hángin ang hinayhay,</i> The wind blew the laundry away. <number>1a</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> be blown off course. <i>Didtu ipálid ang sakayan sa Buhul,</i> The boat was blown over to Bohol. <form>&mdash; ug hangínun</form> <itype>[c]</itype> be so thin the wind could blow it away. <i>Gisumbag pa sa salbáhis nga bána ang íyang asáwa nga ipálid gánig hangínun,</i> The wife was so thin she could have been blown over by a gust of wind, but that didn&apos;t stop her brute of a husband from boxing her. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>winnow</tr>, throw grains in the air so the wind can carry them off or winnow with a machine. <i>Magpálid mig humay sa baybáyun,</i> We&apos;ll winnow rice at the seashore. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>PÁLID</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr> <form>palidpálid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> sway back and forth in the wind, make sway. <i>Nagpalidpálid ang kurtína sa hángin,</i> The curtains waved in the wind. <i>Ang hángin nagpalidpálid sa íyang buhuk,</i> The wind blew her hair in all directions.

<p><form>palidpid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> pass close along the side of s.t. <i>Namalidpid (mipalidpid) kug ági sa karsáda,</i> I walked along the side of the street.

<p><form>palíhan</form> <pos>n</pos> rope tied to a harpoon or arrow with which the quarry can be held after it is speared. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a]</itype> attach, use for a harpoon rope.

<p><form>paliháru</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large sweet potato having soft, yellowish meat.

<p><form>palíhug</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>*LÍHUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>palikíru</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>philandering</tr>. <form>&mdash; ug mata</form> being flirtatious with women, using the eyes.

<p><form>palinà</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small sugar cane that has a dark maroon color and is decidedly sweeter than the commercial variety. The stem is soft and easily chewable.

<p><form>palínà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. fumigation practised for medical treatment or for various rites, the purpose of which is always purification or nullification of s.t. <number>2</number> materials used for this treatment. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> give s.o. this treatment. <i>Magpalínà ku sa bag-ung balay,</i> I will have my new house purified by magic smoke. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> give oneself this treatment. <i>Namalínà ku gíkan sa mintiriyu,</i> I exposed myself to fumigation after I left the cemetery.

<p><form>paling</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB126; c1]</itype> for s.t. not rooted or fixed at the base to fall over to its side; cause it to do so. <i>Iring ang mipaling sa masitíra,</i> The cat knocked the flower pot over. <form>palingpaling</form> <pos>a</pos> having no strong convictions and easily yielding to influence. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56]</itype> be not firm, an easy prey to influence. <i>Way íyang kaugalíngung panghunàhúnà, mupalingpáling (mapalingpáling) pa,</i> He can be swayed in his decision. He has no mind of his own.

<p><form>palìpì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> place thorns around the base of plants to keep them from animals or thieves. <i>Ug wà pa ku makapalìpì sa ákung mangga, mahurut untà sa káwat,</i> If I hadn&apos;t put thorns around the base of the mango tree, the fruit would have all been stolen. <pos>n</pos> thorns placed around plants.

<p><form>palinpinun</form> <pos>n</pos> <pos>a</pos> narrow road with a sharp turn having a high cliff on one side and a deep precipice on the other side.

<p><form>palis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>early afternoon</tr>, between noon and 4 P.M. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B5; b4(1)]</itype> be in the afternoon. <i>Napalisan <pb n=725>kug laba sa mga bulingun,</i> I washed the clothes until afternoon. <i>Palisan ku ang ímung bábuy,</i> I will pay for your pig with an afternoon&apos;s work.

<p><form>pális</form> <xr>= <sc>PÁLID<sub>2</sub></sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr>

<p><form>palispis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN]</itype> for leaves to start sprouting<note> .</note> <i>Sa tulu ka adlaw mupalispis (mamalispis) na ang pugas,</i> In three days the corn seeds will be sprouting. Nagpalispis na ang sanga nga íyang gitisuk, The branch of a tree that she planted is beginning to grow leaves. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> short, thin sprouting leaf, not fully grown. <number>2</number> sheath of a stem of the bamboo plant. <number>3</number> sheath wings, usually of insects. <number>4</number> caudal fin of the squid. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> a fraction of s.t. <i>Pinalispis lang kini sa ímung abilidad,</i> This is only a fraction of your ability.

<p><form>palit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>buy</tr>. <i>Akuy mupalit ánag diyis,</i> I&apos;ll buy it for ten pesos (lit. if it&apos;s ten pesos). <i>Kinsay nagpalit sa ímung awtu?</i> Who bought your car? <i>Nakapalit mig barátung kutsi,</i> We managed to buy a car cheap. Palitun ku ning tambála, I will buy this medicine. <i>Kinsay ímung gipalitan sa kutsi?</i> Who did you buy the car from (or for)? <i>Wà kuy kwartang ipalit ug awtu,</i> I have no money to buy a car with. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <form>&mdash; ug áway, burúka</form> get into trouble with s.o. with whom one had no quarrel simply because of too much meddling. <i>Sa ímung tábì nakapalit kag áway,</i> You bought yourself a quarrel with your gossip. <pos>n</pos> amount paid to buy s.t. <i>Pilay palit nímu sa isdà? How much did you pay for the fish?</i> <form>&mdash; baligyà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>buying and selling</tr>. <i>Ang íyang patigáyun palit baligyà sa mais,</i> He is in the business of buying and selling corn. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sales</tr>. <i>Kusug ba ang pálit sa ímung tinda?</i> Are your goods selling fast? a selling well. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b5]</itype> <number>1</number> sell in large quantities. <i>Bulad mauy gipálit (gipalítan) run sa mga táwu kay mahal ang lab-as,</i> Dried fish sells well now because fresh fish is dear. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for a farmer who raises his own to buy when his stock runs out. <i>Nagpálit na run mi kay nahurut na ang abut námù nga mais,</i> We are buying corn grits now because we used up our stock of corn. <form>hiN-(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of buying. <i>Himálit kaáyu siyag prútas,</i> She is fond of buying fruits. <form>hiN-an, hiN-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> selling well. <i>Himalitan (himalítan, pálit) ang ímung tinda kay bubaratu,</i> Your goods sell well because they&apos;re cheaper. &dagger;

<p><form>palíta</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>brick trowel</tr>. <number>2</number> a flat paddle for removing baked foods from an oven. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; ab2]</itype> <number>1</number> smooth with a trowel. <i>Palitáha ang pinising,</i> Smooth out the finishing cement. <number>2</number> use a paddle, hit with a paddle. <form>-da</form> <xr>= <sc>PALÍTA</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr>

<p><form>palitaw, palítaw</form> <pos>n</pos> sweet made of finely ground sticky rice patties boiled in water and covered with sugar and shredded coconut. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make <ix>palitaw</ix>.

<p><form>palítu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>toothpick</tr>, <tr>matchstick</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make a toothpick. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> use a toothpick. <i>Namalítu siya human ug káun,</i> He picked his teeth after he ate.

<p><form>palítu<sub>2</sub></form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>LÍTU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>paliya, palíya</form> <pos>n</pos> widely cultivated vine producing an elongated fruit with wart-like skin, eaten unripe as a vegetable, having a bitter taste: <bio>Momordica charantia</bio>.

<p><form>paliyar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B6; b4(1)]</itype> for an engine to malfunction. <i>Sus, nagpaliyar na pud ning kagangkagang!</i> Darn! This rattletrap is breaking down again! <number>2</number> <itype>[B6]</itype> for a plan to fail to come out successfully. <i>Mipaliyar ang ámung sábut nga mangalígù kay nag-ulan,</i> Our plans to go swimming didn&apos;t materialize because it rained. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> default in payment. <i>Nakapaliyar kug usa ka instulmin sa pagdaut nákù,</i> I failed to pay one installment when I got sick. <number>4</number> <itype>[B36]</itype> for one&apos;s health to fail. <i>Mipaliyar ang íyang láwas tungud sa síging bilar,</i> She kept staying up nights and it ruined her health. <form>palyádu, palyáwu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> malfunctioning. <number>2</number> failing to come out. <number>3</number> defaulting in payments. <number>4</number> failing in health. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> break down.

<p><form>paliyu</form> <pos>n</pos> flat, pointed stick, usually bamboo, used as a needle to string tobacco leaves together. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make into a <ix>paliyu</ix>. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>match stick</tr>,<note>matchstick above</note> <tr>toothpick</tr>. <number>2</number> swab of cotton on a thin stick. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> swab s.t. <i>Paliyúhan giyud ang búug arun dì mudalítay,</i> Swab the thick ear discharge so that it won&apos;t ooze out.

<p><form>palku</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> balcony of a theater or a house. <number>2</number> small improvised hut built fronting a stage as a box for viewers. <form>palkupalku</form> <pos>n</pos> a raised flooring or stage for a performance.

<p><form>palma</form> <pos>n</pos> palm plant or any part thereof. <i>Ang palma simbulu sa kadaúgan,</i> The palm is a symbol of victory. <form>&mdash; ulíba</form> olive palm, a palm of the same genus as the <ix>pitúgu</ix>, but somewhat smaller.

<p><form>palmíra</form> <pos>n</pos> any of a number of small pinnate-leafed palms, potted or planted for ornamental purposes.

<p><form>palmíta</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> rod for punishment. <number>2</number> punishment with a rod. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> administer the rod. <i>Kusug mupalmíta ang mga páring Katsílà,</i> The Spanish priests were fond of punishing the children with a rod.

<p><form>palmu</form> <pos>n</pos> a game of marbles in which marbles are made to bounce off a board. The first player shoots and the second player tries to <pb n=726>hit the first player&apos;s marble or get within a certain distance. If he fails, the first player throws again, and so forth. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> play a game of <ix>palmu</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> in basketball, shoot the ball into the basket by making it bounce off the board first.

<p><form>palmug</form> <xr>= <sc>PAMULUG</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <sc>BULUG<sub>3</sub></sc>.

<p><form>palpag</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>disheveled</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be disheveled. <i>Ang íyang buhuk mipalpag tungud sa hilabihang kauga,</i> Her hair was disheveled because it was so dry.

<p><form>palpagu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. herbaceous ground cover with creeping stems also grown in pots: <bio>Pellionia daveauana</bio>.

<p><form>palpal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> <number>1</number> hit s.o. on the open palm. <i>Palpálun ku run nang ímung kamut,</i> I&apos;m going to slap your palms. <number>2</number> knock s.t. with the flat palm. <i>Si Martiris ang nakapalpal sa búla gíkan kang Plurinsiyu,</i> Martirez knocked the ball out of Florencio&apos;s hands. <number>3</number> <itype>[B1]</itype> for the feet to get flat. <pos>a</pos> flat of feet. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> somewhat <tr>flat-footed</tr>.

<p><form>palpara</form> <pos>n</pos> a ruffle or frill attached to the neckline or to the sleeves of a dress. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> decorate a dress with ruffles or wear a dress decorated with ruffles.

<p><form>palsipikar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> falsify papers or documents; forge s.o.&apos;s signature. <form>palsipikádu</form> <pos>a</pos> forged, counterfeit document, forged signature. <form>palsipikasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> falsification of documents.

<p><form>palsu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>false</tr>, <tr>incorrect</tr>. <i>Palsu ang ímung pangatarúngan,</i> Your reasons are wrong. <number>2</number> <tr>failed</tr>. <i>Palsu ang ílang tingúhà,</i> Their endeavors came to naught. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a12]</itype> <tr>fail</tr>, not come to fruition. <i>Mipalsu (napalsu) ang ílang plánu,</i> Their plans failed.

<p><form>palta</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> fail to do s.t. <i>Walà pa ku makapalta sa ákung klási,</i> I never missed a class. <i>Napalta ug hatud run ang Tayims,</i> The Times wasn&apos;t delivered today. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> break up people fighting. <i>Gipalta sa pulis ang duha ka batan-un nga nagsinumbagay,</i> The policeman separated the two youngsters who were engaged in a fist fight. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> failure to attend some function. <number>2</number> fail to do s.t. <i>Way palta ang íyang pagbisíta magabíi,</i> He never failed to visit her in the evening. <number>3</number> amount less in a score, amount lacking in a count. <i>Palta úna ug tabla na kamu,</i> One more point and you&apos;ll be even. <i>Ang ímung ihap kúlang. Palta ug duha,</i> You counted wrong. You lack two. <form>kúhà ug &mdash;</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> be held culpable. <i>Makuháag palta ang mga ginikánan nga kinamatayun nga mukastígu ug anak,</i> Parents can be held culpable if they punish their children too severely. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to be absent.

<p><form>paltik</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> homemade firearms. <number>2</number> fake money. <number>3</number> in baseball, foul ball. <number>4</number> s.o. who rides s.t. or enters without a ticket. <i>Daghang paltik sa ílang pasahíru,</i> There were lots of non-*paying passengers. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> go s.w. without a ticket. <i>Náay ákung amígu sa sini. Mamaltik ta,</i> I have a friend that works in the theater. Let&apos;s sneak in.

<p><form>paltus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> fail in one&apos;s plans or strategy. <i>Mipaltus ang íyang plánung manúlis kay hipanid-an man,</i> His plans for the robbery were foiled because s.o. had observed him.

<p><form>palu</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <number>1</number> be disappointed and embarrassed due to the failure of one&apos;s expectations. <i>Napalu siyag hátag ug gása kay dílì pa diay mau ang adlaw,</i> He was embarrassed when he gave his birthday gift as it turned out it was not the man&apos;s birthday. <number>2</number> for a top to fail to spin. &dagger;

<p><form>pálu</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>mast</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>pole</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a]</itype> make a mast, pole, put a mast on. <i>Káhuy nga palúhun sa bangkà,</i> A piece of wood to make into a mast of the boat. <form>&mdash; Maríya</form> <xr>= <sc>BITÁUG</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; síbu</form> <pos>n</pos> name of a game in which s.o. tries to climb a greased pole to get a prize on top. <form>palupálu</form> <pos>n</pos> paddle used in pounding clothes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> beat with a paddle.

<p><form>palù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>hit</tr>, <tr>slap</tr> in punishment. <i>Paluun ku ang ímung nawung,</i> I will slap your face. <i>Hipaluan siya sa sinílas,</i> He got slapped with the slippers. <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to slap with. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of hitting.

<p><form>pálù</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>infatuated</tr> (slang). <i>Misugut dáyun kay pálù man siya nákù,</i> She accepted me right away because she has a crush on me. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b3]</itype> get a crush on s.o.

<p><form>paluap</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> follow up one&apos;s orders or request to see if they have been acted on. <i>Madúgay ang aplikisyun ug way mupaluap,</i> The application will take forever if no one follows it up. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> in basketball, knock the ball into the basket after it bounces from the ring or board. <i>Ug dì masyát ang búla ipaluap dáyun,</i> If the ball doesn&apos;t get in the first time, knock it in by hitting it again. <pos>n</pos> act of knocking a ball which bounces off the ring or board into the basket.

<p><form>pálud</form> <pos>n</pos> shingle of palm thatch, usually <ix>nípà</ix> but also <ix>lumbiya</ix>, used for roofing or walling. It is made by wrapping the leaflet around a piece of bamboo and sewing it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make into, provide with shingles of this sort. <form>palawran</form> <pos>n</pos> piece of bamboo around which the shingle is wound and sewn.

<p><form>palug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> half a buck (slang).

<p><form>palug<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. fresh-water fish, about 3&Prime; long, blackish and scaly.

<pb n=727>

<p><form>palumar</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dovecote</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> construct or put up a dovecote s.w.

<p><form>palung<sub>1</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <xr>= <sc>PALAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>palung<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> whittle the end of s.t. to make it taper or smooth it. <i>Gipalungan níya ang pasamánu sa hagdan,</i> He made the edges of the bannister rounded. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cut the ears so that they hang. <i>Gipalung ang dalunggan sa bábuy ági ug timailhan,</i> They cut the pig&apos;s ear as a mark. <number>2a</number> cut the cockscomb. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> move the end of a line to make it parallel or directly vertical to s.t. <i>Gipalungan níya ang linya dapit sa tuu,</i> He moved the line a little to the right. a having an ear that hangs due to injury. <i>Si Huwan palung,</i> Juan has a dangling ear. <pos>n</pos> deformations on the ear. <form>paN-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> stempost or sternpost of small outrigger boats. <form>pinaN-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small outrigger boat, the stempost and sternpost of which are exactly alike.

<p><form>pálung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>extinguish a fire</tr>, <tr>turn off a light</tr>. <i>Bumbíru ang nakapálung sa kaláyu,</i> The firemen put out the big fire. <i>Pagnga ra gud ang sugà,</i> Please turn the light off. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> for the vision to become blurred. <i>Nagkapáwung ang ákung panan-aw sa kagútum,</i> I can hardly see, I&apos;m so hungry. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; ang kasukù</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a1]</itype> for anger to die down or subside. <i>Dílì mapáwung ang ákung kasukù nímug dì ka mangáyug pasaylu,</i> Nothing can quench my anger unless you apologize. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> instrument for snuffing out candles.

<p><form>palungpung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cluster</tr> or <tr>bunch</tr>. <i>Misuksuk ang manuk sa palungpung,</i> The chicken hid itself in the cluster of bushes. <i>Palungpung sa lyábi,</i> A bunch of keys. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; a12]</itype> be in cluster or bunch, bunch s.t. <i>Mupalungpung ang búnga sa úbas,</i> Grapes come in bunches. <i>Pungpúnga ang ímung buhuk arun dílì magwarung,</i> Tie up your hair so it won&apos;t get dishevelled.

<p><form>palungpung<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> toddy container made of a bamboo tube, two or three nodes long, with no handle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make into a <ix>palungpung</ix><corr>.</corr>

<p><form>paluphu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> scrub cooking utensils. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>PUPHU</sc>, v1.</xr> <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to scrub cooking utensils, usually coconut husks. <i>Paluphu ang ákung ilimpiyu sa dukut sa kaldíru,</i> I&apos;ll clean the rice stuck to the pot with coconut husks.

<p><form>palúrus</form> <xr>= <sc>PARÚLUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>palus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> cause s.t. loosely tied or attached to slip off. <i>Palusa (ipalus) ang baskit nga gisab-it sa ákung abága,</i> Slip the basket off my shoulder. <number>2</number> slip the foreskin back. <i>Ug mapawus ang yámis hustu nang tulíun,</i> If the foreskin can be pulled back, it is ready to circumcise. <pos>a</pos> a foreskin that can be slipped back.

<p><form>palus<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> measurement of a skein of thread one hundred fathoms in length.

<p><form>pálus<sub>1</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>score</tr> in a game. <number>2</number> advantage in score given in billiards to a weaker opponent. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> score in a game. <i>Ipálus (palúsa) nang syíti,</i> Make seven points (knock the seven into the hole). <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give s.o. an advantage in score. <i>Kining tiradáha ipálus ku nímu,</i> I will give you the score of this shot.

<p><form>pálus</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b7c]</itype> pay out additional length of line. <i>Gipalúsan níya ang tugut arun musákag maáyu ang tabánug,</i> He paid out more line so that the kite would climb higher.

<p><form>pálut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>peel skin off</tr>. <i>Gipalútan ku na ang mansánas,</i> I peeled the apple. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> for the skin to get chafed. <i>Napálut (mipálut) ang líug sa kábaw tungud sa yúgu,</i> The yoke chafed the water buffalo&apos;s neck. <number>3</number> <itype>[AB12]</itype> for land to become bare. <i>Napálut ang kaumahan kay way ulan,</i> The fields became bare from lack of rain. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> shave the head bald. <i>Akuy mupálut sa ímung úlu ug dì ka magpatupi ánang ímung bítul,</i> I&apos;ll shave your head bald if you don&apos;t get rid of your beatle cut. <pos>n</pos> <tr>peelings</tr>. <pos>a</pos> bare of vegetation. <i>Kanúnay kitang bahaan kay pálut na ang kabukíran,</i> We have constant floods because the mountains have been denuded. <form>&mdash; ságing</form> <tr>banana peel</tr>, said esp. in stating that s.t. is of no more worth than a banana peel. <i>Ngánung wà man ku kunsultahi. Unsa man ku, pálut ságing?</i> Why was I not consulted? What am I around here, anyway? Just a piece of furniture? <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sorely chafed area. <number>2</number> scar on the head. <i>Nakítà ang palut sa íyang úlu,</i> You can see the scar on his head. a having a bald spot on it. <i>Ang sal-ing palut ug úlu,</i> The coleto bird has a bald spot on the head.

<p><form>palutput</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish, general name for slip-*mouths: <bio>Leiognathus spp</bio>.

<p><form>paluy</form> <xr>= <sc>PAKLUY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>palwa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> petiole of a palm frond, banana leaf, or similarly-shaped leaves. <number>2</number> the whole palm frond, banana leaf. <number>2a</number> the leaf (petioles and leaflets) of the kalamunggay. <i>Duha ka palwang kalamunggay,</i> Two branches of <ix>kalamunggay</ix> leaves. <form>&mdash; sa kadaúgan</form> <pos>n</pos> palm of victory. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b8]</itype> <number>1</number> grow fronds. <i>Namalwa (gipamalwáhan) na ang pitsay,</i> The Chinese cabbage has grown leaves. <number>2</number> gather palm fronds. Mamalwa tag isugnud, We&apos;ll gather palm fronds for fuel. <form>palwáhun</form> <pos>a</pos> like a frond. <i>Palwáhun ug ilung,</i> Flatnosed.

<pb n=728>

<p><form>palya</form> <xr>= <sc>PALIYAR</sc>.</xr> <form>-du, -wu</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>PALIYAR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>palyu</form> <pos>n</pos> canopy covering the bishop in religious services or processions.

<p><form>pam-</form> for forms beginning with <ix>pam-</ix> <ix>see</ix> also <bx>B-</bx> and <bx>P-</bx>.

<p><form>pamáda</form> <xr>= <sc>PUMÁDA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pamaláyi</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>BAYI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pamálung</form> <number>1</number> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>PALUNG</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>PÁLUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pamául</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>muscle ache</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> for muscles to be sore.

<p><form>pambul</form> <pos>n</pos> violation of fumbling in basketball, consisting of hitting the legs or the feet of one&apos;s opponent while he is dribbling.

<p><form>pambut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pump boat</tr>, a small motorized boat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> go by pump boat.

<p><form>pamili &mdash; sayis</form> <pos>a</pos> family-sized packaged products. <form>pil indi &mdash; wi</form> feel at home (humorous&mdash;from the English &lsquo;be in the family way&rsquo; meaning to be pregnant). <i>Ayaw lag kaúlaw pil indi pamili wi,</i> Don&apos;t be shy. Just feel at home.

<p><form>pamilínu</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>PILÍNU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pamilya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>immediate family</tr>, group of closely related people who live together. <number>2</number> large group of related people with the same name. <i>Ang mga Lúpis dátung pamilya sa Pilipínas,</i> The Lopezes are a rich family in the Philippines. <number>3</number> belonging to a class or a family. <i>Kining isdáa pamilya sa mga pági,</i> This fish is in the ray family. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become a member of a certain family by virtue of marriage. <i>Ayaw lag kaúlaw kay mapamilya ka na námù,</i> Don&apos;t be shy because you are soon going to become a member of our family. <form>di-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> family man. <i>Lisud sa usa ka dipamilya kun way kapangwartáhan,</i> It is terrible for a person with a family if he has no work. <number>2</number> man&apos;s undershorts, cut in boxer style. <number>3</number> of a large size, designed for two or more people in a family. <i>Muskitírung dipamilya,</i> A large-sized mosquito net. <number>4</number> s.t. done together by all the members of a family. <i>Dipamilya manan-aw ug sini,</i> See the movie with the whole family. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear boxer-style underpants. <form>padri di-</form> <pos>n</pos> head of a family.

<p><form>pamilyar</form> <pos>a</pos> familiar with s.o. or s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be familiar with or close to s.t. or s.o. <i>Wà pa ku makapamilyar nímu,</i> I&apos;m not familiar with you yet.

<p><form>pamimislun</form> <xr>= <sc>AMIMISLUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pamínaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S; ab2]</itype> <tr>listen</tr>, <tr>hear</tr>. <i>Mamínaw ta sa nyús,</i> Let&apos;s listen to the news. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A23; a12]</itype> listen, heed. <i>Dì ka untà maingun ug namínaw pa ka,</i> If you had listened, that wouldn&apos;t have happened to you. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> feel, think. <i>Pamináwun ku lang ug makaadtu ku,</i> I&apos;ll see if I can go. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2S; a12]</itype> watch, keep an eye on. <i>Pamináwa ra ang balay samtang wà ku dinhi,</i> Watch the house while I&apos;m away. <number>4</number> <itype>[A2S; b5]</itype> look to find out. <i>Pamínaw didtu ug dúna ba silay bakanti,</i> Go find out if they have any openings. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>feeling</tr>. <i>Kumusta ang ímung pamínaw karun?</i> How are you feeling now? <number>2</number> <tr>observation</tr>. <i>Sa ákung pamínaw dílì siya kasalígan,</i> As far as I have noticed, he is not to be trusted. &dagger;

<p><form>pamingkúngan</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>BINGKUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pamingwit</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>BINGWIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>paminta</form> <xr>= <sc>PIMYINTA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>paminti, pamintì</form> (from <ix>bintì<sub>2</sub></ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46N; b(1)]</itype> be angry so that the whole body is trembling. <i>Mibathay ang ugat sa ákung agtang sa dihang naminti ku,</i> I was fuming with rage and the veins stood out on my forehead.

<p><form>pamintun</form> <pos>n</pos> spicy red seasoning, sold packaged. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b7]</itype> mix <ix>pamintun</ix> into food.

<p><form>pamisliun</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>AMIMISLUN</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> region of the body around the kidneys.

<p><form>pamlug</form> <xr>= <sc>PAMULUG</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>BULUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pampam</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prostitute</tr> (slang). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B5N]</itype> become a prostitute. <i>Nagpampam lang siya kay gustu siyag kwartang sayun,</i> She just became a prostitute because she wanted easy money. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> patronize a prostitute. <i>Daghan ang mamampam run kay bag-ung swildu,</i> Lots of people will go to the prostitutes tonight because it&apos;s payday. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>whorehouse</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>red light district</tr>.

<p><form>pampangginya</form> <xr>= <sc>PAMPANGGINYU</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr>

<p><form>pampangginyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a native of Pampanga, a province in Central Luzon. <number>2</number> the language of Pampanga.

<p><form>pampbut</form> <xr>= <sc>PAMBUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pamplit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pamphlet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a pamphlet.

<p><form>pamúg</form> <xr>= <sc>PAMULUG</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>BULUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pamulígi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b3c5]</itype> for s.o. to be hurt and envious because of s.t. good which happened to s.o. else but did not happen to him. <i>Kinsa guy dílì mamulígi nga si Turyu ra may gihatágan ug gása?</i> Who won&apos;t be hurt and envious when Torio was the only one that got a present? <i>Gipamuligíhan ku níla kay dakù kug grádung nadáwat,</i> They were hurt and felt envious of me because I got good grades (and they didn&apos;t).

<p><form>pamúu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> work for s.o. in seasonal work in order to be paid in kind. <i>Mamúu kug mais ug humay sa Mindanaw karung ting-ani,</i> I&apos;ll go to Mindanao to help with the harvest to earn some rice and corn. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> labor for wages. <pos>n</pos> labor, work accomplished. <pb n=729><i>Kinahanglan giyud nga kaangáyan ang pamúu,</i> Labor should be given a fair recompense. <form>maN-r-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>laborer</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>employee</tr>. &dagger;

<p><form>pamúuk</form> <xr>= <sc>PANÚUK</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>SUUK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pamyinta</form> <xr>= <sc>PIMYINTA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pán</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bread</tr>. <form>&mdash; amirikánu</form> <pos>n</pos> bread in a rectangular loaf. <form>&mdash; disal</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. hard roll. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make bread. <form>-adíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>baker</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a baker. <form>-adiríya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bakery</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> have a bakery. &dagger;

<p><form>pan-</form> for forms beginning with <ix>pan-</ix> see also <bx>S</bx>, <bx>T</bx>, and <bx>D</bx>.

<p><form>paN-</form> (<ix>see p. xvi for the meaning of the symbol</ix> <bx>N.</bx> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>MAN-</sc></xr> <ix>for illustrations of the tense forms of the active voice</ix>.) <number>1</number> derivational verb forming prefix. <number>1a</number> forming verbs that refer to plural actions: action done by one or more agents to several things, or several agents to one thing, or one (or more) agents to s.t. more than once. <i>Pangáun na, mga bátà,</i> Come eat, children. <i>Ikay pangúhà sa mga hinayhay,</i> You be the one to bring the laundry in. <i>Hinúgay na ug pangusì ánang bat-ána,</i> You&apos;ve been pinching that child for long enough now. <number>1a1</number> added to nouns referring to living beings to form verbs meaning &lsquo;catch [such-and-such]&rsquo;. <i>Pamangsi,</i> Go catch flying fish (<ix>bangsi</ix>). <i>Nanginabúhì sila sa pagpangisdà,</i> They live by catching fish. <number>1a2</number> do [so-and-so]<note>such-and-such</note> as an occupation. <i>Dúgay na níyang pangutsíru,</i> He has been a rig driver (<ix>kutsíru</ix>) for a long time. <i>Dì ka makakwarta sa pagpangáhuy lang,</i> You cannot get rich by gathering fire-*wood (<ix>káhuy</ix>). <number>1b</number> forming verbs referring to an energetic action or happening. <i>Nagpanlugnut ang dalága nga gikidnap,</i> The girl that was being kidnapped struggled to get free. <i>Gipaningut ku,</i> I am completely drenched with sweat. <i>Nagpangamay siya iyáwat makit-an,</i> He waved for all he was worth in hopes that he would be seen. <number>1c</number> added to verbs referring to the action of cleaning, beautifying, and the like to form verbs meaning &lsquo;[do] to oneself&rsquo;. <i>Panipilyu uy!</i> Brush your teeth! <i>Panabun ug maáyu,</i> Soap yourself well. <i>Ayaw pangìkì,</i> Don&apos;t pick your teeth. <number>1d</number> added to nouns referring to an event or a place to form verbs meaning &lsquo;attend [such-and-such] an event, go to [such-and-such] a place&rsquo;. <i>Pamirnis Santu sa inyu,</i> Spend Good Friday (<ix>Birnis Santu</ix>) at home. <i>Pangarbun na,</i> Go to the Carbon market now. <i>Pamista sa ámung lungsud,</i> Come to the fiesta in our town. <number>1d1</number> added to other nouns to form verbs. <i>Ayaw úsà pamána, Pirla,</i> Don&apos;t get married (lit. take a husband&mdash;<ix>bána</ix>), Perla. <i>Hápit siya mamatay pagpanganak,</i> She practically died in childbirth. <i>Ginadílì ang pagpangíhì dinhi,</i> It&apos;s forbidden to urinate here. <number>1e</number> added to adj. to form verbs meaning be [adj.]. <i>Nag-inánay pagpamula ang íyang náwung,</i> His face gradually started getting red all over. <i>Pagpangínit na sa íyang bukubuku mibákud siya,</i> When his back was warm, he got up. <number>1f</number> verb forming affix with no ascertainable meaning. <i>Pangáyù didtu níyag kwarta,</i> Ask for (<ix>káyù</ix>) money from him. <i>Pananghid úsà ka mulakaw,</i> Say good-bye (<ix>sanghid</ix>) before you leave. <number>2</number> noun forming affix. <number>2a</number> added to roots which form verbs taking <ix>paN-</ix>: action of [do]ing. <i>Way kaláki ang pangisdà dinhi,</i> Fishing is no good here. <number>2b</number> instrument for [do]ing. <i>Panlaba,</i> S.t. to wash with. <i>Panágat,</i> Fishing equipment. <i>Panápì,</i> Means of obtaining money. <number>2c</number> sense of. <i>Panimhut,</i> Sense of smell.

<p><form>panà</form> <pos>n</pos> arrow, spear projected. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> shoot an arrow, spear. <i>Panàa ang dakung isdà,</i> Spear into the huge fish. <i>Ipanà ang udiyung ngadtu sa irù,</i> Shoot the arrow into the dog. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make into an arrow, spear. <form>igù sa &mdash; ni Kupidu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a3]</itype> fall in love (lit. hit with Cupid&apos;s dart). <i>Si Idyun naigù na sa panà ni Kupidu sígi nag iskulbus,</i> Edion is in love because he is always escorting s.o. home. <form>igù sa &mdash;</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a3]</itype> be drunk from drinking <ix>Kulafu</ix>, a brand of cheap liquor which shows a hunter aiming with a bow and arrow on its label (slang). <i>Nagpiraypiray na siya kay naigù sa panà,</i> He is staggering because he had one too many shots of <ix>Kulafu</ix>. <form>(&larr;)<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>PANÀ</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr> <form>paN-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> hunt with bow and arrow, go spear fishing. <i>Ayawg lubúga kay náay namánà,</i> Don&apos;t stir the water because s.o. is spear fishing (a humorous phrase uttered in the presence of s.o. wearing sunglasses&mdash;likening him to a spear fisherman). <pos>n</pos> hunting with bow and arrow, spear fishing. <form>pinaN-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. caught with a bow and arrow or by spear fishing.

<p><form>pánà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>crazed</tr>. <i>Uy! Pánà kang tawhána ka, gahúbù ka man,</i> You&apos;re mad! Why are you going around naked? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be <tr>crazy</tr>. <i>Nawung ka man ug gipánà, sígi ka man lag katáwa,</i> You seem to be crazy, the way you&apos;re laughing all the time. <form>-in-</form> cuss word to express mild annoyance. <i>Ang pinánà wà uruy kan-a sa kílat,</i> The devil! Why doesn&apos;t lightning strike him? <i>Pinánà! Diyut ku mapásù,</i> Darn! I nearly got burned.

<pb n=730>

<p><form>panábu</form> <xr>= <sc>GWAYABANU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>panabúgan</form> (from <ix>tabug</ix>, <ix>2</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>puffer fish</tr>.

<p><form>panagána</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>TAGÁNA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>panag-ing</form> <xr>= <sc>PANIG-INGUN</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <sc>INGUN<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><form>panahun, panáhun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>weather</tr>. <i>Dì ta mularga kay dautan ang panahun,</i> We cannot travel because the weather is bad. <number>2</number> <tr>season</tr>, <tr>recurring time</tr>. <i>Panahun sa ting-ulan,</i> Rainy season. <number>3</number> time s.t. happened or happens. <i>Sa panahun sa libirasiyun,</i> In the liberation period. <number>3a</number> times of s.t. <i>Mahinumdum ka lang sa Diyus panahun sa kalisud,</i> You remember God only in times of hardship. <i>Natigúlang ku sa dì pa sa ákung panáhun,</i> I became an old man before my time. <number>3b</number> <formx>&mdash; dì átù</formx> we are not the masters of our fate (lit. time is not our own). <i>Magpaábut ta sa pagbuut sa Ginúu, ang panahun dì átù,</i> Let us wait for what God ordains. We are not the masters of our fate. <number>4</number> time to do s.t. <i>Wà na kuy panahun paghulat nímu,</i> I have no more time to wait for you. <number>5</number> <tr>chance</tr>, <tr>occasion</tr>. <i>Daghan ka pang panahun pag-usab,</i> You still have a lot of chances to reform. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1456; b8]</itype> come at a certain season. <i>Magpanahun ang mangga; dílì kanúnay,</i> Mangoes come in season. They aren&apos;t always available. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> have a chance, time to do. <i>Ug makapanahun ka, pamisíta sa ámù,</i> If you have time, come visit us.

<p><form>panaksan</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>TAKUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>panákut</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>SÁKUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>panalamban</form> <xr>= <sc>PANGTAMBAN</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>TAMBAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>panálang</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>TÁLANG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>panalángin</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>prayer</tr>. <i>Ang ákung panalángin nga makapasar untà ku walà dungga,</i> God did not answer my prayers to let me pass. <number>2</number> <tr>blessings</tr>, <tr>benediction</tr>. <i>Pangayúa ang panalángin sa Diyus,</i> Ask for God&apos;s blessings. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> <tr>pray</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>bless</tr>.

<p><form>panama</form> <pos>n</pos> panama hat, made from select leaves of buri palm. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b]</itype> wear a panama hat.

<p><form>panamban</form> <xr>= <sc>PANGTAMBAN</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>TAMBAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>panamílit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>bid farewell</tr>. <pos>n</pos> bidding farewell.

<p><form>panangítan</form> (from <ix>sángit</ix>) <pos>n</pos> general name for biting eels with teeth that curl inwards, snagging on the prey.

<p><form>panaptun</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>SAPUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pánas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>erase</tr>, <tr>make s.t. unclear</tr>. <i>Ang maung hitabù dílì mapánas sa ákung panumdúman,</i> That incident cannot be erased from my memory. <i>Panása ang sulat sa blakburd,</i> Erase the writing on the black-*board. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> for s.t. engraved, s.t. raised to become worn down and unclear. <i>Mupánas kanang salapì ug isígi nímug bagnus,</i> That fifty-cent piece will get worn down if you keep rubbing it. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>erased</tr>, <tr>not clear</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>worn down</tr>.

<p><form>pánas<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PALANAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>panatiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>religious fanatic</tr>.

<p><form>panatismu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>religious fanaticism</tr>.

<p><form>pánaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>travel</tr>, <tr>journey</tr>. <number>2</number> regularly scheduled trip. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c]</itype> make a travel or journey. <i>Layù kaáyung dápit ang ámung gipánaw (gipanáwan),</i> We traveled to a place far away. <form>&mdash; sa láing kalibútan</form> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>die</tr>, pass away into the other world. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> go to a place regularly.

<p><form>panay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>earthenware vessel</tr>, usually hemispherical but shallow, used to hold liquids.

<p><form>pandak</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>short and stout</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be short and stout. <i>Mupandak ku ánang tabása,</i> I&apos;ll look short and stout in that cut.

<p><form>pandan</form> <xr>= <sc>PANGDAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pandanggu</form> <pos>n</pos> name of a folk dance. <form>-in-</form> <pos>a</pos> like the Fandango.

<p><form>panday</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>forge</tr>. <i>Walu ka ispáda ang íyang gipanday,</i> He forged eight swords. <number>2</number> build s.t. from wood. <i>Kinsay namanday (nagpanday) sa inyung balay?</i> Who made your house? <number>3</number> <tr>circumcise</tr> (colloquial). <i>Ang mga Ilunggu hadluk kunu papanday,</i> They say the Ilongos are afraid to get circumcised. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>blacksmith</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>carpenter</tr>. <form>&mdash; (sa) pandaut, dáut</form> inept in carpentry or blacksmithing. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>blacksmith shop</tr>. <number>2</number> <formx>bátà pa ang -an</formx> be early in one&apos;s child-bearing years (lit. the blacksmith shop is still young&mdash;humorous). <i>Sayung sundan ang kamanghúran kay bátà pa ang pandayan,</i> They&apos;ll soon have another baby after this one because the baby-factory is still productive. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> occupation of blacksmithing or carpentry.

<p><form>pandíta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>muslim preacher</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B5; a]</itype> become a muslim preacher.

<p><form>pandul</form> <xr>= <sc>PANGDUL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pandung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. held over the head as protection. <number>2</number> reflector of a pressurized kerosene lantern. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> cover the head, esp. to protect it. <i>Karun dílì na kinahanglang magpandung sa simbahan,</i> Now it is no longer necessary to cover the head in church. <i>Pandúngi nang bátà kay náay ulan,</i> Cover the child&apos;s head because it&apos;s raining. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a]</itype> attach, make into a lantern reflector.

<p><form>pang-</form> for forms beginning with <ix>pang-</ix> see also <xr><sc>K-</sc></xr>, and initial vowel.

<p><form>panga</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>forked stick</tr>. <number>2</number> forked handle of a slingshot. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make, attach a forked handle of a slingshot. <form>pang-an</form> <pos>n</pos> having an extra finger branching from the side <pb n=731>of the hand.

<p><form>pangadyì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> <tr>pray</tr>. <i>Átung pangadyíun ang Santus nga Rusaryu,</i> Let us pray the Holy Rosary. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> action of praying. <number>2</number> period of nine days in which the novena is said. <form>-un, -un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prayers</tr>.

<p><form>pangag</form> <pos>a</pos> lacking one or a few teeth. <i>Pangag nga sudlay,</i> A comb with teeth missing. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; b]</itype> knock out, lose teeth. <i>Makapángag kining anagúnang gáhì,</i> This hard corn can make you lose your teeth. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> lacking teeth.

<p><form>pangaghu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sigh noisily</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> sigh with strong aspiration. <i>Nangaghu siya sa kakápuy,</i> He went &lsquo;whew&rsquo; because he was exhausted.

<p><form>pangágud</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>KAGUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pangáhas</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>KÁHAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pangalíya</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> cry out in supplication. <i>Pangaliyáhan ta ang Makagagáhum básin pa ug pamatíun ta,</i> Let us implore the Almighty to hear us. <pos>n</pos> <tr>supplication</tr>. <form>&mdash; panalángin</form> <tr>invocation</tr> offered at the beginning of a religious service.

<p><form>pangalwan</form> <xr>= <sc>PANGHALWAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pangalyúpu, pangalyúpù</form> <xr>= <sc>PANGILYÚPÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pangampis</form> <pos>n</pos> saddle feathers of roosters.

<p><form>pangamúyù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>beg</tr>, <tr>pray for</tr> with humility. <number>2</number> <tr>ponder</tr>, <tr>meditate</tr>. <i>Gipangamuyúan ku ang pagkamatay sa átung Ginúu,</i> I am reflecting on our Savior&apos;s death. <pos>n</pos> humble plea, prayer.

<p><form>pangan, pángan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fresh water scavenger fish.

<p><form>pang-an</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>expert</tr>, <tr>experienced</tr> and <tr>practiced</tr>. <i>Pang-an nga abugádu,</i> An highly experienced lawyer. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become outstanding in s.t. <i>Napang-an ra giyud siya sa nátad sa áwit,</i> He became an outstanding singer.

<p><form>*pangandak</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ANDAK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>panganduy</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>great desire</tr>, <tr>craving</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> crave, desire s.t. very much. <i>Nanganduy ang balbal ug dugù,</i> The vampire craves blood. <i>Ayaw pangandúya (ipanganduy) ang kinabúhing harúhay,</i> Don&apos;t wish for an easy life.

<p><form>panganti</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> wish for s.t. to happen. <i>Nanganti siyang manimalus sa nagpatay sa íyang amahan,</i> He cried out for revenge on his father&apos;s killer. <i>Kamatáyun ray ákung gipanganti,</i> I wish only for death. <pos>n</pos> wish. <i>Káwang lang ang tanan mung panganti kun dì ka mulíhuk,</i> It is no use wishing if you do not act as well. <form>pangantihan</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. to make a wish on. <i>Singsing pangantihan,</i> Wishing ring.

<p><form>pangánud</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ÁNUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pangapang, pangápang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S3P; b6]</itype> for leaves to become lush and vigorous in growth. <i>Mipangápang (nangápang) ang mga tanum sa pag-uwan,</i> The plants grew lots of leaves when it rained. <pos>a</pos> growing lush and vigorous leaves.

<p><form>pangarmin</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>KARMIN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pangáwan</form> <xr>= <sc>PANGHALWAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pangáyam</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ÁYAM</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pangáyaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> go to another place to do or get s.t. <i>Túa sila sa Lilúan mangáyaw ug pananggì,</i> They went to Liloan to help with the corn harvest. <i>Ipangáyaw nátù ning banig sa Manílà,</i> Let&apos;s sell the mats in Manila. <pos>n</pos> persons coming from other places. <i>Nía sila kay mga pangáyaw sa súgal dinhi,</i> They came here to do some gambling.

<p><form>pangdan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pandanus</tr>, any of the plants of the genus <bio>Pandanus</bio>, esp. <bio>tectorius</bio>. <form>&mdash; nga humut, tsína</form> a small species with fragrant leaves, used to line the bottom of containers for cooking rice, grown as ornamental: <bio>Pandanus odoratissimus</bio>.

<p><form>pangdul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b8]</itype> <number>1</number> stub one&apos;s toe. <i>Pagtan-aw sa ímung laktan arun dílì ka mapangdul,</i> Look where you&apos;re going so you don&apos;t stub your toes. <number>2</number> <tr>mispronounce</tr> a word in speech due to haste or difficulty in speaking. <i>Basta magpaspas tag sulti mapangdul usáhay ta,</i> We are bound to mispronounce once in a while if we speak fast. <form>pangdulpangdul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B145]</itype> <number>1</number> keep stubbing the toes. <number>2</number> be hard up financially. <i>Nagkapangdulpangdul na sila nga wà na ang ílang amahan,</i> They are in bad financial straits now that their father is dead. <pos>a</pos> hard up financially. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>obstacle</tr>.

<p><form>panggà</form> <xr>= <sc>PALANGGÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>panggal</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. fish or crab trap, made of thin woven bamboo, rounded in form, with a hole in the top to afford easy entry but no exit. <number>2</number> a woven container shaped like the fish trap to hold chickens. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make a <ix>panggal</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> catch fish or crabs with a <ix>panggal</ix>. <number>3</number> <itype>[c]</itype> put in a <ix>panggal</ix>-shaped basket. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> go fishing with a <ix>panggal</ix> trap. <pos>n</pos> action of fishing with a <ix>panggal</ix>.

<p><form>panggalatuk</form> <pos>n</pos> the language of Pangasinan.

<p><form>panggasininsi</form> <pos>n</pos> people from Pangasinan.

<p><form>panggaw</form> <xr>= <sc>PANGGAL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>panggi-</form> <number>1</number> prefix added to almost all verb bases to form verbs which refer to an action carried out by more than one person. (See <ix>manggi-</ix> for illustrations of the tense forms of the active voice.) This affix is productive in Leyte and in other regions, but elsewhere almost unknown. <i>Ayaw mu panggiáway,</i> Don&apos;t fight among yourselves. <number>2</number> dead prefix added to a few roots with no plural meaning. <pb n=732><i>Ayaw panggilábut sa ílang mga prublíma,</i> Don&apos;t mix into their problems.

<p><form>panggus</form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>abrasion</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be <tr>chafed</tr>. <i>Napanggus ákung túhud kay nadam-ag ku,</i> I scraped my knee because I stumbled.

<p><form>pangguun</form> <pos>n</pos> ornamental shrub with thin linear leaves, bearing yellow, bell-shaped flowers: <bio>Thevetia peruviana</bio>.

<p><form>panghak</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>smelling bad</tr> as, for example, salted fish in an advanced stage of fermentation or clothes wet with urine that weren&apos;t rinsed out. <i>Panghak na ning ginamúsa. Dì na maáyung kan-un,</i> This salted fish smells awful and is unfit for human consumption. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a12]</itype> be, become <tr>bad-smelling</tr>.

<p><form>panghaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chimney</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> put a chimney s.w.

<p><form>panghit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b1]</itype> <tr>take a bite</tr>. <i>Gipanghítan ni Bíbi ang ákung kindi,</i> Baby took a bite of my candy. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> snap at, bite with force. <i>Mamanghit nang irúa,</i> That dog snaps.

<p><form>panghupaw</form> <pos>n</pos> sigh without much noise. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> heave a sigh. <i>Nanghupaw kug dakù dihang nakit-an ang ákung brilyanti,</i> I heaved a big sigh of relief when my diamond was found.

<p><form>pangilába</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>KILÁBA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pangílin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fiesta</tr>, the annual celebration in honor of a patron saint. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> attend a fiesta. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> hold a fiesta. <i>Ángay silang magpangílin,</i> They should celebrate the fiesta. <form>mangingílin</form> <pos>n</pos> people who go to the fiesta.

<p><form>pangilyúpù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>ask for</tr>, <tr>pray</tr> with humility. <i>Mangilyúpù ku ug diyútay nga hinábang sa mayur,</i> I entreated the mayor to grant a little help. <pos>n</pos> <tr>entreaty</tr>, <tr>prayer</tr>. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> self-effacingly humble. <i>Mapangilyupúun siyang mihangyù,</i> He asked in an imploring, humble tone.

<p><form>pangimbig</form> <xr>= <sc>PANGIMBID</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>KIMBID</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pangimbísug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>strive</tr>, do one&apos;s best. <i>Nangimbísug ku sa pagpangítà ug trabáhu,</i> I am doing my best to find a job. <i>Sa kapubri makapangimbísug ku sa ákung pag-iskuyla,</i> I was so poor I had to struggle to get through school. <pos>n</pos> action of striving.

<p><form>panginánu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>care about</tr> s.t., <tr>bother about</tr> s.t. <i>Wà lang manginánu si Isku kun háin ang íyang asáwa,</i> Esko didn&apos;t care about where his wife was. <i>Ngánung wà ninyu panginanúhag pangítà ang mga papílis nga nawálà?</i> Why didn&apos;t you bother looking for the papers that you lost?

<p><form>pangindáhay</form> <pos>n</pos> wishful <tr>longing</tr>, <tr>desire</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6c1]</itype> dream of s.t. wishfully, long for s.t., asking for it. <i>Kun magbulhut kag turútut lukay mangindáhay kag sakit.<note> ,</note></i> If you blow a horn made of coconut leaves, you are asking to get sick. <i>Makapangindáhay giyud ang kabus sa mga mahalung butang,</i> A poor man can&apos;t help dreaming of luxurious things. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> wishfully desirous.

<p><form>pangit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> <tr>bite</tr>, take a bite. <i>Mipangit kug gamay sa íyang mansánas,</i> I took a small bite off his apple. <i>Pangita ang tansan sa butilya,</i> Bite off the bottle cap.

<p><form>pángit</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>ugly</tr> (slang). <i>Dílì angay magrayna. Pángit ug hitsúra,</i> She&apos;s not fit to be a queen. She&apos;s ugly. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a2]</itype> be ugly.

<p><form>pang-it</form> <xr>= <sc>PANGHIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pangítà</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>KÍTÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pangkà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> <tr>bump against</tr> s.t. <i>Mipangkà aku kanímu,</i> I bumped against you. <i>Nagkapangkà mi apan wà giyud ku makaila níya,</i> We bumped against each other, but I don&apos;t know her. <pos>a</pos> be in dire <tr>financial straits</tr>. <i>Pangkà na sila sukad mamatay ílang amahan,</i> They are in bad straits since their father died. <form>pangkàpangkà, pangkaay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> keep bumping against s.t. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1]</itype> go from place to place to get s.t. one vitally needs. <i>Nagkapangkàpangkà akug panghulam,</i> I went from place to place trying to borrow money. <number>3</number> <itype>[B1]</itype> be in dire poverty. <i>Napangkàpangkà ku kay wà kuy trabáhu,</i> I was in desperate financial straits because I had no job.

<p><form>pangkay</form> <pos>n</pos> child&apos;s word for the female genitalia.

<p><form>pangkì</form> <xr>= <sc>PULANGKÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pangkù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>knot the hair</tr>. <i>Pangkúa (ipangkù) lang ang ímung buhuk,</i> Tie your hair in a knot. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> hair tied in a knot.

<p><form>pangkù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large sailing ship used by Muslims. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; ac]</itype> ride on a pangkù.

<p><form>pangkug</form> <pos>n</pos> single <tr>step</tr>, <tr>stair</tr>. <i>Walu ka pangkug ang ámung hagdánan,</i> Our stairway has eight steps. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> lay steps in place.

<p><form>pangkul</form> <pos>n</pos> handle of a hand-powered corn or rice mill.

<p><form>pangli, panglin</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> harvest root crops. <i>Panglíhun na nátù ang gábi,</i> We&apos;ll harvest the taro. <pos>n</pos> dull knife, bar, or stick, pointed on one end, used to gather root crops.

<p><form>pangpang</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cliff</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a12]</itype> become a cliff, make a cliff. <i>Mupangpang (mapangpang) nang lugára ug sigíhag kúhà ang yútà,</i> The place will become a cliff if they continue taking soil away. <form>-anun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>cliff dwellers</tr>. <form>hiN-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> a section of road cut into a side of a steep slope. <i>Paghínay ug maníhu kay nía ta sa himangpangun,</i> Drive slow because we are at the place where the road has been cut into the hillside. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>cliffs</tr>. <number>2</number> the province Pampanga, its people, and its language. <pb n=733><form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> characterized by having cliffs. <i>Pangpangung baybáyun,</i> Shore with cliffs going to the sea.

<p><form>pangsud</form> <pos>n</pos> offensive odor in the armpits. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> have bad-smelling armpits.

<p><form>pangsut</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>PANGSUD</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> smelling like urine. <i>Pangsut kaáyu ka kay dì ka man manghúgas inig humag pangíhì,</i> You smell because you don&apos;t wash yourself after you urinate. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> have a <ix>pangsut</ix> smell.

<p><form>pángu, pangug</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>stupid</tr>, tending to do the wrong thing unthinkingly. <i>Ang pangug giapil ang baskit paglábay sa basúra,</i> The idiot threw the basket away with the garbage. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be somewhat stupid. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> a stupid sort.

<p><form>pangulílang</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ULÍLANG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pangulípas</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>KULÍPAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pangunggu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> try to pull a fast one. <i>Dílì ni diyamanti uy. Lubut ni sa básu. Nangunggu sad ka dà,</i> This is no diamond. It&apos;s a glass. You&apos;re trying to pull a fast one on me. <i>Tagdiyis ra ni uy! Nangunggu sad,</i> What do you mean, it&apos;s only worth ten cents. Are you trying to be funny?

<p><form>pangunggu<sub>2, 3</sub></form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>KALUNGGU</sc></xr>, <xr><sc>UNGGU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pángus</form> <xr>= <sc>PANGGUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pang-us</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> chew on a stalk, or stick. <i>Mupang-us kag tubu?</i> Will you chew sugar cane stalk? <i>Ayaw pang-úsa ang ímung lápis,</i> Don&apos;t chew on your pencil! <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> bagasse, the pulp of sugar cane.

<p><form>pangusmu</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>KUSMU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pangut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> bite, chew on s.t. <i>Pangtun sa bábuy ang íyang higut,</i> The pig will chew on the rope.

<p><form>pangyas</form> <xr>= <sc>ÍLAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pangyáwan</form> <pos>n</pos> climbing fleshy vine of thickets, the bitter sap of which has wide medicinal application; used as an aborticide: Tinospora rumphii. <form>pait pa sa &mdash;</form> more bitter than the <ix>pangyáwan</ix>. <i>Haskang kasabáa, pait pa sa pangyáwan!</i> What a cussing out. It was harder to take than the <ix>pangyáwan</ix>.

<p><form>panid<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>arrange</tr>, do s.t. in the proper order. <i>Siyay mupanid sa mga insayklupidiya,</i> She will arrange the encyclopedia in alphabetical order. <i>Panira ug kúhà, ayawg laktawlaktawa,</i> Take it in order. Don&apos;t skip around.

<p><form>panid<sub>2</sub>, pánid</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>panel</tr>, <tr>sheet</tr>. <i>Duha ka pánid playwud,</i> Two panels of plywood. <number>2</number> <tr>page</tr>. <number>3</number> <tr>section</tr> in a publication. <i>Pánid sa bálak sa Bisayà,</i> The poetry section in Bisaya. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> cut into panels, small sheets.

<p><form>pánig</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> side. <i>Pánig sa wala,</i> On the left side. <number>2</number> <tr>group faction</tr>. <i>Mitapun siya sa ámung pánid,</i> He joined our group. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23P; b(1)]</itype> take s.o.&apos;s side. <i>Ug kasab-an ang anak, mupánig dáyun ang inahan,</i> If they scold the child, the mother takes his side right away. <i>Panígan ta ang mga dinaugdáug,</i> Let us take the side of the oppressed.

<p><form>paníga</form> <pos>n</pos> a unit of dry measurement containing one-third of a cavan (eight gantas and one liter). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> measured by <ix>paníga</ix>&apos;s. <i>Panigáha lang pagtakus ang humay,</i> Measure the rice by the <ix>paníga</ix>.

<p><form>panígù</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ÍGÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pánil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>panel truck</tr> or car, mostly the closed type for delivering goods. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> use, ride in a panel truck or car.

<p><form>paniN-</form> derivational verb forming prefix forming verbs with a number of meanings or nouns referring to the action of doing s.t. in this way. Not a live prefix. <i>Makabungkag sa panimúyù,</i> Can destroy one&apos;s family life. <i>Ayaw paninágad sa mga tabì,</i> Don&apos;t pay attention to the gossip.

<p><form>paningud</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>SINGUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pánis</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>BADLI PÁNIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>panit</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tuna.

<p><form>pánit</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>skin</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>peelings</tr>. <number>3</number> <tr>bark</tr>. <number>4</number> <tr>leather</tr>, s.t. made of leather. <number>5</number> shell of a shrimp, egg. <form>bukug ug &mdash;</form> <tr>skin and bones</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> skin, peel s.t. <i>Sayun ang ukban panítan,</i> It is easy to peel a tangerine. <i>Paníti ang itlug,</i> Take the shell off the egg. <number>1a</number> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> for a barber to take too much hair off. <i>Gipanítan ku sa barbíru,</i> The barber butchered my hair. <number>2</number> beat s.o. in gambling. <i>Gipanítan ku sa madyung gabíi,</i> I lost in mahjong last night. <number>3</number> be trounced in a fight. <form>(&rarr;) mu rag irug panit</form> miserable poor (like a dog with no fur). <i>Kung wà tay kwarta mu ra tag irug panit,</i> If we don&apos;t have money, we are miserable. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>complexion</tr>. <i>Is-is siyag pamánit,</i> She has smooth, white skin.

<p><form>pankik<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pancake</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, have pancakes.

<p><form>pankik<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pancake make-up</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b1]</itype> use pancake make-up.

<p><form>pans</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fans</tr>, usually of people in show business.

<p><form>páns</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>facial cream</tr> (so called from the brand name Pond&apos;s).

<p><form>pansak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> drive or stuff s.t. forcibly into s.t. <i>Ipansak ang sungsung sa bàbà sa butilya,</i> Shove the cork into the mouth of the bottle. <number>2</number> in basketball, put the ball into the ring from above. <i>Basta taas ipansak lang ang búla,</i> A tall player simply places the ball in the ring.

<p><form>pansat</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prawn</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> catch prawns.

<p><form>pansayan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>outhouse</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> make a <pb n=734>comfort room.

<p><form>pansi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>costume jewelry</tr>.

<p><form>pansil</form> <pos>n</pos> place with rocks. <i>Didtu kami mamánà sa pansil (kapansílan),</i> We went spear fishing in the coral reefs. <pos>a</pos> <tr>eroded</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become rocky, eroded. <i>Nagkapansil na ning yutáa,</i> This land is becoming eroded. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>rocky</tr>. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> place where there are rocks.

<p><form>pansing<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b4]</itype> punch a hole into s.t. <i>Gipansíngan na mig tíkit sa lantsa,</i> Our ferry tickets have been punched. <pos>n</pos> punch to make holes.

<p><form>pansing<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>punch</tr> in boxing. <form>&mdash; bag</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>punching bag</tr>.

<p><form>pansir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>paper punch</tr>.

<p><form>pansis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>punches</tr>, thrusting blows with a fist.

<p><form>pansit</form> <pos>n</pos> dish of míki noodles. <form>&mdash; kantun</form> k.o. <ix>pansit</ix> with crisp noodles. <form>&mdash; luglug</form> <ix>pansit</ix> in broth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> have, make <ix>pansit</ix>. <i>Magpansit ta karung panihápun,</i> We&apos;ll have pansit for supper. <form>-an(&rarr;), -iríya, -irya</form> <pos>n</pos> an eatery specializing in short order Chinese dishes.

<p><form>pansiyadur</form> <pos>n</pos> in a sawmill, the person who spots planks to edge. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B456]</itype> be a spotter.

<p><form>pansu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> punch to make holes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> punch a hole. <i>Pansúhan ku ning buklit arun matuhúgan ug ríbun,</i> I&apos;ll punch holes in the booklet so I can tie it with a ribbon. <number>2</number> punch one&apos;s time in a Bundy clock.

<p><form>pansu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. thick unsweetened roll with a crust.

<p><form>pansud</form> <xr>= <sc>PANGSUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pansung</form> <pos>a</pos> for a nose to be flat and turned up at the end. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> for the nose to flatten. <i>Mapansung ang ilung basta iduut sa bildu,</i> Your nose gets flattened and turned up if you press it against the window pane.

<p><form>pansut<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PANGSUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pansut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pantsuit</tr>, a set of clothes for women composed of a pair of long pants and blouse of the same material. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> wear, make into a pantsuit.

<p><form>pantalan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wharf</tr>.

<p><form>pantalun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pants</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a]</itype> wear, make into long pants. <i>Ang bátà nga ringbírir sa kasal nagpantalun ug itum,</i> The ring bearer in the wedding wore long black pants. <form>&mdash; dilargu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>long pants</tr>. <form>&mdash; dipuntu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>short pants</tr>.

<p><form>pantalya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>shade reflector</tr> put over a lamp to diffuse light. <number>2</number> <tr>facade</tr>, cover for s.t. <i>Ang nigusyung bay-ansil pantalya sa íyang ismagling,</i> His buying and selling business is just a facade for his smuggling. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> put a reflector on a lamp. <number>2</number> put up a false front, cover. <i>Dì na mapantalyahan ang kahimtang sa íyang láwas,</i> She can&apos;t hide it that she&apos;s pregnant any longer. <number>3</number> <itype>[c]</itype> show, display. <i>Ayaw ipantalya kanang law-ay nga mga ritrátu,</i> Don&apos;t display those dirty pictures in public.

<p><form>pantasma</form> <pos>n</pos> terrifying <tr>apparition</tr>.

<p><form>pantat</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. fresh water catfish. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>PANSAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pantaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>porch</tr> which may or may not be roofed and/or walled. Usually in back of a house. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> make, add a porch. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>PANTAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pantaypantay</form> <pos>a</pos> more or less equal in ability (slang). <i>Pantaypantay ra mi sa klási,</i> We have about the same standing in class.

<p><form>panti<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>panty</tr>, <tr>briefs</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b1]</itype> wear, make into a panty.

<p><form>panti<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. nylon fishing net for deep water. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> go fishing with this k.o. net.

<p><form>pantíhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>manta rays</tr>, esp. <bio>Mobula eregoodoo-tenkee</bio>.

<p><form>pantilit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pantalettes</tr>, drawers edged with lace, sticking out from under a skirt. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear pantalettes.

<p><form>panting</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>palace</tr>, <tr>castle</tr>.

<p><form>pantiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> grave consisting of a rectangular concrete box raised above the ground, or building used as a <tr>tomb</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> make a <tr>tomb</tr>.

<p><form>pants</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>punch</tr>, beverage consisting of a mixture of water and sweet drinks often with liquor. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make, have punch.

<p><form>pantsak</form> <xr>= <sc>PANSAK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pantug</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>urinary bladder</tr> of man and animals.

<p><form>pantuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> knock s.t. against s.t. else. <i>Ipantuk ang pul-an sa simintu arun matáup ang gítung,</i> Bang the handle on the cement so that the tang will go all the way in.

<p><form>pantun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>discipline</tr>, <tr>correct s.o.</tr> to be good. <i>Pantúna ang mga bátà nga gagmay pa,</i> Discipline children while they are young. <number>2</number> <tr>train s.o.</tr> or s.t. to do s.t. <i>Si Huwan ang mupantun sa gamayng piríku pagsulti,</i> Juan will train the young parrot to talk. <number>3</number> <tr>form s.t.</tr> in a desired shape. <i>Gipantun nákù ang sanga sa tiradur,</i> I bent the slingshot at the fork to shape it properly. a amenable to formation. <i>Pantun ang íyang buhuk. Sayung sudláyun,</i> His hair is not unruly. It is easy to comb.

<p><form>pantuplas</form> <pos>n</pos> pantofles, k.o. slippers for out-*door wear with a solid toe and hard sole. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> wear pantofles.

<p><form>panuku</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>TUKU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>panukus</form> <xr>= <sc>PANUKLUS</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>TUKLUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>panulindaw</form> <xr>= <sc>TULINDAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>panúlung</form> (from <ix>dúlung</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bow of ship</tr>. <number>2</number> fascia board providing facing for the rafters underneath the eaves of a roof.

<p><form>panumbálay</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>*TUNGBÁLAY</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=735>

<p><form>panumbaling</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>TUMBÁLING</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>panun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>large group</tr> of people, birds, planes, or other animals. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> go in a group. <i>Ngánung nagpanun kamug anhi?</i> Why have you come in a group? <form>(&larr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>PANUN</sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr>

<p><form>panúni</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>PANGHÚNI</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>HÚNI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>panurámik</form> <pos>n</pos> wide movie projection. <form>&mdash; bilt</form> <pos>n</pos> webbed belt with a metal buckle.

<p><form>panurúsu</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>TRÚSU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pan-us</form> <pos>a</pos> for food, wash, or the body to get a rancid smell from having been wet and not allowed to dry out well. <i>Pan-us ang kík nímu,</i> Your cake is spoiled with a sour smell. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> get spoiled, sour in smell.

<p><form>panut</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bald-headed</tr>.

<p><form>panutsa</form> <pos>n</pos> penuche, a k.o. fudge made of unrefined sugar, cream, and nuts. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make penuche.

<p><form>panuylu</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>kerchief</tr> consisting of a square cloth folded triangularly and worn over the neck like a collar. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> use, make into a <ix>panuylu</ix>.

<p><form>panuyù</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>TÚYÙ<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><form>panyas</form> <xr>= <sc>ÍLAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>panyáwan</form> <xr>= <sc>PANGYÁWAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>panyù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>handkerchief</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> use, make into a handkerchief.

<p><form>panyulítu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>small handkerchief</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> use, make a small handkerchief.

<p><form>panyulun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>square shawl</tr> worn over the shoulder folded into a triangle, larger than the <ix>panuylu</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> use a <ix>panyulun</ix>.

<p><form>pápa<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> father, term of address to one&apos;s father, father-in-law, or godfather. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> call s.o. pápa. <form>(&rarr;)</form> voc. <ix>Short form:</ix> <bx>pa</bx>.

<p><form>pápa<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Pope</tr>. <form>Santu &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>PÁPA<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pápà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> child&apos;s talk for eat. <i>Unsay ímung papáun, gà?</i> What are you going to eat, sweetheart?

<p><form>pàpà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> bite s.t. or grab it with the teeth without tearing or wounding it. <i>Maáyu ning irúa sa pangáyam. Dílì mupàpà sa kuhà,</i> This is a good dog for hunting because it just takes the game in its mouth without tearing it. <number>1a</number> for a pig to chew on s.t. without eating it. <i>Pàpáun sa anay ang íyang pasawan ug dì dáyun mapasawan,</i> A pig will chew at its trough if it is not fed on time. <number>2</number> slurp up greedily, eat s.t. completely. <i>Mipàpà ang kaláyu ug ubay-ubayng balay,</i> The fire consumed quite a number of houses.

<p><form>pàp&amacracu;</form> <xr>= <sc>PALÀPÁLÀ<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pápal nunsiyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Papal Nuncio</tr>.

<p><form>papan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stone slab</tr>.

<p><form>pápang</form> <pos>n</pos> address of respect for a father or an old man closely related to one.

<p><form>pápap</form> <pos>n</pos> sound of a low-pitched car horn. <i>Wà siya mudayun ug labang kay nakadungug ug pápap,</i> She did not cross the street because she heard a horn.

<p><form>pápas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>erase</tr>, <tr>obliterate</tr> s.t. <i>Dílì siya mapápas sa ákung hunàhúnà,</i> I cannot erase her from my mind. <i>Ang ulan sa kadugáyan makapápas sa mga kinulit sa lapida,</i> With the passage of time the rain will obliterate the engraving on the tombstone. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>eraser</tr>. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>erasure</tr>.

<p><form>pápay</form> <pos>n</pos> child&apos;s talk for snack. <i>Mukáun ug pápay si Inday parísan ug pitsi,</i> Baby is going to eat some snacks with her Pepsi.

<p><form>pap-ay</form> <pos>n</pos> hand in mahjong where only an <ix>ay<sub>4</sub></ix> is needed to get mahjong. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> have a <ix>pap-ay</ix> hand.

<p><form>papha</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> brush away dust or particles from a surface with the open palm. <i>Papháa ang mumhu,</i> Wipe away the bits of rice. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>fire s.o.</tr> from a job. <i>Papháun ka sa trabáhu ug dì ka magtárung,</i> You&apos;ll be fired if you don&apos;t do your work right. <form>&mdash; sa mapa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> annihilate a place. <i>Napapha sa mápa ang Hirusíma,</i> Hiroshima was wiped from the face of the earth. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> brush off dust from oneself. <i>Nagpamapha siya kay giulmigas íyang karsúnis,</i> He keeps brushing himself off because he got ants all over his pants.

<p><form>papil</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>paper</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>role</tr>. <i>Dakù ang papil nga gidala sa Amirika sa Asya,</i> America has a big role in Asia. <form>súgù sa &mdash;</form> according to the script. <number>2a</number> <formx>basà ang &mdash;</formx> lose one&apos;s good name, reputation. <i>Mabasà átung papil ug sakpan tang maníkas,</i> You will lose your reputation if you are caught cheating. <number>3</number> paper in a game of <ix>pik</ix> (hammer, paper, scissors). <form>&mdash; intirmidiya</form> <tr>ruled pad</tr> paper. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make into paper, use paper. <form>&mdash; dibangku</form> <tr>paper money</tr>. <form>&mdash; dihapun, hapun</form> thin, colored tissue paper for wrapping, kites, lanterns, decorations, and the like. <form>&mdash; dilíha</form> <tr>sandpaper</tr>. <form>di-</form> <pos>a</pos> strict, stickler for the rules. <i>Dì ka makadalìdálì niánang tawhána. Dipapil kaáyu nà,</i> You can&apos;t approach him easily just like that. He is a stickler for proper rules.

<p><form>papílis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>documents</tr>, <tr>papers</tr>.

<p><form>papilíta</form> <pos>n</pos> small piece of paper bearing one&apos;s record of birth issued by the civil registrar for presentation to the priest during baptism.

<p><form>papilítus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a dose of powdered medicine wrapped in a piece of paper. <number>2</number> a piece of paper on which an <ix>urasiyun</ix> has been written.

<p><form>papkurn</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>popcorn</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make popcorn.

<p><form>paplin</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. coarse cotton cloth, plain woven, sometimes printed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> <pb n=736>wear a dress made of poplin cloth.

<p><form>paprika</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>paprika</tr>.

<p><form>papsikul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>popsicle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a popsicle.

<p><form>pár</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a <tr>pair</tr> of s.t. of the same kind. <i>Mupalit kug tulu ka pár tsinílas,</i> I&apos;ll buy three pairs of slippers. <number>2</number> bottle of liquor and a bottle of soft drink which will be mixed together. <number>3</number> being of the same color or cut. <i>Pár silag kurbáta, púlus pula,</i> They have matching ties, both red. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; ac]</itype> <number>1</number> wear s.t. which is of the same color or cut as s.o. else&apos;s. <i>Dì ku mupár nímug sinínà,</i> I don&apos;t want to wear a dress the same style as yours. <number>2</number> be a pair, match. <i>Maáyung párun ang ítik arun musánay,</i> It would be good to make it a pair of ducks so they can multiply. <i>Kining bága mauy ipár sa ímung sapátus,</i> This is the bag you should match your shoes with. <form>parpár</form> <pos>n</pos> a hand in mahjong containing two pairs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> have two pairs, either one of which may allow one to go mahjong.

<p><form>para</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> <tr>result in</tr>. <i>Ug unsay ímung parahan, wà kuy lábut,</i> Whatever happens to you, I won&apos;t be responsible. <i>Unsa may giparahan sa inyung nigusyu?</i> What happened in the end to your business venture? <pos>n</pos> chance of winning or succeeding. <i>May parahan kahà ning átung tím?</i> Think our team has a chance of winning?

<p><form>pára<sub>1</sub></form> <number>1</number> <formx>&mdash; sa</formx>, [<i>dat.</i>] for. <number>1a</number> for the sake or benefit of. <i>Nagdala kug isdà pára nímu,</i> I brought some fish for you. <number>1b</number> in the direction of. <i>Mau ba ning barkúha pára sa Manílà?</i> Is this the boat for Manila? <number>1c</number> in the estimation of. <i>Pára nákù paríha ra ang duha,</i> For me, it&apos;s all the same. <number>1d</number> as change for money. <i>Dúna ka bay sinsíyu pára sa diyis písus?</i> Do you have change for ten pesos? <number>1e</number> with an end to. <i>Gáwig Isu Tayudyan pára sa mas daghang maáni,</i> Use Esso Thiodian for a better harvest. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; <r>[<ix>verb</ix>]</r></formx> for the purpose of, in order to, so that. <i>Ímung sigáhan pára malútù dáyun,</i> Turn the heat up so that it will get done right away. <number>2a</number> <formx>&mdash; <r>[<ix>noun referring to action</ix>]</r></formx> to be used in [doing]. <i>Ákung gawíun ning kardburd pára paypay,</i> I will use the cardboard for a fan. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; alas</formx> ([so-and-so] many minutes) before [such-and-such an hour]. <i>Karun bayinti minútus pára alas singku,</i> It is now twenty minutes to five o&apos;clock. <number>4</number> <formx>&mdash; <r>[<ix>noun</ix>]</r></formx> all it is is [noun] and yet.... <i>Pára dalugdug ug unyà matarant&acaron;r ka dáyun,</i> All it is is thunder and you get wild with fright. <number>4a</number> just because [so-and-so] is the case. <i>Pára gamayng sayup ímung papahawáun dáyun?</i> For such a small mistake you want to fire him right away? <number>4b</number> [such-and-such] a bad thing is nothing. <i>Maáyu siyag láwas. Pára nawung ray dipirinsiya,</i> She has a nice body. The only thing wrong with her is her face.

<p><form>pára<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> hail a vehicle or ask the driver to stop. <i>Pára bay,</i> Stop, driver! <i>Paráha ang bús kay musakay ku,</i> Stop the bus because I want to get on. <number>2</number> <itype>[A123P; c1]</itype> discontinue a course of action. <i>Dílì siya makapára sa íyang pag-inum,</i> He can&apos;t stop his drinking. <i>Paráhun (ipára) ang átung pinsiyun ug mamatay na aku,</i> If I die my pension will be cut off. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23; b5]</itype> hesitate doing s.t. (usually in negative sentences). <i>Dílì mupára ug súkul nang batáa bísag kinsa,</i> That child doesn&apos;t hesitate to fight back, no matter who it is. <i>Wà kuy gipára (giparáhan) sa mga kan-unun,</i> There is no food I hesitate to eat. <form>-da<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> two-wheeled, horse-drawn rig that plies the streets and takes up to four passengers who sit facing each other. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> park a vehicle in a certain place. <i>Ang íyang giparadáhan gidilì,</i> He parked in a no-parking zone. <form>pamaráda</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> operate the <ix>paráda</ix>. <pos>n</pos> rig-driving occupation. <form>paradahan</form> <pos>n</pos> vehicle terminal. <form>-dista</form> <pos>n</pos> one who drives a <ix>paráda</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be in this occupation.

<p><form>parabir</form> <form>&mdash; <r>[<ix>verb</ix>]</r></form> before [doing]. <i>Parabir ka mukáun panghunaw úsà,</i> Before you eat wash your hands first. <i>Parabir siya milákaw (mulakaw) nagbílin ug kwarta,</i> He left some money before he went out.

<p><form>parabula</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>parable</tr>. <i>Ang parabula sa parasan,</i> The parable of the vineyard.

<p><form>paráda<sub>1</sub></form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>PÁRA<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><form>paráda<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>parade</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> <number>1</number> have a parade. <number>2</number> display s.t. before the public. <i>Ayaw iparáda ang gisiun nímung sinínà,</i> Don&apos;t parade around in your torn shirt.

<p><form>paráda<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bet</tr> involving a large amount of money. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> place a bet of major size.

<p><form>paradista</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>PÁRA<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><form>paradur</form> <xr>= <sc>APARADUR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>paragátus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>slippers</tr> made of braided abaca. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, make this sort of slipper.

<p><form>paragáyu</form> <xr>= <sc>KALÍPAY</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr>

<p><form>paragparag</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>tottering</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> walk unsteadily, zigzagging. <i>Nagparagparag ang hubug nga naglakaw sa karsáda,</i> The drunkard is staggering down the street.

<p><form>paragù</form> <xr>= <sc>PAGÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>paragwa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>forge</tr>, place or furnace where metals which are to be worked are heated.

<p><form>paraísu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>paradise</tr>.

<p><form>parak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> counter for things that come in large lumps. <i>Dakung parak nga pagkababáyi,</i> A huge hulk of a woman. <i>Mupalit kug bibingkang duha ka parak ug kalamayng usa <pb n=737>ka parak,</i> I will buy two rice cakes and one piece of sugar candy. a being fat and large. <i>Parak siyag nawung,</i> She has a fat and round face. <i>Antaw kaáyu ang parak ánang nagbáting siyut,</i> You can clearly see the bulges in the genital region on that girl wearing a bathing suit. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S5]</itype> get large and round. <i>Mipárak (napárak) na ang íyang nawung pagkináun ug tambuk,</i> His face got fat and round because he kept eating fat. <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> [do] by the piece.

<p><form>parak<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cop</tr> (slang).

<p><form>parakayda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>parachute</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> use a parachute.

<p><form>parakul</form> <xr>= <sc>PALÁKUL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>parakyut</form> <xr>= <sc>PARAKAYDA</sc>.</xr> <form>-ir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>paratrooper</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be a paratrooper.

<p><form>paraláyis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become <tr>paralyzed</tr>.

<p><form>paralisar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; c1]</itype> <tr>paralyze</tr>, <tr>immobilize</tr> activities. <i>Maparalisar ang trabábu kun madáut ang makina,</i> The work will be paralyzed if the machine breaks down. <i>Paralisahun (iparalisar) ang nigusyu sa mga impliyádu nga nagwilga,</i> The business will be paralyzed by the employees who are on strike. paralisádu a paralyzed.

<p><form>paralísis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>paralysis</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a4]</itype> become a paralytic, paralyzed. <i>Dúgay na siyang naparalísis,</i> He has been a paralytic for a long time. <i>Dì na siya makalakaw kay giparalísis,</i> He can&apos;t walk because he is paralyzed.

<p><form>paralitiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>paralytic</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a4]</itype> be a paralytic.

<p><form>párang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> pair off with s.o. in a contest, fight, dance, or anything else where people oppose one another. <i>Mupárang kag sinumbagay níya?</i> Do you want to be his opponent in boxing? <i>Nagkapárang giyud ang duha sa tabiay,</i> The two gossips made a pair. <i>Nindut silang tan-áwun ug parángun sa kuratsa,</i> They look nice when they dance the curacha together. <i>Kinsa may ímung ipárang sa ákung manuk,<note>should be ?</note></i> Who are you going to put up against my protege? <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s opponent in s.t. or dance partner. <i>Kinsay ímung kapárang sa ahidris,<note>should be ?</note></i> Who was your opponent in the game of chess?

<p><form>parapara</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>frills</tr>, <tr>lace trimmings</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> put frills or lace trimmings on a dress.

<p><form>parapin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>paraffin</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> apply paraffin to s.t.

<p><form>parapirnalya</form> <pos>n</pos> groups of things used for a specific purpose: tools for a trade, items worn with a uniform. <i>Hitsu ka na sa parapirnalya sa ar-utísi?</i> Do you have all the items for your ROTC uniform complete?

<p><form>parapu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>paragraph</tr>.

<p><form>páras<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>grapes</tr>, <tr>raisins</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> make into a vineyard. <i>Maáyu ning lugára parásan,</i> This is a good place to plant grapes. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>raisin</tr>. <form>-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vineyard</tr>.

<p><form>páras<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> split a fish lengthwise to dry it. <pos>n</pos> <tr>dried fish</tr>. <form>-in-</form> <xr>= <sc>PÁRAS<sub>2</sub></sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p><form>parasparas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> do s.t. hurriedly, usually with shoddy results. <i>Kun parasparasan (parasparasun) mug lútù ang sud-an dì mulamì,</i> If you cook food hurriedly, it won&apos;t taste good.

<p><form>parasparas<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> acting uncouthly without taking time to think. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; b5c]</itype> act or do s.t. in a coarse way. <i>Ang bínu ang nakaparasparas (nakapaparasparas) sa íyang linihukan,</i> Alcohol made him rough in his behavior. <i>Giparasparas níyag súgù ang mga kargadur,</i> She ordered the porters around in a rough and rapid way.

<p><form>parat, párat</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>salty</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> be, become salty. <i>Ayaw paráta ang sud-an,</i> Don&apos;t make the food too salty. <form>(&rarr;) ang &mdash;</form> <itype>[A12]</itype> what makes it bad, the thing that is wrong. <i>Ang nakaparat nímu kay dílì ka mamínaw ug tambag,</i> What&apos;s wrong with you is that you don&apos;t listen to advice. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of eating salty foods or making foods salty.

<p><form>paraw</form> <pos>n</pos> <pos>a</pos> large sailboat with two or more masts, one rigged in the bow and one in the stern.

<p><form>paráwu</form> <pos>n</pos> stiff triangular kerchief worn around the shoulders as an accessory to the mistísa dress. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> wear a <ix>paráwu</ix>, make into a paráwu.

<p><form>paray</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> truck with compartments used for transporting pigs (so called from the name of a pig merchant who used these trucks). <number>2</number> any truck used as a bus for passengers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> ride on a truck, make into a truck.

<p><form>paráyig</form> (from <ix>daláyig</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> asking for affection, usually by showing affection. <i>Nagparáyig nang batáa maung gasígig hílak,</i> That child is crying because he is asking for attention. <i>Ákung giparaygan si Máma arun paadtúun ku sa bayli,</i> I played up to Mother so she would let me go to the dance. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> ask for s.t. in an endearing way. <i>Mamaráyig aku níyag sapátus,</i> I&apos;ll ask her for shoes in a sweet way. <i>Dúna kuy ipamaráyig nímu, Pri. Ipasúd ring ákung umágad,</i> I have a little favor to ask of you. Help my son-in-law get into the company. <form>paraygun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>affectionate</tr>, demanding of affection. <i>Paraygun kaáyu ang sinultihan sa mga Ilunggu,</i> The Ilonggos speak in an affectionate tone of voice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> be <tr>affectionate</tr>, demanding of affection. <i>Maparaygun ang bátà ug sigíhag kúgus,</i> A child gets to be demanding if <pb n=738>you keep picking him up. <form>parayganay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> be affectionate with each other.

<p><form>pardnir</form> <xr>= <sc>PART</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pardu</form> <xr>= <sc>PALDU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pardun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pardon</tr> granted to a convict. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> give or grant pardon to a convict.

<p><form>pári</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>KUMPADRI</sc>.</xr> <form>(&rarr;)</form> term of address to one&apos;s <ix>kumpadri</ix>. <number>2</number> term of address used by men who are close friends. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; a12]</itype> call s.o. pari, be <ix>kumpadri&apos;s</ix>.

<p><form>párì</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>priest</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>cop</tr> (slang). <number>3</number> <formx>mi-/muguwà ang &mdash;</formx> for cuts to bleed. <i>Way kásung tadlása. Wà muguwà ang párì,</i> That cut was nothing. It did not bleed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be, become a <tr>priest</tr>. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> group of <tr>priests</tr>. <number>2</number> area in the city of Cebu, so-called because during the Spanish times it was inhabited by the Spanish friars. <form>parìpárì</form> <pos>n</pos> person in the game of <ix>balaybálay</ix> who acts as the go-between between the opposing teams. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> being like a priest.

<p><form>parid</form> <xr>= <sc>PARÁDA<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> go s.w. in droves as if on parade. <i>Nagparid ang mga táwu nga nanagbù sa artista,</i> The people trooped out to meet the actor. <i>Nagparid ang mga hulmígas nga nanúguk sa kan-un,</i> The ants swarmed over the food.

<p><form>parigla</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>RIGLA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>paríha</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>similar</tr>, <tr>identical</tr> to another. <i>Sigi lang, paríha ra nà,</i> It&apos;s all right, it makes no difference. (It&apos;s all the same.) <i>Paríha kaáyu ang nawung sa kalúha,</i> The twins look exactly alike. <pos>n</pos> <tr>pair</tr>. <i>Píla ka paríhang sapátus,<note>should be ?</note></i> How many pairs of shoes? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B13C; ac]</itype> be the same. <i>Maparíha kahà ang átung grádu,<note>should be ?</note></i> Will our grades come out the same? <i>Way makaparíha sa ímung kaáyu,</i> No one could equal your goodness. <i>Nagkaparíha ang ámung sinínà,</i> Our dresses happened to be similar. <i>Ayaw kug iparíha nímung tabian,</i> Don&apos;t say I&apos;m like you, a gossip. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> pair up with. <i>Akuy muparíha níya sa kuratsa,</i> I will pair off with her in dancing the curacha. <i>Nagkaparíha sila sa patigáyun,</i> They teamed up in business. <i>Pariháun nátù ang átung sunuy,</i> Let&apos;s pair off our cocks. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>partner</tr>. <form>Culu-, pari-</form> <pos>a</pos> somewhat similar. <i>Puparíha (pariparíha) sa kang Risal ang ímung sinudlayan,</i> The way you comb your hair looks s.t. like Rizal.

<p><form>paríhas, paríhu</form> <xr>= <sc>PARÍHA</sc>, <pos>a</pos>, <i>v1.</i></xr>

<p><form>paril</form> <pos>n</pos> tall stone or concrete wall enclosing or at the edge of an area. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> put a stone or concrete wall around. <number>2</number> k.o. stone fish corral in tidal flats in which fish are trapped by the receding tide.

<p><form>parilya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>grill</tr> bars for broiling. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> broil on a grill.

<p><form>parinhayit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Fahrenheit</tr>.

<p><form>parinti</form> <xr>= <sc>PARYINTI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>páris</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pair</tr>. <i>Duha ka páris nga kapling,</i> Two pairs of cuff links. <number>2</number> the other one of a pair. <i>Háin man ang páris niíning sapátus,<note>should be ?</note></i> Where is the other shoe of this pair of shoes? <number>2a</number> the thing that matches s.t. else. <i>Kining bága páris sa ákung bistídu,</i> This bag is the one that matches my dress. <number>3</number> <tr>partner</tr> in doing s.t. <number>4</number> <tr>spouse</tr>. <number>5</number> food or drink served with s.t. else. <number>6</number> even in number. <i>Lúnis u páris ba,<note>should be ?</note></i> Odd or even? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3SC; ac]</itype> pair off, go with, match. <i>Nagpáris silang nanglákaw,</i> They were walking in pairs. <i>Maáyu untà ug makaparis kug kugihan,</i> It would be good to get an industrious girl for a help-*mate. <i>Ákung parísan ang barung Tagálug ug karsúnis itum,</i> I&apos;ll match my barong with black trousers. <number>2</number> <itype>[C13; c]</itype> eat or drink together with s.t. else. <i>Mangga ang maáyung ipáris sa budbud,</i> Mangoes go well with rice sticks. <number>3</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be even in number, [do] by two&apos;s. <i>Ug mupáris mudaug ka. Akuy pildi,</i> If it comes out even you win and I lose. <form>parispáris</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c1]</itype> be in several pairs. <i>Parisparísun (iparispáris) sa Ginúu ang mga maáyug batásan,</i> The Lord will pair good people up with each other. <form>parisparis</form> <pos>n</pos> a game of cards, usually of four players, each dealt five cards. The players draw and discard in turn with the object of getting three pairs (where the last card drawn making the third pair is not discarded). <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pair</tr>. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>partner</tr>. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> things that fit together. <i>Parisun kaáyu silang duha,</i> They are a good pair.

<p><form>parisíyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pharisee</tr> (Biblical).

<p><form>parka</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> wallings of a small boat made of planking or sawali (<ix>amákan</ix>) waterproofed with tar. <number>2</number> wooden siding added to the sides of a boat to lend more freeboard. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make or put walling on a small boat.

<p><form>parki</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>park</tr>.

<p><form>parking</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> park vehicles. <i>Dílì mahímung iparking ang ímung kutsi dinhi,</i> You may not park your car here. <form>nu &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> notice of no parking. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> parking place.

<p><form>parliyamint, parliyamintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>parliament</tr>.

<p><form>parlur</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>beauty parlor</tr>. <number>2</number> refreshment parlor. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> construct, make a beauty or refreshment parlor.

<p><form>parmasya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>drugstore</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> make a drugstore. <form>parmasyutika</form> <xr>= <sc>PARMASYUTIKU</sc></xr> (female). <form>parmasyutiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pharmacist</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be a pharmacist.

<p><form>parnásu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Parnassus</tr>, the mountain sacred to the Muses (literary). <i>Niadtung higayúna wà pa siya mag-ampù sa Parnásu,</i> At that time <pb n=739>he had not begun writing poetry (worship at Parnassus).

<p><form>parsíla</form> <pos>n</pos> parcel of land. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> divide land into parcels.

<p><form>parsir</form> <xr>= <sc>PURSIR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>parsiyar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> for eyesight to fail or be impaired. <i>Na, ug muparsiyar ug súgud ang átung mata, lisud na ta makabasa,</i> When your eyesight starts to get impaired, you can hardly read. <form>parsiyádu</form> <pos>a</pos> for the vision to be weak.

<p><form>part</form> <pos>n</pos> term of address among men of the same age, usually among friends. <i>Mangharána ta unyang gabíi part,</i> Let&apos;s go serenading tonight, partner.

<p><form>partayim</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>part-time work</tr>, working part-time. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>work part-time</tr>. <i>Nagpartayim kug tyútur samtang nagmaistra,</i> I worked part-time tutoring while I was teaching. <form>-ir</form> <pos>n</pos> one who works part-time. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> work as a part-timer.

<p><form>parti<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>party</tr>, a social gathering. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> have, throw a party. <i>Ámung gipartíhan ang bag-ung nanggraduwar,</i> We held a party for the new graduates. <form>&mdash; layin</form> <pos>n</pos> party line of a telephone. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C; c]</itype> be on the same party line. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get as one&apos;s party line. <form>partiparti</form> <pos>n</pos> parties collectively, esp. dance parties. <i>Túa siya kanúnay ug ása tung partiparti,</i> Wherever there is a party you&apos;ll be sure to see him. <i>Daghang partiparti sa Disimbri,</i> There are lots of parties in December.

<p><form>parti<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> share of s.t. <i>Tagáan ta kag usa ka parti,</i> I&apos;ll give you one share. <i>Kwarta parti,</i> A quarter part. <number>2</number> part assigned to s.o. in a play, program, and similar activity. <i>Unsay ímung parti sa dráma?</i> What&apos;s your part in the drama? <number>3</number> a specific part of a certain location or place. <i>Háin kang parti sa Mindanaw puyù?</i> In what part of Mindanao do you live? <number>4</number> concerning about. Nangutána siya parti sa nahitabù, He asked about what happened. <i>Parti sa ímung anak ayaw kabaláka,</i> Don&apos;t worry about your son. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>divide s.t.</tr> <number>2</number> relay a message; report. <i>Iparti ni nátù dáyun,</i> Let us report this immediately. <form>-da<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>message</tr>, <tr>report</tr>. <form>-da dibawtismu</form> <tr>baptismal certificate</tr>. <number>2</number> share, part of s.t. divided. <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>PARTI</sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr>

<p><form>partída<sub>1</sub></form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>PARTI<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><form>partída<sub>2</sub></form> (from <ix>parti<sub>2</sub></ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.w., in a certain part of some place. <i>Adtu ku maninda sa partída sa Mindanaw,</i> I sell things in some places in Mindanao. <number>2</number> place one goes outside of the home on business. <number>3</number> amount paid for goods bought wholesale or in big quantities. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>migrate</tr>, <tr>travel</tr>. <i>Gipartída námù ang mga dagkung syudad sa Urúpa,</i> We visited the big cities of Europe. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> <tr>peddle</tr>. <i>Túa siya sa kabukíran nagpartídag bulad,</i> She is in the mountains peddling dried fish. <number>3</number> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> buy in great quantities. <i>Nakapartída kug barátu kaáyung isdà,</i> I managed to buy a big quantity of fish cheaply. <number>3a</number> <itype>[c]</itype> <tr>sell wholesale</tr>. <i>Íyang ipartída pagbaligyà kay sámuk ug minudúhun,</i> He will just sell it wholesale because it is too much trouble to sell it in small quantities.

<p><form>partída<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> advantage given in a game. <i>Dakù ang partída nga ílang gihátag sa kaatbang,</i> They gave their opponents a big advantage. <number>2</number> in billiards or games of pool where dice are thrown to give the player part of the score, the points the player must make to win in addition to the number rolled on the dice. <number>2a</number> have made the requisite number of points in billiards. <i>Makakuhir lang kug dus puntus, partída na ku,</i> If I can get two points, I win. <i>Dus puntus na lay ákung partída,</i> I need only two points to win this game. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> give an advantage to the opponent in games, contests, etc. <i>Kun partidáhun ku ning ákung manuk, musúkul ka?</i> If I have my cock give you an advantage, would you bet against it? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> need [so-and-so] many more points to win in billiards.

<p><form>partidista</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>PARTÍDU<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><form>partídu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>political party</tr>. <form>&mdash; Libiral</form> Liberal Party. <form>&mdash; Nasyunalista</form> Nacionalista Party. <form>partidista</form> <pos>n</pos> one engaged in partisan politics. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get engaged in partisan politics.

<p><form>partídu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> person related to another, usually said only of blood ties. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126C; b]</itype> be related by blood, said occasionally of relations by affinity. <i>Mapartídu na ta inigkaminyù ninyung manang,</i> We will be relatives if you marry my sister. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> person with whom one is related by blood. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C12; b6]</itype> claim, try to establish kinship with s.o. <i>Ang kandidátu namartídu nákù,</i> The candidate claims that I&apos;m his relative. <form>-s</form> <xr>= <sc>PARTÍDU</sc></xr> (plural).

<p><form>partikular</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>peculiarity</tr>, <tr>characteristic</tr> act. <i>Partikular sa manuk nga mubátug matag gabíi,</i> That&apos;s the way chickens are. They roost in the evening. <number>2</number> <tr>specific</tr>, the very one. <i>Ngánung kanà mang partikular nga bran sa rilu ang gustu nímu?</i> Why do you like just that particular brand of watch? <i>Ang partikular nga táwu mauy tagáan giyud sa sulat,</i> The letter should be given to the man himself. <number>3</number> ordinary in looks or ways. <i>Milyunaryu, apan mu ra lag táwung partikular <pb n=740>nga musúruy,</i> He&apos;s a millionaire, but you&apos;d think he was an ordinary person when he goes out. <number>3a</number> <formx>mga &mdash;</formx> unimportant matters, nothing of special concern. <i>A, mga partikular lang tung ámung gipanaghisgútan,</i> Oh, all we talked about were trivial things. <number>4</number> place outside of the home one goes to on business. <i>Ang mga nigusyanting bulanti náa pirmi sa partikular,</i> Traveling salesmen are always away from home on business. <pos>a</pos> <tr>exacting</tr>, <tr>fussy</tr> about things. <i>Partikular kaáyu ku sa ákung sapátus,</i> I&apos;m very particular about my shoes. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> become a trait. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for s.o. who is expected to be in uniform to wear civilian clothes. <i>Dì magpartikular ang sundáwu sa patrulya,</i> A soldier does not wear civilian clothes on patrol.

<p><form>partíra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>midwife</tr> who hasn&apos;t undergone any formal training in assisting in childbirth. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B16]</itype> become a <ix>partíra</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> hire a <ix>partíra</ix>. <i>Wà may kásu ug partiráhun (ipartíra) ug maáyu lang ang pag-anak,</i> I don&apos;t mind having a baby with an untrained midwife if it&apos;s a normal delivery.

<p><form>partisipasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> participation in a business. <number>2</number> the amount one has put into a business with other people. <i>Dakù ang ákung partisipasiyun sa susyu,</i> I have a large share in the partnership.

<p><form>partisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>partition</tr>, <tr>room divider</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> partition a room. <number>2</number> <tr>partition land</tr>. <i>Partisiyunun ta ang yútà samtang búhì pa si Tátay,</i> We&apos;ll partition the land while Father is still alive.

<p><form>parts</form> <xr>= <sc>PART</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>párù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cook rice or corn grits dry. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> rice or corn grits cooked dry. <form>parùpárù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> cook a small amount of rice, enough for a couple of people. <i>Magparùpárù ku ug aku rang usa sa báy,</i> I just cook a little rice when I&apos;m alone in the house. <pos>n</pos> cooking of a small amount of rice.

<p><form>paruk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> bang the head against s.t. <i>Akuy muparuk nímu sa bungbung,</i> I&apos;ll bang your head against the wall. <number>2</number> <itype>[B16; a4]</itype> be sleepy with the head nodding. <i>Giparuk kung namínaw sa diskursu,</i> I started to nod listening to the speech.

<p><form>parúku, parukya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>parish</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; a12]</itype> be a parish. <form>parukyánu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>parishioner</tr>. <number>2</number> a person who buys regularly from s.o. <number>3</number> a person who frequents a place regularly. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be a parishioner. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB126C; a2]</itype> be a regular customer. <i>Pahangyúa ku básin pag maparukyánu ku ninyu madúgay,</i> Let me bargain. Maybe I&apos;ll become your steady customer. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> become one who frequents a place on a regular basis. <i>Nagparukyánu ku sa tubaan,</i> I started to hang around the toddy stand.

<p><form>parul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> hanging <tr>lantern</tr>. <form>&mdash; dikumbáti</form> <pos>n</pos> barn lantern. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> use, have a lantern. <form>-íru</form> <pos>n</pos> one whose job is to light the lanterns in the street.

<p><form>parul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>parole</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> be a prisoner out on parole. <form>-i(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>parolee</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be a parolee.

<p><form>parúla</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lighthouse</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> <number>1</number> put up a lighthouse. <number>2</number> glass jar of palm toddy (slang). <i>Daghan kaáyung parúla sa imnanan,</i> There are lots of jars of palm toddy in the stand. <form>parulíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lighthouse keeper</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; b6]</itype> be a lighthouse keeper.

<p><form>parulíru</form> <number>1</number> <ix>see</ix> <sc>PARUL<sub>1</sub></sc>. <number>2</number> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>PARÚLA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>parúlus</form> <pos>n</pos> long, heavy horizontal beam that supports the framework of a bridge, bottom of a building, or a roof. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> make or put horizontal supporting beams.

<p><form>parúni</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cut a ripe jackfruit into pieces. <i>Nakaparúni siyag walu sa usa ka búnga,</i> Each ripe jackfruit she cut into eight pieces.

<p><form>parús</form> <xr>= <sc>PARÚLUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>párut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; b5]</itype> be utterly <tr>defeated</tr>. <i>Sa pulitika mapárut giyud ang way sápì,</i> In politics the person who has no money is sure to get defeated completely. <number>2</number> go <tr>bankrupt</tr>. <i>Ang íyang pagsúgal nakapárut (nakapapárut) sa íyang nigusyu,</i> His business went bankrupt because of his gambling. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> a hand in mahjong or cards that lacks a card or has one card too many and thus cannot win. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get in the <ix>parut</ix> situation. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> defeat suffered by s.o. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>utter defeat</tr>. <i>Dawáta ang ímung kaparútan,</i> Accept your utter defeat.

<p><form>parutput</form> <xr>= <sc>PALUTPUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>páruy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> call s.o. in a sing-song manner. <i>Ábi nákug nagkanta siya, íya diay nga gipáruy ang íyang anak,</i> I thought she was singing. She was just calling her son.

<p><form>paruyparuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be <tr>unsteady</tr>, <tr>tottering</tr> on one&apos;s feet. <i>Nagparuyparuy ang hubug,</i> The drunk is tottering as he is walking. <pos>a</pos> <tr>staggering</tr>, tottering.

<p><form>paryinti</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>relative</tr>, related by blood or by affinity. <number>2</number> as good as, not much different from. <i>Paryinti na man nas pangáyù ang ímung hinangyuan,</i> The way you haggle over the price you might as well ask for it for nothing. <number>3</number> people having similar defects or sicknesses (humorous colloquial). <i>Mikúyug siyag pakilimus sa íyang paryinti nga bakul sab,</i> He went begging together with his fellow-<note>space not - ?</note>cripple. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12NC]</itype> be related by blood or by affinity. <form>kaparyintíhan</form> <pos>n</pos> group of relatives.

<pb n=741>

<p><form>pas, pás<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> in drinking sprees where only one glass is used, let one&apos;s turn to drink pass onto the next person. <i>Mupás sà ku íning tagáya kay kasukaun ku,</i> I will pass this drink onto the next person because I feel like vomiting.

<p><form>pás<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> pass giving free access to places where tickets are required. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> get a pass.

<p><form>pás<sub>3</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PASTÍKUM</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pás<sub>4</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> hand in. <i>Ipás na ang tispípar,</i> Pass in your test papers now.

<p><form>pasa<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> abdominal binder for an infant, the purpose of which is to press down the navel, or an abdominal binder put around a mother when she has just given birth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put on a binder on s.o. <form>pasahan</form> <xr>= <sc>PASA</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p><form>pasa<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> press clothes which have not been laundered. <i>Pasahan ku ang sinínang ákung gisul-ub ganína,</i> I&apos;ll iron up the shirt I had on a while ago. <form>pasahánan</form> <pos>n</pos> clothes to be pressed.

<p><form>pása</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> pass s.t. to s.o. <i>Abtik siyang mipása sa búla,</i> He passed the ball quickly. <i>Palíhug ipása ang kan-un,</i> Please pass the rice. <form>pasapása</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> pass s.t. around from one to the other. <i>Gipasapása sa mga mangangagaw ang pitákang ílang sinabnit,</i> The purse snatchers passed the bag they had snatched on to their comrades. <form>&mdash; banda</form> <xr>= <sc>PASBURD</sc>.</xr> <form>pasapasa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; c1]</itype> be scattered around in disarray. <i>Napasapasa ang mga anak sukad mangaílu,</i> The children were scattered after they were orphaned.

<p><form>pásad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB6; c]</itype> <tr>scatter</tr> s.t. all over a place; be scattered. <i>Siyay nagpásad ug mais álang sa manuk,</i> He scattered corn for the chickens. <i>Nagpásad ang mga butang sa kwartu,</i> The things are scattered all over the room.

<p><form>pasádu</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>PASAR<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><form>pasadur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sanitary napkin</tr>. <i>Labhi ang pasadur,</i> Wash out the sanitary napkin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a1]</itype> wear, make into a sanitary napkin.

<p><form>paságad</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>*SÁGAD<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><form>pasáhi<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> fare on public transportation. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> pay one&apos;s fare.

<p><form>pasáhi<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> introduction, prelude to a musical rendition. <number>2</number> hints and words said before one gets around to his real purpose. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> play or sing the opening part of a musical composition. <number>2</number> give indirect words and hints by way of introducing the real purpose. <i>Pasáhi úsà. Ayawg diritsug abla,</i> Make some opening hints first. Don&apos;t propose right off.

<p><form>pasahíra</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a woman fish peddler. <number>2</number> female passenger. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> peddle fish. <i>Si Tikay namasahíra ug isdà sa mga balay,</i> Tikay is peddling fresh fish from house to house.

<p><form>pasahíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>passenger</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12B156; b8]</itype> get passengers, be a passenger. <i>Nakapasahíru kug wà mubáyad,</i> I got a passenger who did not pay. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> drive a passenger vehicle to pick up passengers. <i>Mamasahíru ku káda human sa klási,</i> I drive a passenger jeep after classes. <form>pasahiruan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>passenger vehicle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a passenger vehicle. <form>di-</form> <pos>n</pos> a passenger vehicle, boat. <i>Ayaw pagsakay ug dipasahíru kay daghang hapitan,</i> Don&apos;t take a passenger vehicle because it makes many stops. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> convert a vehicle into a passenger vehicle.

<p><form>pasakalyi, pasakayli</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> do the introduction to a musical number. <number>2</number> give a long prologue before getting around to one&apos;s real subject. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> pass the time away by strolling around. <i>Mipasakalyi ku sa plása,</i> I was passing the time strolling in the park. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> introduction to a musical number. <i>Mauy nindut ang pasakayli kay sa kanta,</i> The introductory portion was nicer than the song itself. <number>2</number> round-about speech in preparation for saying s.t. else difficult. <i>Hinúgay nang pasakalyi mu. Sulti na,</i> That&apos;s enough of your beating around the bush. What do you want?

<p><form>pasakpasak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>spatter</tr>, <tr>splatter</tr> s.t. soft or liquid. <i>Ayawg pasakpasaka (ipasakpasak) ang pintal sa sawug,</i> Don&apos;t let the paint spatter on the floor. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> make a pattering sound. <i>Nagpasakpasak ang uwan sa atup,</i> The rain makes a pattering sound on the roof. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> spatter, splatter. <number>2</number> pattering sound.

<p><form>pasamánu, pasamánus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>handrail</tr> of a stair-*case. <number>2</number> <tr>window sill</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> make, put a handrail.

<p><form>pásan</form> <xr>= <sc>PALÁSAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pas-an</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> carry s.t. over the shoulders. <i>Nagpas-an siya ug ripli,</i> He was carrying a rifle over his shoulder. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> assume the burden of s.t. <i>Pas-ánun ku ang tanang buluhatun sa balay,</i> I will shoulder all the housework. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> bear, endure a burden or problem. <i>Tigúlang kansang kurayut nga láwas nagpas-an sa suliran sa kinabúhì,</i> An old man, whose shrunken body bore the problems of life. <form>-l-un, -unun</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. to be carried, burden to be shouldered by s.o. <form>mag-l-, mag-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.o. who carries things on his shoulders or shoulders burdens. <pos>n</pos> action of carrying or amount carried on the shoulders. <i>Kining kantidára madá sa usa ka pas-an,</i> You can carry this amount on your shoulders in one trip.

<p><form>pasángil</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>*SÁNGIL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pasanib</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>*SANIB</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pasápul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> take or assume the responsibility <pb n=742>for doing s.t. <i>Mupasápul kug hímug kík basta dúnay katábang,</i> I will take the responsibility for making the cake as long as s.o. helps me. <pos>n</pos> assurance of getting s.t. done. <i>Sa mga pasápul nga gisáad walay natúman,</i> He gave lots of assurances but accomplished nothing.

<p><form>pasapurti</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>passport</tr>. <number>2</number> s.t. that leads to s.t. <i>Sakit nga mauy íyang pasapurti ngadtu sa lubngánan,</i> An illness that lead<note>leads? led? P2</note> to the grave.

<p><form>pasar<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a2b2]</itype> pass an exam, screening, or the like. <i>Mipasar siya sa iksámin sa sirbisyu sibil,</i> He passed the Civil Service test. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> pass a certain time, deadline. <i>Nakapasar na nang tagal sa pagbáyad,</i> The term to pay me has expired. <number>2a</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> for canned or packaged foods to spoil after being kept too long. <i>Nagkapasar na ning tablitása kay nalánay na,</i> These tablets must be expired because they have already melted. <number>3</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> go out of style or fashion, be not with the times. <i>Napasar na ang tag-as nga múda sa palda,</i> The long skirt is out of fashion. <number>4</number> go through, go by s.t. (used in set phrases). <number>4a</number> <formx>&mdash; ang gútum, káun</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> fail to eat at the proper time and lose one&apos;s desire to eat. <i>Makapasar gánì ang ákung gútum dì na ku gustung mukáun,</i> If I fail to eat during meal times, I lose my appetite. <number>4b</number> <formx>&mdash; ang gána</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> lose one&apos;s fondness for s.t. <i>Mipasar (napasar) na ang ákung gána sa mga kalingáwan,</i> I have lost my interest for amusements. <number>4c</number> <formx>&mdash; sa kamut</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> for s.t. to pass through one&apos;s hands. <i>Mipasar nang bayhána sa ákung kamut únà maminyù,</i> That girl passed through my hands before she got married. <i>Ipasar ang papílis sa ákung kamut únà idusù,</i> The papers go through my hands before they are passed forward. <form>&mdash;</form> [<i>noun, pronoun</i>] [so-and-so] has a passing mark. <i>Pasar ka sa sibil sirbis tist,</i> You passed the Civil Service test. <form>pasádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> successful in an exam. <i>Pasádu tanan kay may líkids,</i> Everybody passed because there was a leakage (the test questions were known to the examinees). <number>2</number> past a certain time. <i>Pasádu alas dúsi na,</i> It&apos;s past twelve o&apos;clock now. <number>3</number> canned foods, packaged products which are so old that they have become spoiled. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be successful in an examination. <number>2</number> <itype>[B6; c16]</itype> be past a certain hour. <number>3</number> <itype>[B]</itype> for canned foods or other packaged products to spoil from being too old. <i>Mupasádu (mapasádu) na gánì ang sardínas, ilábay na lang,</i> If the can of sardines is already spoiled, throw it away.

<p><form>pasar<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PASA<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pásas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>raisins</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> put, mix with raisins.

<p><form>pasatyimpu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pastime</tr>. <number>2</number> girl with whom one is just passing time without being serious. <i>Pasatyimpu lang nang bayhána nákù,<note> .? P2</note> Dì nákù pangasaw-un,</i> That girl is just for the pleasure of the moment. I have no intentions of marrying her. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <number>1</number> pass, spend one&apos;s time doing s.t. <i>Nagpasatyimpu lang kug bása ug nubíla,</i> My pastime is reading novels. <number>2</number> have a temporary affair with a girl.

<p><form>pásaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> feed food mixed with water to domestic animals. <i>Aku ray mipásaw sa bábuy,</i> I&apos;ll feed the pigs. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> feed for domestic animals mixed with water. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> trough for feeding the animals.

<p><form>pasáyan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shrimp</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> gather, catch shrimp. <pos>n</pos> occupation of catching shrimp. <form>pasayanpasáyan</form> <pos>n</pos> fishing lure which is formed like a shrimp.

<p><form>pasaylu</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>SAYLU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pasburd</form> <pos>n</pos> shot in basketball made by bouncing the ball off the board and into the ring. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> make a goal in this way.

<p><form>pasgung</form> <pos>n</pos> trap for land crabs and mice made out of a node of bamboo having an opening with a trap door at one end. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> catch mice or land crab with this k.o. trap. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> catch land crabs or rats with a <ix>pasgung</ix>. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. caught with a <ix>pasgung</ix> trap.

<p><form>pasì</form> <pos>n</pos> rice in the husk or corn grains with a shell. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having unhusked rice or corn grains mixed in it. <form>ti-</form> <xr>see <sc>TIPASÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pasiatab</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>ÁTAB<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><form>pasig</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shoals</tr>, a shallow place in a body of water. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a]</itype> for a water-covered area to become shallow. <i>Mupasig (mapasig) ang bukána sa subà ug kusug ang bahà,</i> The mouth of the river will become shallow if there is heavy flooding.

<p><form>pasignunut</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>NUNUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pasíkat</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>SÍKAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pásil</form> <pos>n</pos> place near the seashore which becomes rocky due to the action of the sea. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> get to be a rocky shore.

<p><form>pasilyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>corridor</tr>, covered <tr>passageway</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> put a passageway, corridor.

<p><form>pasinsiya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>patience</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> be patient with s.o. for doing s.t. <i>Gipasinsiyáhan ku lang ang idlut níyang púlung,</i> I just endured his painful words patiently. <form>pasinsiyúsa</form> <pos>a</pos> having lots of patience (female). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be patient and long-suffering. <form>pasinsiyúsu</form> <xr>= <sc>PASINSIYÚSA</sc></xr> (male).

<p><form>pasinti</form> <xr>= <sc>PASYINTI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pasipála</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>mistreat</tr>, treat s.t. roughly, abusively. <i>Ayaw pasipad-i ang mwiblis,</i> <pb n=743>Don&apos;t mistreat the furniture. <number>2</number> abuse a woman. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; ug sulti</formx> mistreat s.o. by saying s.t. inconsiderate and painful to him in a light, unthinking way. <i>Ngánung nagpasipála ka mag pamasángil nga dì ka man sigúru?</i> Why do you accuse me unthinkingly if you are not sure? <number>3<note> 4</note></number> dare do s.t. dangerous. <i>Dì ku mupasipála ug labang ánang kusug nga bahà,</i> I don&apos;t dare cross the river because it is so high. <form>mapasipaláhun, mapasipad-ánun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>abusive</tr>, <tr>maltreating</tr>. <number>2</number> careless with things that are dangerous.

<p><form>Pasipiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Pacific Ocean</tr>.

<p><form>pásis<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PÁS<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pásis<sub>2</sub></form> explanation indicating surrender, accompanied by raising the hands. <i>Pásis. Dì na ku,</i> I give up. I quit. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> raise the hands in surrender or as in a stick-up. <i>Ayaw ug pusila kun mupásis na sila,</i> Don&apos;t shoot if they raise their hands. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126C; c16]</itype> settle personal differences. <i>Makigpásis ku sa ákung kuntra,</i> I&apos;d like to settle my quarrel with my enemy. &dagger;

<p><form>pasistur</form> <pos>n</pos> table with a top that flips for storage. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a]</itype> make or obtain such a table.

<p><form>pasitib</form> <pos>n</pos> positive result of a medical test.

<p><form>pasiugda</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>UGDA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pasiuna</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ÚNA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pasiyal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ANC12; b6(1)]</itype> take a leisurely stroll or ride s.w. <i>Ug mupasiyal (mamasiyal) ka diri, hapit sa báy,</i> If you take a stroll this way, drop in the house.

<p><form>pasiyu, pasíyu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> take a leisurely walk, stroll, ride. <i>Mupasíyu ku sa parki mahápun,</i> I take a stroll in the park in the afternoon. <i>Ipasíyu nang bátà arun mainitan,</i> Take the child for a stroll to get some sun. <number>2</number> drop by a place to see s.o. <i>Pasyúhan ku siya matag Duminggu,</i> I drop by her place every Sunday. <form>pasyuhan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> take a stroll habitually in a certain place. <i>Magpasyuhan ku ngadtus íla ug maduminggu,</i> I usually take a stroll to their place on Sundays.

<p><form>*pasiyu</form> <form>ba &mdash;</form> it is highly impossible that [such-and-such] happen (said as if addressing s.o. named Pacio). <i>&lsquo;Mipasar ka sa iksámin, Ting?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Pasar ba, Pasiyu!&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Did you pass the exams, Ting?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Hell, no!&rsquo; <i>&lsquo;Musugut ka ba?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Musugut ba, Pasiyu!&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Do you agree to do it?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Are you kidding? (No!)&rsquo;

<p><form>pasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> Passion of Jesus Christ. <number>2</number> hymns relating the Passion of Jesus Christ sung during the Holy Week. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> sing the Passion of Jesus Christ.

<p><form>paskan</form> exclamation at the high degree s.t. is. <i>Paskang iníta run!</i> How hot it is today! <form>&mdash; nu</form> it would be terrible. <i>Paskan, nu, ug mahibalu ánà ang Prisidinti!</i> What if the President should come to know about it!

<p><form>paskin</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> notice or announcement displayed publicly. <number>2</number> s.t. bad about a person written anonymously in a public place or an anonymous poison-pen letter. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> put up as a public announcement. <i>Nagpaskin si Lútir sa pultahan sa simbahan,</i> Luther posted his theses on the church door. <number>2</number> post an announcement ruining s.o.&apos;s reputation. <i>Kinsay nagpaskin nga si Pidru pisut?</i> Who wrote on the wall that Pedro is uncircumcised? <number>2a</number> send an anonymous poison-pen letter. <i>Gipaskínan ang ginikánan nga kidnápun ang ílang anak,</i> The parents received an anonymous letter that their baby would be kidnapped. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> play a game in which the letters of the name of a man and a woman are compared to find out if they will fall in love, be married, and the like.

<p><form>Pasku</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> Christmas season, day, or Easter. <i>Maáyung Pasku,</i> Merry Christmas! <form>&mdash; sa kalípay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Christmas</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa kasákit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Lenten season</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa labadúra</form> Feast of the <tr>Passover</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa pagkabanhaw</form> <tr>Easter</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b2]</itype> spend Christmas day. <i>Nagpasku ang mga sundálu sulud sa ílang pakshul,</i> The soldiers spent their Christmas in their foxholes. <number>2</number> <itype>[B3; b8]</itype> for it to be Christmas. <i>Mupasku na lang wà pa kuy kwarta,</i> It will be Christmas and I still have no money. <number>3</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> get a Christmas present from s.o. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> <number>1</number> spend or celebrate Christmas. <i>Didtu ku mamasku sa prisuhan,</i> I spent my Christmas in jail. <number>2</number> go caroling. <i>Mamasku ta sa kumbintu,</i> Let&apos;s go caroling at the rectory. <form>pinaskúhan</form> <pos>n</pos> Christmas gift. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> get a Christmas present. &dagger;

<p><form>paskuwas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>poinsettia</tr>.

<p><form>paslag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <number>1</number> drive s.t. away by poking or throwing s.t. at it. <i>Akuy mupaslag ug batu sa mga bábuy nga misúd sa gít,</i> I&apos;ll drive the pigs that entered the gate away by throwing rocks at them. <number>2</number> throw a lot of things at s.t. <i>Gipaslag ang balay gabíi,</i> S.o. threw rocks at the house last night.

<p><form>paslak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> stuff s.t. into s.t. with force, not carefully. <i>Pasláki ang lungag arun way mabulásut,</i> Stuff s.t. into the hole so nobody will fall into it. <i>Gipaslak lang sa nars ang pítu sa labatíba ngadtu sa ákung lubut,</i> The nurse just shoved the enema nozzle into my behind.

<p><form>paslang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>exterminate</tr>, defeat a great number of people or things. <i>Ang usa ka iring dì makapaslang sa mga ilagà dinhing baláya,</i> One cat is not enough to get rid of <pb n=744>the rats in this house. <i>Gipaslang nila<note> níla ?</note> ang mga sagbut sa uma,</i> They got rid of all of the weeds in the field.

<p><form>paslayit</form> <xr>= <sc>PLASLÁYIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pasluk</form> <xr>= <sc>PASUK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>paslut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; b8]</itype> <tr>chafe</tr> the skin from scalding or friction. <i>Ug mubutu ang lutu, mupaslut ang pánit,</i> If the blister bursts, the skin will come off. <i>Ang ínit kaáyung kapi makapaslut (makapapaslut) sa dílà,</i> Hot coffee will blister your tongue. <i>Mapaslutan ang ímung kamut ug magsígi kag gúna,</i> Your hands will get chafed if you keep on weeding.

<p><form>pasmu</form> <pos>n</pos> ailments characterized by a feeling of weakness and dizziness, or in debility in a single limb, or by swollen veins, from two causes: <number>1</number> failing to eat at one&apos;s meal time, eating s.t. at the wrong time. <number>2</number> exposing the body to water after having done heavy work. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> get <ix>pasmu</ix>. <i>Napasmu ang ugat sa íyang tiil kay nanghimásà human magbaskit,</i> He got swollen veins in his feet because he washed them after playing basketball. <i>Makapasmu usáhay ang pagpuása,</i> Sometimes fasting can cause pasmu. <form>&mdash; ang, sa bítuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> <tr>starve</tr> (lit. make the roundworms get <ix>pasmu</ix> from not eating). <i>Napasmu ákung bítuk sa kagamay adtung rasyúna,</i> We got so little to eat my roundworms began to starve. <form>&mdash; sa pasálig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a12]</itype> frustrate s.o. through promises (humorous). <i>Napasmu siya sa pasálig sa íyang trátu,</i> She became frustrated with her boy friend&apos;s promises. <form>&mdash; sa gútum</form> <xr>= <sc>PASMU</sc>, <pos>n</pos>, <i>v1.</i></xr> <form>&mdash; sa kusug</form> <xr>= <sc>PASMU</sc></xr>, <i>v2.</i> <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> treat <ix>pasmu</ix>. <i>Gihimasmu nákù ang itlug nga lab-as,</i> I treated my <ix>pasmu</ix> with fresh eggs. <pos>n</pos> s.t. to treat <ix>pasmu</ix>.

<p><form>paspas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>fast</tr> in motion or doing s.t. <i>Paspas siyang mukáun,</i> He eats fast. <i>Paspas siyang mudrayib ug awtu,</i> He drives fast. <i>Paspas siyang musulti,</i> He speaks rapidly. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2; b5]</itype> do s.t. hurriedly, get to be fast. <i>Mupaspas kug káun kay tayim na,</i> I&apos;ll eat hurriedly because it is already late. <i>Mupaspas (mapaspas) ang ákung pulsu ug kulbaan ku,</i> My pulse beats fast if I&apos;m scared. <i>Paspásig (paspásag) bugsay,</i> Row fast. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> anything gotten or obtained illegally. <i>Kanang kwartang gigastu sa tagakustum pinaspásan nà,</i> The customs examiner is spending ill-gotten money. <number>2</number> magic food left s.w. (e.g. fish in-<note> why &apos;-&apos; P2</note> a fish trap) by an unglù which will cause the eater to become an <ix>unglù</ix> or develop some sort of ailment, usually losing his teeth.

<p><form>paspas<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>duster</tr>. <number>2</number> stick with strips of paper at the end to chase away flies. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> dust off s.t. with a duster. <i>Paspási ang bangkù,</i> Dust off the benches. <number>2</number> drive flies away with a fly whisk. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> hit s.o. with a duster or a fly whisk. <i>Hingpaspasan siya nákù kay labihang nakapanugs&umacracu;g,</i> I hit him with a duster because he teased me too much.

<p><form>paspasanan</form> <pos>n</pos> a batten running under the eaves of a roof.

<p><form>paspáyit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> do s.t. with utmost vigor. <i>Pastilan níyang nakapaspáyit ug káun sa pansit,</i> My! How he laid into the noodles! <i>Paspaytan (paspaytun) ta nig trabáhu arun daling mahuman,</i> Let&apos;s work hard on this so it will get done right away.

<p><form>paspurt</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>passport</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain a passport.

<p><form>paspuru</form> <xr>= <sc>PUSPURU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pasta<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> filling for a tooth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> fill a tooth. <number>2</number> fill s.t. like a tooth. <i>Gipastáhan na ang lungag sa bangà,</i> They filled the hole in the jar.

<p><form>pasta<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> mixture or<note> of</note> flour or starch and water used as <tr>paste</tr>. <number>2</number> foodstuff pounded or ground until fine and creamy, made into a sauce. <i>Pastang tamátis,</i> Tomato paste. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make <tr>pasta</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> paste with pasta. <i>Pastáhun (ipasta) ku ning ritrátu sa ákung nutbuk,</i> I&apos;ll paste this picture in my notebook.

<p><form>pasta<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. grass with long lanceolate leaves which is used for horse feed.

<p><form>pastang</form> <xr>= <sc>PASKAN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pastidiyar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>discipline</tr>, <tr>train</tr>, break in. <i>Ayaw luagluági ug magpastidiyar ka ug kabáyù,</i> Don&apos;t be lenient when you break in a horse. <i>Ug pastidiyáhun ang mga bátà magtubù nga matinahúrun,</i> Children grow up to be obedient if you discipline them.

<p><form>pastidiyu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bothersome</tr>, <tr>annoying</tr>. <i>Pastidiyu kaáyu ning mga sayup sa tím,</i> These mistakes in the compositions are annoying. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> be bothersome, annoying. <i>Dì makapastidiyu sa maistra ang mga pangutána,</i> Questions won&apos;t annoy the teacher. <i>Aku na say pastidiyúhun ning batáa,</i> This child is going to annoy me again.

<p><form>pastíkum</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the custom of the Roman Catholic church of carrying the image of the Infant Jesus lying on a crib by two acolytes from house to house for people to adore, for which people usually give money as an offering. The <ix>pastíkum</ix> begins on the 25th of December and ends on the 2nd of February. <number>2</number> the words uttered by the acolyte when the image has been kissed.

<p><form>pastilan</form> <ix>short form</ix>: <bx>tilan</bx> <number>1</number> expression of <pb n=745>great worry or grief. <i>Pastilan ang ákung bátà naligsan sa trák,</i> Heavens! My son got run over by a truck! <number>2</number> <i>expression of feigned surprise or concern, with a disdainful tone:</i> what are you worrying so much for? <i>Pastilan, Tiryú, kasayun niánà ug mahadluk kang mubúhat!</i> Goodness, Terio, that&apos;s so easy and you&apos;re scared to do it? <number>2a</number> expression of scorn or derision at s.o. trying to tell a lie. <i>Tilan nímu uy, bísag klárung bakak patuhúun gihápun ta ánà!</i> You sure are s.t.! It&apos;s such an obvious lie and you expect me to believe it! <number>3</number> expression of pain or annoyance. <i>Tilan ning mga batáa, pagkasabaan!</i> My these children, how noisy they are! Pastilang labára sa ákung úlu! Oh! How my head aches! <number>4</number> exclamation of how intense s.t. is. <i>Pastilang gwapáhang bayhána!</i> What a beautiful woman!

<p><form>pastiliríya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>frosting</tr> or decorations on a cake. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> put frosting or decorations on a cake.

<p><form>pastilyas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. pastilles for deworming. <number>2</number> name of various confections cooked, rolled, and sliced into pastille shape. <form>&mdash; dilitsi</form> k.o. sweet made from condensed milk. <form>&mdash; dimani</form> sweet made from peanuts. <form>&mdash; diúbi</form> k.o. sweet made from ground <ix>úbing kinampay</ix>.

<p><form>pastiyurisádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>pasteurized milk</tr>.

<p><form>pastu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pasture</tr>. <i>Túa sa pastu ang báka,</i> The cows are out in the pasture. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> raise animals that are put to pasture, make a cattle farm. <i>Íyang pastúhun ang yútà níya nga pagawpaw,</i> He will transform his barren land into a cattle ranch. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put out to pasture. <i>Ipastu ang kábaw,</i> Put the carabao out to pasture. <form>pastuhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pasture lands</tr>.

<p><form>past&ucaron;r<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>herdsman</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> attend to a herd.

<p><form>past&ucaron;r<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>minister</tr> of a Protestant congregation. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> become a minister.

<p><form>pastúra</form> <pos>n</pos> a shepherd&apos;s play put on in the Christmas season by players going from house to house. It depicts the visit of the shepherds to the Christ Child and consists of song and dance sequences. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> go s.w. to put on the shepherd&apos;s play.

<p><form>pastúris</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>herdsmen</tr>. <number>2</number> participants of a <ix>pastúra</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>PASTÚRA</sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr>

<p><form>pasu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; b8]</itype> commit certain violations in games: get a score of more than the winning number of points and therefore be out of the contest, step on the demarcation line in hopscotch, et al. <i>Mapasu (mupasu) ka na ug mulápas nang ímung puntus sa bayinti únu,</i> You lose if you get more than twenty-one points. <pos>n</pos> violation of this sort.

<p><form>pásu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> walk slowly and deliberately. <i>Mipásu siyag lakaw kay dihay natúlug,</i> He walked slowly because there was s.o. asleep. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> march before a crowd in a ceremony. <i>Mipásu na ang mga intranti sa banggà sa kaanyag,</i> The beauty contestants marched before the judges. <i>Wà kuy sinínà nga ipásu sa gradwisyun,</i> I don&apos;t have a dress to wear when I march in the commencement. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> walk in front and in view of many people as if on parade. <i>Mupásu giyud ta íni kay nagsúgud na ang klási,</i> Now we are going to have to pass in front of the whole class because the class has already started. <pos>a</pos> for one&apos;s walk to be refined and slow, not rough or erratic. <i>Pásu ang linaktan sa rayna,</i> The beauty queen walked elegantly. <pos>n</pos> manner of walking, esp. a graceful walk. <i>Nausab ang pásu sa babáyi nga gitaghúyan,</i> The woman lost her poise when the men whistled at her. <form>pasupásu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> pace to and fro. <i>Nagpasupásu siya samtang nagbatì ang íyang asáwa,</i> He paced to and fro while his wife was in labor.

<p><form>pásù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB126; b4]</itype> <tr>injure s.t. by burning</tr> it or subjecting it to s.t. that gives similar effects. <i>Ang asidu makapásù,</i> Acid can burn you. <i>Napásù ákung tudlù sa tangsi pagbinira sa kubit,</i> I burnt my hand pulling on the nylon rope when I caught a fish. <i>Gipasúan níyag sigarilyu ang ákung áping,</i> He burned my cheek with a cigarette. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>PASU</sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr> <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> burnt part of the skin. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>PASU</sc></xr>, <pos>n</pos>. <number>3</number> in <ix>sungkà</ix>, the hole that is not in use because the player lacks requisite pieces to use it. <form>-an</form> <xr>= <sc>PASÙ</sc>, <bx>3</bx>.</xr>

<p><form>pasugbu</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>SUGBU<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p><form>pasuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> stuff or place s.t. in a small enclosed place. <i>Gidalì níyag pasuk ang sinínà sa bulsíta,</i> She hurriedly put the dress in the paper bag. <i>Paski (paksi) ug gápas ang ilung sa minatay,</i> Stuff cotton into the nose of the corpse. <form>paskanan</form> <pos>n</pos> place where things are stuck or dumped into.

<p><form>pásuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>peg</tr>, <tr>short stake</tr> to which animals can be tethered. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put a stake in the ground. <number>2</number> <itype>[a1]</itype> use, make into a short stake.

<p><form>pasul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fishing line</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain a fishing line. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> catch with a fishing line. <i>Sayun ra paslun nang isdáa,</i> It&apos;s easy to catch that k.o. fish with a hook and line. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> go fishing with a hook and line. <form>pamaslanan, pamaslánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fishing <pb n=746>place. <number>2</number> fishing boat. <form>pinaslan</form> <pos>n</pos> fish caught with a hook and line.

<p><form>pasulábi</form> (from <ix>sulábi</ix>) <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>LABI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pasúlit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>test</tr> or <tr>exam</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> hold or give a test. <i>Ang gubyirnu magpasúlit pára sa mga aplikanti,</i> The government will hold a test for the applicants.

<p><form>pasumánu</form> <xr>= <sc>PASAMÁNU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pasunding</form> <pos>n</pos> civic or military <tr>parade</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> parade. <i>Mipasunding sa íyang alimpatakan ang mga nindut níyang kaági,</i> He could see the memorable experiences of his past parading before his mind&apos;s eye. <i>Ang mga bisíta gipasundíngan sa Rusya sa íyang mga rákit,</i> Russia paraded her rockets before the visitors.

<p><form>pasung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cockscomb</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> trim a cockscomb. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> grow a cockscomb. <i>Wà pa ang mga pisù mamasung,</i> The chicks have not developed combs yet. <form>pinasngan</form> <pos>n</pos> rooster with a trimmed cockscomb.

<p><form>pásung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>trough</tr>, originally made of a hollowed-out log, but now of anything fashioned into a long but rather shallow open vessel, used as manger or for pounding stripped palm trunks. <number>2</number> a unit of dry measure for unhusked rice more or less equal to &frac57; of a bushel, with a good deal of local variation. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> make into a manger or trough. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>PÁSUNG</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p><form>pas-ung</form> <xr>= <sc>PASGUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pasunud</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>SUNUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>paswurd</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>password</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> have or use as a password.

<p><form>pasyinsiya</form> <xr>= <sc>PASINSIYA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pasyinti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>patient</tr>, sick person. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> have a patient. <number>2</number> <itype>[B125]</itype> be s.o.&apos;s patient.

<p><form>pasyunarya</form> <xr>= <sc>SAYÚTI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pasyun syú</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fashion show</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> hold a fashion show. <i>Nakapasyun syú na sila,</i> They have had their fashion show. <number>2</number> parade oneself to show off a dress and other personal apparel. <i>Mupasyun syú nà siya basta makabag-ug sinínà,</i> She parades herself around whenever she has a new dress.

<p><form>pat</form>. <pos>n</pos> abbreviation for <ix>patrulman</ix> &lsquo;patrolman&rsquo;.

<p><form>páta</form> <xr>= <sc>PALATA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pátà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> fall with a plop. <i>Mupátà ang tái sa báka,</i> The bowel movements of a cow fall with a plop.

<p><form>patad, pátad<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>bet</tr>, place a bet. <i>Diyútay ray nagpatad sa ugis,</i> Only a few people bet on the white cock. <i>Ayaw ipatad ang tanan mung kwarta,</i> Do not bet all of your money. <pos>n</pos> bet, betting. <i>Way pátad ning duláa,</i> No betting this game.

<p><form>pátad<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> pair off in a contest or in love. <i>Nagkapátad ang duha ka pulitiku sa miáging piliay,</i> The two politicians were pitted against each other in the last election. <i>Patárun ta ang átung isig ka bátà,</i> Let us match your daughter and my son. <i>Ayaw kug ipátad ug dakù,</i> Don&apos;t pair me up with s.o. big. <pos>a</pos> evenly matched, well paired off. <i>Pátad kaáyu ang duha ka igtatarì,</i> The two cocks were evenly matched. <pos>n</pos> action of matching, pairing off.

<p><form>pátad<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); c1]</itype> lie <tr>scattered</tr> all over a place, such as things for sale, things in disarray, dead bodies, litter. <i>Mipátad ang patay nga Bitkung sa pilapilan,</i> The bodies of the Vietcong lay scattered over the rice fields. <i>Nagpátad ang tinda apan mínus ang pumapálit,</i> There were things for sale displayed everywhere but there were few buyers.

<p><form>patadyung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. loose wrap-around skirt worn overlapping in the front, made of hand-woven cloth together with a native blouse (<ix>kimúna</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear a <ix>patadyung</ix>, make into a <ix>patadyung</ix>.

<p><form>pátag</form> <pos>a</pos> for an area to be <tr>flat</tr> and <tr>level</tr>. <i>Pátag ang ibabaw ánang búkid,</i> The top of that hill is flat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12]</itype> for an area to become level, cause it to be so. <i>Patágun ang yútà úsà gam-ang pilapilan,</i> They level the land before they make it into rice paddies. <i>Patágun ku nang likud sa buktut ug magbinúang siya,</i> I&apos;ll flatten that hunchback&apos;s back if he makes trouble. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> flat level land, <tr>plains</tr>. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> plains. <form>kina-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> place that is most level.

<p><form>pátak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; b6]</itype> for a large number of things to be scattered over an area. <i>Daghang bitúun nga nagpátak sa lángit,</i> A myriad of stars dotting the sky. <form>patakpatak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B6; a]</itype> be scattered or strewn over an area. Nagpatakpatak ang tái sa bátà, The baby&apos;s stools were scattered all over the place. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB6; a1]</itype> break, tear to pieces, get broken, torn to pieces. <i>Nagpatakpatak na sa katagù ang ákung sinínà,</i> My dress is almost tattered into pieces, the fabric is so weak. <i>Patakpatakun ku ning hunub nga kúlun,</i> I&apos;ll break this leaky pot into pieces. <number>3</number> produce a pitter-pattering sound like falling rain. <pos>n</pos> pitter-patter of falling rain.

<p><form>pat-ak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>splotch</tr>, spatter all over s.t. <i>Nagpat-ak ang buling sa salug,</i> The floor is splotched with dirt. <i>Ayaw pat-áka (ipat-ak) ang ímung pagpintal,</i> Don&apos;t paint so that it splotches all over everything. <form>pat-akpat-ak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do at random and irregularly with blank spaces in between. <i>Nagpat-akpat-ak ang ap-ap dihà sa íyang dughan,</i> Her breasts had fungus splotches all over them. <i>Ayawg <pb n=747>pat-akpat-aka (ipat-akpat-ak) ang pag-iskuyla arun dì ka hagbúngun,</i> If you do not attend classes on a regular basis you will be dropped.

<p><form>patal</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>fatal</tr>, usually said of a wound or blow. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a]</itype> <tr>fatal</tr>.

<p><form>patálas</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>knife</tr> or any sharp instrument used as a weapon (slang). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a1]</itype> stab with a knife. <i>Namatay ang buguy nga gipatálas,</i> The ruffian who was stabbed died.

<p><form>patánì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. chicken which has dark-colored meat and bones. <number>2</number> a very dark-skinned person. <form>gíra &mdash;</form> <number>1</number> <tr>civil war</tr>. <number><corr sic="3">2</corr></number> all-out quarrel among people residing together. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be dark-skinned.

<p><form>patánì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lima bean</tr>: <bio>Phaseolus lunatus</bio>.

<p><form>pátas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; b5]</itype> <tr>even up</tr> a score, debt, wrong. <i>Nagkapátas ang duha ka tím,</i> The two teams were tied. <i>Mapátas na gánì átung iskur dì na ku mudúlà,</i> I&apos;ll quit as soon as the score is tied. <i>Patásun (patásan) ku giyud ang insultu,</i> I&apos;ll get even for the insult. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> match, be the equal. <i>Way makapátas nímu sa ímung kamaldítu,</i> There is no one as mean as you are. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> even in score. <i>Pátas ang ílang puntus sa tungàtúngà,</i> Their score was even at half time. <number>2</number> of equal ability or achievement. <i>Pátas giyud ang duha ka manuk,</i> The two fighting cocks are exactly even in ability. <number>3</number> have an equal share of s.t. unpleasant. <i>Pátas tang tanan. Púlus gikasab-an,</i> We&apos;re even. We were all scolded. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> for a person who has suffered to harm others, innocent or not, so that they too will suffer as he has. <i>Mamátas na lang ku kay gidaugdáug kug maáyu,</i> I&apos;ve been oppressed enough. Now I will raise hell for everybody.

<p><form>patátas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. flaky brown cracker. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> serve, have <ix>patátas</ix>.

<p><form>patátas<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>potatoes</tr>.

<p><form>pataw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>buoy</tr> tied to s.t.: buoy used to hold up fishing nets, used to mark a fish trap in the sea, used to mark an unattended fishing line tied to a rope with a harpoon (<ix>paladyaw</ix>) to hold the fish back, et al. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> use a float, fasten a float to a rope. <i>Ang ámung púkut gipatawan ug gúma,</i> We tied rubber floats for our fishing net. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> place a <ix>pataw</ix> has been put. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>PATAW</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p><form>patay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b7]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>kill</tr>, <tr>slay</tr>. <i>Dì makapatay ning sakíta nímu,</i> This sickness won&apos;t kill you. <i>Patyun ku siya,</i> I&apos;ll kill him. <number>2</number> put an end to s.t. as if killing it. <i>Ang pagkapakyas makapatay sa kadásig,</i> Failure can destroy one&apos;s enthusiasm. <i>Adtu sa Kamara Báha patya ang balaudnun,</i> The bill will be killed in the Lower House. <i>Angay patyun nang balitáa,</i> That news should be suppressed. <number>3</number> shut off an engine, light; put out a fire. <i>Patya nang sugà,</i> Turn off the lights. <number>3a</number> neutralize chemicals or colors. <i>Putì ang ipatay niánang pula nga kulur,</i> Neutralize that red color with white. <number>3b</number> consume time. <i>Maáyu ning duláa ipatayg úras,</i> This game is good for killing time. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> whittle s.t. down to reduce its size or smoothen it. <i>Patyi ang ngilit sa lamísa,</i> Round off the edges of the table. <number>5</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> be all tails in a game of tossing coins. <i>Mapatay na ni rung antúga,</i> This toss will be all tails. <number>6</number> in a game of <ix>sungkà</ix>, drop the last stone in an empty hole. <number>7</number> in set phrases: <form>a &mdash; sa báhù</form> <itype>[A2P; a1]</itype> mask a pungent smell. <i>Lamas ang ipatay sa báhù sa isdang langsa,</i> Spices can cover the fishy taste of fish. <form>&mdash; ug hálas</form> <form>b1</form> for men to urinate. <form>b2</form> for men to masturbate. <form>c &mdash; sa kabugnaw</form> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> heat water until it becomes tepid. <i>Patya úsà ang kabugnaw sa túbig nga idígù sa bátà,</i> Warm the baby&apos;s water before you bathe him. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dead</tr>. <i>Patay na si Tátay,</i> My father is dead. <number>2</number> for s.t. to have been <tr>killed</tr>, <tr>deadened</tr>. <i>Patay ang ákung pagláum,</i> I have no more hope. <i>Patay ang makina,</i> The engine is dead. <number>3</number> for coins to come out tails. <number>4</number> for the last stone to have been dropped in an empty hole in a game of <ix>sungkà</ix>. <number>5</number> <tr>new moon</tr>. <i>Himatayun ang buwan run. Dì na madúgay patay na,</i> We are in the last quarter now. Pretty soon it will be the new moon (no moon). <number>6</number> for nits to be hatched (lit. for the eggshell to be dead). <number>7</number> be head over heels in love. <i>Patay siya nákù,</i> She&apos;s head over heels in love with me. <number>8</number> <ix>in phrases</ix>: <formx>&mdash; ug dugù</formx> do s.t. in an unenthusiastic way. <i>Hinay siyang mangulitáwu kay patayg dugù. Kinahanglan hulhúgun,</i> He isn&apos;t doing a very good job in courting the girl. He is unenthusiastic and needs prodding. <form>&mdash; gútum</form> poor as church mice. <i>Asa gud sila makapaiskuyla sa ílang mga bátang patay gútum man nà sila?</i> How could they send their children to school when they are poor as church mice? <form>&mdash; nga irù</form> <tr>miserable</tr>, <tr>wretched</tr>. <i>Patayng irù ang táwung way kwarta,</i> A man who is penniless is miserable. <form>&mdash; ug lamì</form> having excessive sexual desires. <i>Patay kaáyu ug lamì nang bayhána maung kuyawng pangasaw-un,</i> It&apos;s dangerous to marry that woman because she has excessive sexual desires. <form>&mdash; ug limud</form> an <tr>inveterate liar</tr>. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> intense action of killing. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for several killings to be going on. <number>2</number> <itype>[C; a12]</itype> fight it out with killing. <i>Patáyun nátù ang átung dúmut,</i> We&apos;ll settle our hatred by fighting it out to the death. <form>lunud, <pb n=748>lúnud &mdash;</form> <tr>die-hard</tr>, <tr>inveterate</tr>. <i>Lúnud pátay nga sugarul,</i> An inveterate gambler. <form>-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C23; c6]</itype> for roosters to fight it out to the death. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> play <ix>patáyan</ix>. <pos>n</pos> game of betting on heads or tails played by twirling a coin. <form>pataypátay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> do s.t. intensely. <i>Pataypatáyun (ipataypátay) nákù ning ákung láwas sa trabáhu arun ku mabúhì,</i> I wear myself out working just to live. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> do, act slowly without energy or enthusiasm. <i>Ug magpataypátay ka, mabyaan ka sa trák,</i> If you take so long, you&apos;ll miss the bus. <number>3</number> <itype>[AP]</itype> pretend to be poor when one is rich, be a nobody when one is s.o. <i>Nagpapataypátay nang tawhána apan unásis diay,</i> That man acts like a nobody but actually he&apos;s an Onassis. <form>patyanay, pinatyánay</form> <xr>= <sc>PÁTAY</sc>.</xr> <form>palatyanan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> place s.t. is killed. <form>&mdash; sa utug</form> girl used to satisfy one&apos;s sexual desires (lit. s.t. to kill one&apos;s erection on). <number>2</number> total part of the body, place in the body which will cause instant death if struck. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to kill. <i>Maáyung pamatay sa kágaw kanang sabúna,</i> That soap is a good germicide.

<p><form>pathaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> do s.t. suddenly without sufficient reason, warning, or propriety. <i>Mipathaw lag katáwa ang búang,</i> The madman suddenly burst into laughter.

<p><form>pat huldir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pot holder</tr>.

<p><form>pati<sub>1</sub> ang <r>[<ix>noun</ix>], [<ix>nom.</ix>]</r></form> it happened to [so-and-so] as well. <i>Gibunù tanan. Pati ang mga bátà,</i> They were all killed, including the children. <i>Pati aku naapil sa kasábà,</i> I was included in the scolding, too.

<p><form>pati<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>SALAMPÁTI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pátid</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>kick at</tr>. <i>Kusug mupátid ang plíyir sa sákir,</i> A soccer player kicks hard. <i>Patíri ang itlug sa kuntra,</i> Kick your opponent in the balls. <number>2</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> move s.t. s.w. by kicking it. <i>Ipátid ra ákung sinílas diri,</i> Kick my slippers over to me. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>kick</tr>. <number>2</number> kick of drinks (humorous). <i>Pwirtig pátid ning tubáa dà,</i> This toddy packs quite a kick. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> kick with intensity. <i>Nagpamatid siya sa kasukù,</i> He was kicking in anger. <form>patidpátid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> go on foot in a leisurely manner. <i>Magpatidpátid lang ku inigpaúlì,</i> I&apos;ll walk home leisurely. <form>&mdash; sa láta</form> <xr>= <sc>PATIDPÁTID</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr> <number>2</number> play <ix>patidpátid</ix>. <pos>n</pos> children&apos;s game of undoing knotted rubberbands with the feet. The one who separates one from the rest wins all of them.

<p><form>patig</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>army fatigues</tr>. <number>2</number> colored olive drab. <i>Karsunsilyung patig,</i> Olive-drab undershorts. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> wear fatigues.

<p><form>pátik<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>tattoo</tr>, mark with a brand. <i>Ákù siyang gipatíkan ug agila,</i> I tattooed an eagle on him. <number>1a</number> implant kisses. <i>Patíkan kug hawuk ang ímung dughan,</i> I&apos;ll cover your breasts with kisses. <number>2</number> <tr>print</tr> or <tr>publish</tr>. <i>Napátik ang íyang hulagway sa mantaláan,</i> Her picture was published in the newspaper. <number>2a</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> be fixed indelibly s.w. <i>Napátik sa ákung kasingkásing ang ímung pangalyúpù,</i> Your pleas have been imprinted in my heart. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> implement used for marking animals. <number>2</number> <tr>tattoo</tr>, <tr>brand</tr>. <i>May patik nga iks sa samput,</i> There is an X branded on the rump. <number>3</number> explanatory annotation on a land title that it has been made collateral for a loan. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> be so annotated. <i>Napatikan na giyud ang ákung titulu,</i> I finally had to borrow on my land. (Lit. My land has finally gotten an annotation.) <form>-ánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>printing press</tr>. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> one who has been tattooed, esp. ex-convicts. <form>mag-r-(&rarr;), mag-l-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> publisher, printer. <number>2</number> one who brands or tattooes.

<p><form>pátik<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> terrific in execution, appearance (slang). <i>Pátik kaáyu siya sa íyang amirikána dà,</i> He sure looks terrific with his coat. <i>Pátik sag sinayawan nang bayhána dà,</i> That girl can really dance.

<p><form>patikan</form> <xr>= <sc>ANÍBUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>patilya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sideburns</tr>, growth of hair next to ears. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> wear, leave sideburns.

<p><form>pátin</form> <pos>n</pos> paten, the plate used to hold the host in the mass. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> use as a paten.

<p><form>pating</form> <pos>n</pos> general name for small sharks. <form>&mdash; nga bungul</form> <number>1</number> k.o. shark. <number>2</number> deaf as a door post (lit. like a <ix>pating</ix>). <pos>a</pos> unconcerned about what is right or wrong (from the notion that one acting this way is being deaf to what people say just as the pating is called <ix>bungul</ix> &lsquo;deaf&rsquo;). <i>Pating giyud nang batáa. Dì giyud magtamud bísag unsáug pína,</i> That child doesn&apos;t care to be good. He won&apos;t obey no matter how much you tell him. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; c]</itype> not give a damn about whether an action is right or not. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1346; c16]</itype> be deaf to s.t. <i>Nagpapating lang siya sa ákung pagpakiluuy,</i> He was deaf to my pleas. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> do s.t. regarded as wrong no matter what people think. <i>Nagpapating ang bigáun bísag bulg&acaron;r sa kadaghánan,</i> The over sexed woman didn&apos;t care what people said any more. She went right ahead even though everybody knew about it. <form>patingpáting</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b(1)]</itype> ignore, pretend not to hear. <i>Ayúhag pamínaw kining ákung súgù. Ayaw kug patingpatíngi,</i> Listen carefully to what I tell you to do. Don&apos;t just ignore me.

<p><form>patínga</form> <pos>n</pos> make a <tr>down payment</tr> on s.t. bought or ordered. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make a down payment. <i>Gipatingáhan ug singku písus ang <pb n=749>ákung pinatahì,</i> I put down five pesos as deposit on the trousers as I was having made.

<p><form>patinti<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> container for measuring liquids, esp. palm toddy, that has been registered and licensed. <form>-ru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> palm toddy dealer. <number>2</number> any <tr>merchant</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> become a dealer in palm toddy.

<p><form>patinti<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>patent</tr>. <i>May patinti siya paggamà ánang klasíha sa dáru,</i> He has a patent to manufacture that k.o. plow. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> issue a patent.

<p><form>patipati</form> <pos>n</pos> weed of waste places: <bio>Acalypha indica</bio>.

<p><form>pátirn</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dress pattern</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> make a dress pattern.

<p><form>pátir nustir</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>Lord&apos;s Prayer</tr>.

<p><form>patis</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> liquified preserved fish paste. <number>2</number> <tr>soy sauce</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number><note>1</note></number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make <ix>patis</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b]</itype> add <ix>patis</ix> to s.t.

<p><form>patriyúta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>patriot</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be a patriot.

<p><form>patr&ucaron;l</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>police patrol</tr>, esp. in vehicles or boats. <number>2</number> <tr>boy scout patrol</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>PATRULYA</sc>.</xr> <form>-man</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>patrolman</tr>. <i>Patrulman Ruhíru,</i> Patrolman Rogero.

<p><form>patrulya</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> go on <tr>patrol</tr>. <i>Gipatrulyahan (gipatrulyáhan) sa mga Písi ang mga prisintu sa pag-iliksiyun,</i> The P.C. patrolled the precincts during the elections. <number>2</number> go out for a walk. <i>Magpatrulya ta sa plása,</i> Let&apos;s go out for a walk to the plaza. <pos>n</pos> <tr>patrol</tr>.

<p><form>patrun, patr&ucaron;n</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>patron saint</tr> of a place or occupation. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; c1]</itype> take a saint as one&apos;s patron. <form>-a(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> female patron saint. &dagger;

<p><form>patsáda</form> <pos>a</pos> good to look at, good in quality. <i>Kapatsáda ning batáa,</i> What a pretty child. <i>Patsáda silag baul,</i> They have a first class farm. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a12]</itype> be, become good. <i>Mapatsáda ang ímung tíngug ug makakaun kag úlud,</i> Your voice improves if you eat worms.

<p><form>patsi</form> <pos>n</pos> medicinal plaster for headaches or muscular pains. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> patch s.t. by laying it on top. <i>Ang buslut gipatsíhag gúma,</i> The hole was patched up with rubber. <number>2</number> wear a medicinal plaster. <i>Nagpatsi ku kay labad ákung úlu,</i> I am wearing a medicinal plaster for my headache.

<p><form>patsing</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>cement</tr> binding. <number>2</number> decorative patching on material. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> bind stones with cement. <i>Patsíngi ang batu sa paril arun dì matumpag,</i> Bind the stones forming the wall with cement so it can&apos;t collapse. <number>2</number> put a decorative patching on s.t.

<p><form>pátu</form> <pos>n</pos> general name for <tr>ducks</tr>.

<p><form>pátù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> pair s.o. teasingly with s.o. else. <i>Kinsay nagpátù nímu kang Pidru?</i> Who wanted to pair you off with Pedro?

<p><form>pat-ud</form> <xr>= <sc>PAT-UL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>patuk</form> <pos>a</pos> having a protruding bulge in the front or back of the head. <i>Patuk ug agtang,</i> Having a bulging forehead. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26]</itype> for the front or back of the head to protrude. <i>Mapatuk ang úlu sa bátà ug sigíhag patakílid,</i> The child&apos;s head will develop a bulge if he is always put down on his side.

<p><form>pátul</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>fit</tr> characterized by convulsions and foaming of the mouth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B246; a4]</itype> suffer a <tr>seizure</tr> of this sort. <form>-l-un</form> <pos>n</pos> one who is subject to these seizures.

<p><form>pat-ul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> put s.t. where it can be chopped, hit, or broken. <i>Kining tadtaran mauy pat-úlan inigtadtad sa bukug,</i> Put the bone on this chopping block, when you chop up the bones. <number>2</number> put s.t. on top of s.t. for a short period of time. <i>Íyang gipat-úlan ug ínit nga hampul ang íyang bun-ug,</i> He put a hot compress on his bruises. <number>3</number> put the blame on s.o. <i>Íyang gipat-ul nákù ang tanang salà,</i> She put all the blame on me. <form>-ánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chopping block</tr>.

<p><form>pat-ul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2N; cN]</itype> match s.o. with s.o. else with the purpose of marrying him or her off. <i>Ngánung ipamat-ul man nímu nákù nang tiguwánga,<note>should be ?</note></i> Why are you trying to pawn that old geezer off on me?

<p><form>patúla</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. squash: <bio>Luffa acutangula</bio>. <number>2</number> by extension, name also given to the <ix>sikwa</ix>, a similar vegetable.

<p><form>patung</form> <xr>= <sc>BUTUNG<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pátung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> place s.t. on top of s.t. else. <i>Ang lángaw nga makapatung sa kábaw magpakakábaw sad,</i> A fly that alights on a carabao thinks he, too, is a carabao (becomes swell-headed). <i>Patúngi ang mga papil arun dì manglúpad,</i> Put a weight on the papers so they won&apos;t get blown away. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pile</tr>. <i>Natumpag ang pátung sa mga diláta,</i> The cans that were stacked up neatly came tumbling down. <number>2</number> <tr>interest</tr> on money. <i>Pilay pátung sa kwartang ímung gihulaman?</i> How much interest did they charge on the money you borrowed? <form>patungpatung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB6; c1]</itype> <tr>pile</tr>, be <tr>piled up</tr>, <tr>accumulated</tr>. <i>Nagpatungpatung<note> ` splot?</note> ang ákung trabáhu, maung sígi kug ubirtayim,</i> My work is piling up, so I keep having to work overtime. <form>hi-/ha-(&rarr;), hi-/ha-</form> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <number>1</number> be at the top of s.t. <i>Paghipátung níla sa bungtud,</i> When they reached the top of the mountain. <number>2</number> reach a certain height of affluence. <i>Nahipátung ku sa kahamugáway kay nakadaug kus swipstiks,</i> I was on easy street when I won the sweepstakes.

<p><form>patùpátù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> compose lines, extemporaneously, to form a rhyme. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> fabricate insidious gossip against others. <i>Maáyu <pb n=750>kang mupatùpátù sa mga butang nga wà mahímù sa ímung isig ka táwu,</i> You are good at inventing gossip about other people, things they couldn&apos;t possibly have done. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> rhymes composed extemporaneously. <i>Sa balítaw ang ditsu patùpátù,</i> In the courtship poems, the verses are extemporaneous. <number>2</number> fabrication made up against s.o.

<p><form>paturágas</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>*TURÁGAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>patúru</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>TÚRU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>patyu, patyù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> open, round booth built in the center of a plaza. <number>2</number> patio, grounds enclosed within a building.

<p><form>paud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> <number>1</number> put s.t. against or over s.t. hard to steady it. <i>Pad-i ang libru sa ímung pagsulat,</i> Write on top of the book. <number>2</number> press s.t. against s.t. hard with one&apos;s weight. <i>Gitabangan nílag paud ang búang sa bungbung,</i> They all pressed the lunatic against the wall. <i>Napaud ku sa pusti pagtulud niya,</i> I was knocked against the post when he pushed me. <number>2a</number> press part of the body against s.t. <i>Íyang gipaud ang íyang dughan sa ákung likud,</i> She pressed her breast against my back. <number>2b</number> fix the sight on s.t. <i>Gipaud ku sa kisami ang ákung mga mata,</i> I fixed my eyes to the ceiling. <number>3</number> <itype>[b]</itype> put the blame on s.o. <i>Ngánung aku may pad-an sa ímung salà,<note>should be ?</note></i> Why do you put the blame on me for what you did? <form>pad-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> buffer for s.t. one writes or applies pressure on.

<p><form>páuk</form> <xr>= <sc>PÁYUK</sc>, <pos>a</pos>, <i>v1.</i></xr>

<p><form>paun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bait</tr>. <form>subad nga way &mdash;</form> butt in on a conversation where one has no business doing so (lit. bite when there is no bait). <i>Dílì ikaw ang ákung gisultíhan. Ngánung musubad ka man dihà nga way paun,<note>should be ?</note></i> I wasn&apos;t talking to you. Why do you butt in? <form>subad ug way &mdash;</form> believe s.t. just because s.o. said it (lit. bit an unbaited hook). <i>Dì kakumidiyáhan siya kay musubad ug way paun,</i> You can&apos;t kid him because he will take you literally. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>bait s.t.</tr> <i>Gipan-an ku ang ilagà ug pán,</i> I baited the rats with bread. <i>Kwarta ang ipaun sa kiriwan,</i> Use money to lure the thief. <number>1a</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> make, use as bait. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> use s.o. else as a means to deflect danger from oneself. <i>Ipaun man lang ta nímu sa piligru,</i> You are exposing me to danger to protect yourself.

<p><form>paúruy</form> <pos>n</pos> liquor distilled from nipa or coconut toddy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make <ix>paúruy</ix>.

<p><form>paus, páus</form> <pos>a</pos> severely <tr>hoarse</tr>. <i>Páus kaáyu ákung tíngug sa pagkinanta,</i> My voice is very hoarse from singing so much. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> get severely hoarse.

<p><form>páw</form> <xr>= <sc>PÁLAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>páwà</form> <pos>n</pos> size of area cleared by weeding or plowing. <i>Dakug páwà ang ákung gisuhúlan paggúna,</i> The man whom I hired to weed covered quite a large area.

<p><form>paw-ak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab7]</itype> take a large part or chunk off of s.t. <i>Ang mga ungguy dakug gipaw-ak sa kamaisan,</i> The monkeys consumed a large part of the corn in the field. <pos>n</pos> chunk taken off of s.t.

<p><form>paw-ang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>gap</tr> between things that are normally solid or close to each other. <i>Daghang paw-ang ang pinugsan sa mais,</i> The way they planted the corn the plants are too far apart. <number>2</number> distance in time. <i>Dakù ang paw-ang sa idad sa magtiáyun,</i> The couple are quite far apart in age. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <tr>have spaces</tr> in between. <i>Ang bungbung mupaw-ang (mapaw-ang) ug dílì pakupsun ang káhuy,</i> Cracks will develop in the wall if the wood is not aged beforehand. <i>Nagpaw-ang ang pultahan maung nakasulud ang ilagà,</i> The door was ajar and so a mouse managed to get in. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; c1]</itype> <tr>miss</tr>, <tr>skip</tr>. <i>Nakapaw-ang siyag usa ka linya,</i> He skipped a line.

<p><form>pawdir milk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>powdered milk</tr>.

<p><form>pawíkan<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sea turtle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[4b4]</itype><note>4b4 typo?</note> be affected by a sea turtle&mdash;i.e. be unable to come apart in intercourse (from the k.o. sorcery where the penis of a sea turtle is hidden in the clothing of an adulterer so that he can not disengage when he has intercourse). <i>Wà kunu mag-úkang ang mga mananapaw. Gipawíkan (gipawikánan) tingáli,</i> They say the adulterers could not come apart. No doubt they were victims of sea turtle sorcery. <form>-in-</form> <pos>a</pos> crying with a profuse flow of tears (like a sea turtle is said to do). <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to cry easily. <i>Kadaghánan sa mga babáyi pawikánun,</i> Most women are crybabies. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get so one cries at the slightest provocation.

<p><form>pawíkan<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>GUYUNGGUYUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>páwir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> be given a power of attorney. <form>&mdash; ab aturni</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>power of attorney</tr>.

<p><form>páwis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shark fins</tr>.

<p><form>pawla</form> <xr>= <sc>PALWA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pawpaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab7]</itype> scoop s.t. off the surface of s.t. to remove it. <i>Pawpáwa ang nanglútaw nga buwà sa tubà,</i> Scoop off the foam from the toddy. <i>Pawpáwi ang kan-un úsà sukára,</i> Remove the upper part of the rice before you serve it. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the sweet upper layer of the surface of coconut meat, scraped off from the rest. <number>2</number> container for liquids made of approximately half a coconut shell (shallower than the <ix>húngut</ix> and deeper than the <ix>payà</ix>).

<p><form>pawu-</form> <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>PALU-</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>páwud</form> <xr>= <sc>PÁLUD</sc>.</xr> <form>palawran</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>PÁLUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pawug</form> <xr>= <sc>KAGWANG</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr>

<pb n=751>

<p><form>páwul</form> <pos>n</pos> foul committed in sports. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> commit a foul, in sports. <i>Giwarníngan ang buksidur kay gipáwul níya ang kuntra,</i> The boxer was warned because he committed a foul against his opponent. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> not be able to do what one had planned to do. <i>Napáwul ang ámung ikskursiyun tungud sa dautang panahun,</i> We had to call off our excursion because of the bad weather. <form>dúbul &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> double foul, the situation in which two players bump into each other, such that both have technically committed a foul. <form>&mdash; láyin</form> <pos>n</pos> foul line. <form>&mdash; syát</form> <pos>n</pos> foul shot, given to a player against whom a foul has been committed.

<p><form>pawundirs dí</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Founder&apos;s Day celebration</tr> in a private school. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> celebrate a school&apos;s Founder&apos;s Day.

<p><form>pawuntin</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fountain</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>fountain pen</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> make a fountain. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> use a fountain pen. <form>&mdash; pin</form> <tr>fountain pen</tr>.

<p><form>pay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pie</tr>. <form>pig &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> pie made of stale crackers with pork fat and onions.

<p><form>payà</form> <pos>n</pos> shallow bowl or scoop made of a third of a coconut shell. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> make or use a coconut shell as plate or bowl. <i>Magpayà mi sa ámù kay wà man miy plátu,</i> We use coconut shell plates because we don&apos;t have dishes.

<p><form>payadpayad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be <tr>unsteady</tr>, <tr>staggering</tr> in one&apos;s walk. <i>Nagpayadpayad siya human sa dúgay níyang paglubug sa banig,</i> She was unsteady on her feet because she had lain in bed for a long time.

<p><form>payag</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hut</tr>, small house constructed of light materials. <form>may táwu na ang &mdash;</form> for a girl to have a sweetheart. <i>Way tsans ang ímung gugma kaníya kay may táwu na ang payag,</i> You don&apos;t stand a chance with her because she already has a beau. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> make a hut.

<p><form>payakpak</form> <pos>a</pos> for the stomach to be so empty as to sag and form a hollow on the sides. <i>Payakpak kaáyug tiyan ang bábuy nga wà hipasáwi,</i> The pig has a hollow stomach because they forgot to feed it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)N]</itype> for the stomach to be, become sagging inwards. <i>Namayakpak ang ímung tiyan,</i> Your ribs are sticking out (lit. your stomach is hollow).

<p><form>payanpayan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> do s.t. half-heartedly or do s.t. with just enough motion to give the appearance of working. <i>Gipayanpayanan lang ang pagdáru maung wà mahuman,</i> He didn&apos;t put any effort into his plowing, so it never got done.

<p><form>payas</form> <pos>a</pos> for a pig&apos;s abdomen to be thin, not filled. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be thin, not filled. <i>Ang bábuyng dílì maáyung mukáun magpayas lang ang tiyan,</i> A pig that doesn&apos;t eat well has a sunken stomach.

<p><form>payásu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>clown</tr>, <tr>jester</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; a12]</itype> play the part of a clown. <i>Mangítà ku ug mupayásu sa dráma,</i> I&apos;ll look for a person who will act as a clown in the play. <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> act, dress, speak like a clown.

<p><form>payat</form> <pos>a</pos> very meager and small in amount. <i>Alang kaníya payat kaáyu ang duha ka gatus nga gastúhun sa usa ka adlaw,</i> For him it is chicken feed to spend two hundred pesos in one day.

<p><form>páyaw</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. bamboo raft used in fishing, used to attract fish. It is left in deep waters with weighted coconut fronds suspended from it, on which algae develop and attract fish which can then be caught with a net. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make a <ix>páyaw</ix>. <xr><sc>paN-</sc></xr> <pos>n</pos> fishing with a <ix>páyaw</ix>.

<p><form>paybut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> in basketball, for a player to pivot on one of his feet. <i>Mipaybut únà siya sa wà pa musyát arun maw&amacrgra; ang gwardiya,</i> He pivoted before shooting the ball to give him a clear shot. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>TSINDYING</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>payhag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> destroy s.t. by knocking it to pieces, consume or scatter s.t. as though destroyed. <i>Ang bumba mipayhag sa mga balay,</i> The bomb destroyed the houses. <i>Tiradur ang ipayhag sa balay sa putyúkan,</i> Smash the beehive with a slingshot.

<p><form>payhaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a characteristic shout or cry in calling s.o. at a distance. <number>2</number> a shout or cry to ease the tightness in the chest due to panting, uttered esp. when one climbs a steep hill. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> let out this sort of shout, calling s.o. at a distance or to ease up shortness of breath. <i>Pamináwa náay nagpayhaw (nagpamayhaw) sa píkas buntud,</i> Listen. S.o. is yelling on the other side of the hill.

<p><form>payì</form> <pos>a</pos> lame from having a defect in the articulation of the bones of the foot or arms. <i>Si Ingkar magtakiang paglakaw kay payì,</i> Encar limps when she walks because she is lame. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> get a dislocation and thus become lame. <i>Napayì siya sa íyang pagkahúlug,</i> She was crippled when she fell down.

<p><form>payib kúlum</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fifth column</tr>.

<p><form>payib pinggir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>masturbate</tr> (slang). <i>Payib pinggíra (ipayib pinggir) kun muutug,</i> Masturbate when it erects.

<p><form>payil<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> pile of mahjong pieces from which the hand is drawn. <form>&mdash; nga ininsik</form> Chinese way of piling mahjong pieces, 9 double decks and 16 single decks. <form>&mdash; sa búlak</form> the pieces on the right hand side of a player&apos;s pile stacked in pairs. How many pairs are in the <ix>payil sa búlak</ix> depends on the number <pb n=752>rolled on the dice at the beginning of the game. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> pile the mahjong pieces.

<p><form>payil<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>file papers</tr> and the like. <i>Ipáyil kini sa a,</i> File this under a. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>file a complaint</tr> in court for an offense or misdeed. <i>Ipáyil ku ang kíha ngadtu sa hípi,</i> I&apos;ll file the complaint with the chief of police. <pos>n</pos> file in which s.t. is kept.

<p><form>payin tri</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pine tree</tr>.

<p><form>payir</form> <number>1</number> <ix>a command to commence firing:</ix> fire! <number>2</number> <i>a signal to start doing s.t.:</i> come on, go ahead (colloquial). <i>Sigi, payir, sugdan na nátug inum nà,</i> Come on, let&apos;s go. Let&apos;s start drinking. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> have sexual intercourse. <i>Payri siya kanúnay arun dì ka awáyun,</i> Have frequent intercourse with her so she won&apos;t quarrel with you.

<p><form>payir tri</form> <xr>= <sc>ARBUL<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>payit</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>boxing</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>sexual intercourse</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> fight in a boxing event. <i>Mupáyit si Balug karung Sabadu,</i> Balug will fight this Saturday. <number>1a</number> have a fist fight. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> have sexual intercourse. <i>Dílì siya pilian. Mupayit bísan ug tigúlang,</i> He&apos;s not choosy. He will go to bed with anybody, even an old woman. <form>-unun</form> <pos>a</pos> be a perfect match, go well together (colloquial). <i>Paytunun kaáyu sila si Ális ug si Kulas,</i> Colas and Alice make a perfect pair. <i>Paytunun kaáyu ang tubà ug ang Pipsi,</i> Pepsi goes well with toddy.

<p><form>payla</form> <xr>= <sc>PALIYA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>paylas</form> <pos>n</pos> infectious inflammation of the skin on the legs, accompanied by fever. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> get this sickness.

<p><form>*payling</form> <form>&mdash; kabinit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>filing cabinet</tr>. <form>&mdash; klirk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>filing clerk</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a filing clerk.

<p><form>*paylut</form> <form>harbur &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> small motorized boats which serve as a guide for vessels in the harbor. <number>2</number> pilot for the pilot boat. <form>&mdash; háwus</form> <pos>n</pos> office of the harbor pilot. <form>&mdash; sa lubi, &mdash; sa kukunat, kukunat &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> palm toddy gatherer (humorous).

<p><form>payn-ápul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pineapple</tr>. <form>&mdash; dyús</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pineapple juice</tr>.

<p><form>paynar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> dress the hair. <form>paynadúra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hairdresser</tr>, one who arranges a woman&apos;s hair. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> be, become a hairdresser.

<p><form>paypay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fan</tr>. <number>2</number> k.o. thin, fan-shaped bivalve, found in sandy seabeds, of no food value. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> fan s.o. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> fan oneself. <i>Nagpamaypay ku sa kaalimúut,</i> I fanned myself frantically, it was so hot.

<p><form>paypay<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PALAYPAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>payramid</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> pyramid in gymnastics. <number>2</number> the Pyramids of Egypt. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> form a pyramid in gymnastics.

<p><form>payr-awut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> dismiss s.o. from a job or position. <i>Payr-awtun ang mga kaswal,</i> All casual employees will be dismissed.

<p><form>payriks</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pyrex</tr>, a k.o. heat-resistant glass-*ware.

<p><form>payring</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> fire on s.o., for there to be gunfire. <i>Manlukluk ta sa dì pa magpayring,</i> Let&apos;s get out of the way before the firing starts. <form>&mdash; layin</form> <pos>n</pos> firing line. <form>&mdash; pin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>firing pin</tr> in a rifle. <form>&mdash; iskwad</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>firing squad</tr>.

<p><form>payta</form> <xr>= <sc>PALATA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>payting ispírit</form> <pos>n</pos> will to fight or play under stress or against odds. <i>Lúpig siya, piru may payting ispírit,</i> He was outclassed but he had a fighting spirit.

<p><form>payting pis</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fighting fish</tr>. <number>2</number> pornographic movies.

<p><form>paytir</form> <pos>a</pos> having a fighting spirit, esp. in defending one&apos;s position or what one thinks is right. <i>Paytir kaáyung sinadúra. Wà mag-apas nga pasublì,</i> That senator is a great fighter for his cause, because he isn&apos;t interested in reelection. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become a fighter for what one thinks is right.

<p><form>payud</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the <tr>shoulder blades</tr>, <tr>scapula</tr>. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>DAPÌDÁPÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>payudpayud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> walk with unsteady steps due to weakness. <i>Nagpayudpayud nga naglakaw ang apyugun,</i> The convalescing patient walks with unsteady steps.

<p><form>páyuk</form> <pos>a</pos> for s.t. light in color to get darkened. <i>Páyuk ang tísirt nga way ladlad,</i> A T-shirt comes out greyish if you don&apos;t bleach it. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB]</itype> become darkened or discolored, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Mipáyuk ákung pánit sa ínit,</i> My skin got black in the sun. <i>Háin na tung táwung nagpáyuk sa ímung nawung?</i> Where&apos;s that man who made your face black and blue? <number>2</number> <itype>[B236; b4]</itype> for the skin to become black and blue. <i>Mipáyuk ang binunalan,</i> He turned black and blue where he was whipped. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> discolored, dark and dirty. <i>Payuk siyag linabhan,</i> Her wash comes out grey. <pos>n</pos> <tr>bruise</tr>. <i>Dúgayng naáyu ang mga payuk sa íyang láwas,</i> It took a long time for the bruise on her body to heal. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> inflict bruises. <i>Hínay kaáyu siyang manukmag, walà gánì makapayuk nákù,</i> He didn&apos;t even hit me hard enough to inflict a bruise. <form>ka-(&rarr;)</form> <itype>[A13]</itype> get bruises all over one. <i>Nahúlug siya ug nagkapayuk ang láwas,</i> He fell and he got bruises all over his body.

<p><form>pay-uk</form> <xr>= <sc>PÁYUK</sc>, <pos>a</pos>, <i>v1.</i></xr>

<p><form>páyung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>umbrella</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa búlan</form> <pos>n</pos> ring around the moon. <form>&mdash; sa libgus, úhung</form> pilleus of mushrooms. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> use an umbrella, shelter under an umbrella. <i>Payúngan ta ka <pb n=753>kay ínit kaáyu,</i> I&apos;ll shelter you with an umbrella because the sun is hot. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b(1)]</itype> stretch arms over s.o. in basketball in guarding a teammate or in preventing an opponent from passing or shooting the ball. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <i>v1.</i></xr> <form>payungpayung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <formx>&mdash; sa santus</formx> artificial halo around the statues of saints. <number>2</number> k.o. limpet which looks like an umbrella found clinging to stones.

<p><form>payúpas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fan</tr>, any device used for fanning. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> fan s.o. <i>Payupási ang bátang natúlug,</i> Fan the child as he sleeps. <form>paN-</form> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> fan oneself. <i>Namayúpas kug kardburd,</i> I&apos;m fanning myself with a piece of card-*board.

<p><form>payuphu</form> <xr>= <sc>PALUPHU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>payuríya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pyorrhea</tr>, infection of the gums. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infected with pyorrhea.

<p><form>payus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> cut a piece off ears, usually of animals as a marker. <i>Napayus (napayusan) ang dawunggan sa buksiyadur,</i> The boxer had cauliflower ears. <pos>a</pos> having the ears or a piece of the ears cut off. <i>Hiilhan ang ámung bábuy kay payus man,</i> I can easily identify the pig because of the way its ears are cut. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>a</pos> having a piece of an ear cut off.

<p><form>páyut</form> <xr>= <sc>PAY-UT<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pay-ut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for skin to be wrinkled and sagging. <i>Maáyu untag kurti nang bayhána apan pay-ut ug nawung,</i> She has a nice face, but it is wrinkled and sagging. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a2]</itype> for skin to become wrinkled and sagging. <i>Ági sa kaláyu ang nakapay-ut (nakapapay-ut) sa íyang láwas,</i> Scars from burning caused wrinkles on his body.

<p><form>pay-ut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for clothes to be discolored, darkened with dirt. <i>Pay-ut na kaáyu nang sinínà nga dúgay nang wà hubúa,</i> You have been wearing that dress so long it is black with dirt. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; c1]</itype> get discolored with dirt.

<p><form>pi<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> letter P. <form>&mdash; dibawtismu</form> baptismal certificate (acronym for <ix>partída dibawtismu</ix>).

<p><form>pi<sub>2</sub></form> <form>may láin &mdash;</form> humorous euphemism for <ix>may láin pa</ix>. <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>LÁIN</sc>, <i>1a.</i></xr>

<p><form>pí</form> <xr>= <sc>PYI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>píang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>dislocate</tr>, <tr>sprain</tr>, <tr>fracture</tr> s.o. <i>Napíang ku pagkadakin-as nákù,</i> I got a sprain (fracture) when I slipped and fell. <i>Kaáyung piángan nang ímung kamut nga kiriwan,</i> How nice it would be to break your thieving hands. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make s.t. crippled, be at a disadvantage because of a loss or absence of s.t. indispensable. Napíang ang nigusyu pagháwà sa kasusyu, The business was crippled when one of the partners withdrew. <i>Gipiángan na mi dáan kay nasakit ang ámung sinalígan nga magdudulà,</i> We are already on a disadvantage because one of our important players is sick. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> general term for <tr>dislocation</tr>, <tr>fracture</tr>, or <tr>sprain</tr>. It may manifest itself in other ways than in the sprained or fractured limb, e.g. respiratory ailments are commonly thought to result from piang. <number>2</number> <tr>lacking</tr>. <i>Piang tag usa sa kúrum sa madyung,</i> We&apos;re lacking one to play mahjong. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>PIANG</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr> <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> having a sprain, dislocation, or fracture.

<p><form>píar</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for <tr>P.R.</tr>, <tr>public relations</tr>. <i>Dì siya mulampus kay kuwag píar,</i> He won&apos;t succeed because he is bad in dealing with people (lit. lacks public relations).

<p><form>píay</form> <pos>n</pos> dump truck used by the Bureau of Public Highways (from the PI mark on its plate number).

<p><form>Pib</form>. <pos>n</pos> abbreviation for <ix>Pibríru</ix>, February.

<p><form>píbak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> pay back an overpayment. <i>Nasubrahan kag swildu. Magpíbak ka niánà,</i> They overpaid your salary. You have to pay back the extra amount.

<p><form>Pibriru</form><note>Pibríru? See &lsquo;Pib.&rsquo; above</note> <pos>n</pos> <tr>February</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ABRIL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>píbur</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> be <tr>partial</tr> to s.o., playing favorites. <pos>a</pos> <tr>partial</tr>, <tr>playing favorites</tr>. <i>Píbur kaáyu námù ang ripiri, maung midaug mi,</i> The referee was partial to us, so we won.

<p><form>píd</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make assists in basketball by passing the ball to a free teammate near the goal. <i>Dakug puntus ang purward basta náay maáyung mupíd,</i> The player who plays forward will make a high score if he gets good assists.

<p><form>pídal</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pedal</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>pedal pushers</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> pedal s.t. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, wear pedal pushers. <form>&mdash; púsir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pedal pushers</tr>. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>PÍDAL</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr>

<p><form>pidásu</form> <xr>= <sc>PIRÁSU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pidbak</form> <pos>n</pos> feedback in electronic equipment. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> produce a feedback.

<p><form>pídi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>payday</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; c6]</itype> become, have it be payday. <i>Unsa mang adláwa ang ipídi?</i> On what day do you receive your pay?

<p><form>pidídu</form> <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s order of dry goods. <i>Día ang pidídu sa ákung gikinahanglan,</i> Here is the order for the things I need. <i>Ihatud sa inyu ang pidídu mung káhuy,</i> They&apos;ll deliver the lumber you ordered to your house. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> order dry goods. <i>Kining klasíha mauy ipidídu,</i> This is the kind to order. <form>-s</form> <xr>= <sc>PIDÍDU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pidikab</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pedicab</tr>, a bicycle or motorcycle with a side car for passengers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> ride in, bring by pedicab.

<p><form>pidikiyur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pedicure</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> get, give a pedicure. <form>-ista</form> <pos>n</pos> one who gives a pedicure.

<p><form>pidirasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>labor union</tr>. <number>2</number> member of a labor union. <number>2a</number> <tr>stevedore</tr> (so called because they were among the earliest workers to have unions). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> be, become a <pb n=754>member of a labor organization. <number>2</number> be, become a stevedore.

<p><form>pídir rud</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>feeder road</tr> going from remote areas to the main highway. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> build a feeder road.

<p><form>pídir wit</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>featherweight boxer</tr> or <tr>jockey</tr>. <number>1a</number> any lightweight person. <number>2</number> the amount a featherweight weighs. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B156; c1]</itype> become a featherweight boxer or jockey. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> be very much reduced in weight. <i>Nagdiyíta ka nga mipídir wit (napídir wit) na man ka?</i> Are you on a diet that you&apos;ve lost so much weight?

<p><form>pidist&acaron;l</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pedestal</tr> on which a flower pot, vase, lamp, etc. is put. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make into, use a pedestal.

<p><form>pidíyus</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>egg noodles</tr> of the same material as macaroni but made into various shapes: shells, stars, half-moons, etc. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> cook s.t. with <ix>pidíyus</ix>.

<p><form>pidlà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>spurt</tr>, for liquid to be ejected with force for a short period of time. <i>Inig-abut sa lamì mupidlà ang tús (útin),</i> When you have your orgasm, the sperm spurts out (the penis spurts). <i>Magpidlà gánì ang lungag, dúnay tamalà sa iláwum,</i> If liquid spurts out of the hole, that means there is a small octopus inside. <i>Gipidlà níya ang túbig sa ákung nawung,</i> She spewed the water in my face. <number>2</number> treat a sickness by chewing herbs and spitting on the joints of the patient, usually following massage and prayers. <pos>n</pos> this medical treatment.

<p><form>pidlasut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for liquids to come out in a long, thin spurt. <i>Hipidlasutan ku sa túbig,</i> The water spurted on me.

<p><form>pidlut</form> <xr>= <sc>PIDLASUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pidpid</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>very near</tr> or <tr>close</tr>. <i>Pidpid ra kaáyu ang ímung paglingkud kanákù,</i> You took a seat too close to me. <i>Ibutang ang katri pidpid sa bungbung,</i> Put the bed against the wall. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> put, stay very close along s.t. <i>Mipidpid ku sa paril arun dì himatikdan,</i> I stayed close to the wall so no one would notice me. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> travel close along s.t. <i>Namidpid ang sakayan sa baybáyun,</i> The boat sails close to the shore.

<p><form>Pidru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>Peter</tr>, man&apos;s name. <number>2</number> <formx>si &mdash;</formx> one&apos;s penis (euphemistic slang). <i>Paghúbù níya, mitindug dáyun si Pidru,</i> When she started to undress, my peter stood up.

<p><form>pidsbuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pageboy bob</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> wear a pageboy haircut, cut the hair in the pageboy style.

<p><form>pid-uk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; b7c]</itype> make or <tr>grow dim</tr>. <i>Mupid-uk ang sugà ug wà nay gás,</i> The light will get dim (or flicker) if there&apos;s no more gas. <i>Pid-úki ang sugà kay matúlug na ta,</i> Dim the light, because we&apos;re going to sleep now. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN3; b6]</itype> for a light or the eyes to flicker. <i>Mipid-uk (namid-uk) siya nákù nga dílì paubanun níla,</i> She winked at me not to go along with them. <pos>n</pos> wink of the eye.

<p><form>pid-uk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[N; b6]</itype> look out of the corners of the eyes with suspicion or disdain. <i>Ngánung namid-uk ka nákù?</i> Why are you looking at me with disdain?

<p><form>pigà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>press</tr>, <tr>squeeze</tr> s.t. <i>Akuy mupigà sa kinagud lubi,</i> I will press the juice out of the grated coconut. <i>Gipigà níya ákung kamut sa kahinangup,</i> He squeezed my hand in welcome.

<p><form>pigádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for an area to be too small for s.t. <i>Pigádu kaáyu ning baláya pára ninyu,</i> This house is too small for you. <i>Pigádu ra ning baláya sa dálan,</i> This house is too close to the street. <number>2</number> hard up financially. <i>Pigádu mi kay wà kuy trabáhu,</i> We are hard up because I have no work. <number>3</number> for there not to be enough time. <i>Pigádu na rung ipaúlì,</i> There is not enough time to get home any more. <number>4</number> in billiards, for the cue ball to be touching another ball or be touching the edge of the billiard table. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> get to be too small in space or area. <i>Nagkapigádu ang ákung mga sinínà nga nanambuk na ku,</i> My dresses are getting too tight as I gain weight. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be hard up financially. <number>3</number> <itype>[A]</itype> give s.o. little time to do s.t. <i>Mipigádu siya ug paningil kay nanginahanglan giyud,</i> He pressed his debtors for immediate payment because he needed the money.

<p><form>pigal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> roll s.t. into a cylinder by turning it over and over on itself or s.t. else. <i>Magpigal kug panaptun nga ákung suksúkan sa báraw,</i> I will roll up a piece of cloth to insert the knife into. <i>Ayaw ipigal (pigala) ang kwartang papil,</i> Don&apos;t roll up the paper money. <pos>n</pos> a cylindrical mass of s.t. <form>&mdash; pang dáhun</form> <pos>n</pos> young leaf buds or shoots rolled into a cylinder. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> cigar rolled and pressed flat.

<p><form>pígat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> squash, squeeze s.t. soft out of shape. <i>Siyay nakapígat sa kartun nga íyang natumban,</i> He stepped on the box and squashed it. <i>Napígat ang ságing nga nalingkuran,</i> He squashed the bananas when he sat on them.

<p><form>pigáwu</form> <xr>= <sc>PIGÁDU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>piging</form> <pos>n</pos> party with sumptuous food. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> give a <tr>banquet</tr>.

<p><form>pigiri</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>piggery</tr>. <i>Daghan na ang bábuy sa íyang pigiri,</i> He has lots of pigs in his piggery now.

<p><form>pigis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> crush or mash s.t. fine with a rolling pin or in a mortar. <i>Pigisa (pigsa, <pb n=755>ipigis) ug maáyu ang kakaw,</i> Crush the cacao fine. <form>pigsanan</form> <pos>n</pos> flat board where s.t. is crushed. <form>pinigsan</form> <pos>n</pos> pork fat cooked to extract the lard and then squeezed in a squeezer into rounded slabs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make, have <ix>pinigsan</ix>.

<p><form>pigit</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for the string of a musical instrument not to sound well because of s.t. that impedes proper vibration. <i>Ang tíngug sa íyang sista pigit kaáyu,</i> His guitar doesn&apos;t give a full sound. <number>2</number> for the voice to be cracked. <i>Pigit kaáyu ang íyang tíngug ug mutaas ang kanta,</i> Her voice cracks in the upper register. <number>3</number> for rounded things not to be true, out of shape. <i>Ang íyang kasing pigit kaáyu,</i> His top is very much out of true. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be, become cracked, out of shape; fail to vibrate properly.

<p><form>pig-it<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>narrow</tr>, <tr>tight</tr>. <i>Pig-it nga sinínà,</i> A tight dress. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> become tight-fitting, be narrow. <i>Napig-it ang ákung sinínà kay mikúlù,</i> My dress became tight because it shrunk. <i>Ug pig-itun ang kalsáda dílì makaági ang trák,</i> If the road is made too narrow, the bus won&apos;t be able to use it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> press s.t. tightly in one&apos;s hand or embrace. <i>Ang mga kandidátu kusug mupig-it ug kamut,</i> The candidates are shaking hands for all they are worth. <i>Ayaw pig-íta ang bátà pagkúgus,</i> Don&apos;t hold the baby too close. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> pressure s.o. into doing s.t. <i>Pig-íta arun musugut,</i> Exert pressure on her so that she will accept you. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> subject s.o. to strong disciplinary constraint. <i>Kinahanglan pig-ítan ang anak nga dalága,</i> It is necessary to keep tight reins on one&apos;s daughter. <form>-in-ay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> press, shake each other&apos;s hands. <i>Nagpinig-ítay sa kamut ang mga bisíta,</i> The guests were shaking each other&apos;s hands.

<p><form>pig-it<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PIGIT</sc>, <i>a1, 2.</i></xr>

<p><form>pignit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>pinch</tr>, pick off with the thumb and the forefinger. <i>Pigníta ang íkug sa ilagang patay,</i> Pick up the dead rat by the tail. <i>Gipignit ku ang íyang áping,</i> I pinched her cheek. <pos>n</pos> a pinch of s.t. <i>Usa ka pignit nga asin,</i> A pinch of salt.

<p><form>pigsà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>mash</tr>, <tr>squash</tr> s.t. not dry into a fine pulp. <i>Magpigsà kug nilung-ag patátas,</i> I&apos;ll mash the potatoes.

<p><form>pigsang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> <number>1</number> for flowers to be in full bloom. <i>Mipigsang ang mga búlak sa hardin,</i> The flowers in the garden bloomed. <number>1a</number> for s.t. to manifest itself to a great extent. <i>Nagpigsang ang íyang nawung sa kaúlaw,</i> His face became flushed with shame. <number>2</number> for a sickness to be developing to a stage where a rash or skin inflammation will burst out. <i>Mipigsang na ang íyang tipdas,</i> His measles is in the incubation period. <number>3</number> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> for pus to come out of infections; cause to do so. <i>Mupigsang nang hubag mu ug pislítun,</i> The pus will come out of your boil if you press it. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> flourishing, manifesting itself in great quantities or to a great extent. <number>2</number> full of pus.

<p><form>pigsat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>mash</tr>, <tr>squash</tr> into a pulp, usually a large quantity or s.t. large.

<p><form>pigsik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB246; a2]</itype> squeeze s.t. to cause it to squirt out; for liquid to squirt out when pressed or squeezed. <i>Mupigsik ang balat kun hikápun,</i> Sea cucumbers will squirt out liquid if you touch them. <i>Gipigsik níya ang bugas sa íyang ilung,</i> She squeezed the pimple on her nose to get the acne out. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> for rice grains or coconut to be mature enough to squirt out white juice if you press the grains or meat.

<p><form>pigsit, pigsut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b2]</itype> spurt out through a tiny, narrow opening. <i>Mipigsut ang nánà pagpislit sa hubag,</i> Pus spurted out when the boil was pressed. <i>Hingpigsutan ku sa átà sa nukus,</i> The squid spurted ink at me. <pos>n</pos> <tr>spurt</tr>.

<p><form>pigting</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> hit briskly with the end of a stick. <i>Gipigtíngan nákù sa sungkud ang íyang kamut,</i> I whacked him on the hand with my cane. <number>2</number> hack an animal&apos;s tendon prior to slaughtering it so that it cannot escape when it is stabbed.

<p><form>pigtul</form> <xr>= <sc>PINTUL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pígung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>grip</tr> or <tr>hold</tr> s.t. firmly. <i>Ayúhag pígung ang baktin kay makabuhì unyà,</i> Hold the piglet tight or it will get away. <i>Pigúngi ning káhuy kay ákung gabsun,</i> Press this board tight because I&apos;m going to saw it.

<p><form>pigúra</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> figure, contours of a body, esp. of a woman. <number>2</number> a drawing or representation of a figure. <number>3</number> figures in statistics.

<p><form>pigurin</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a <tr>figurine</tr>. <number>2</number> a framed picture of a saint.

<p><form>pigus</form> <pos>a</pos> smallest animal in a litter and, by extension, among children in a family.

<p><form>pig-ut</form> (from <ix>piut</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>narrow</tr>, not affording enough space. <number>2</number> hard up financially. <i>Pig-ut ang ámung kahimtang,</i> We are in a tight financial situation now. <number>3</number> <tr>ugly</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a]</itype> <number>1</number> become small, narrow in space. <i>Napig-ut ang kwartu sa mga butang,</i> The room was crowded with so many things inside it. <i>Nagkapig-ut ang dálan ngadtu sa búkid,</i> The trail into the mountain gets narrower and narrower. <number>2</number> get financially hard up. <number>3</number> become ugly. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> subject s.o. under one&apos;s care to tight restrictions. <i>Dì ku mupig-ut ninyu basta magtárung mu,</i> I won&apos;t be too strict with you as long as you behave. <number>5</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <pb n=756>pressure s.o. into s.t. <i>Dílì siya mubáyad ug dílì pig-útun (pig-útan),</i> She won&apos;t pay if you don&apos;t press her.

<p><form>pihádu</form> <xr>see <sc>PIHAR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pihak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6]</itype> for a child&apos;s fontanel to get depressed. <i>Mupihak ang hubun<note>bubun? P2 |hubun -P3</note> sa bátà ug masakit,</i> The baby&apos;s fontanel becomes depressed when it&apos;s sick. <pos>a</pos> for the fontanel to be depressed. <form>pihakpíhak</form> <xr>= <sc>TAMPIHAK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pihar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> notice s.t. <i>Wà ku makapihar nga miági siya,</i> I did not notice that he passed by. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> make sure of s.t. <i>Pihara ug náa ba giyud siya,</i> Make sure if she is really there. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> have the edge or advantage in doing s.t. <i>Nakapihar siya sa tanang aplikanti kay paryinti man,</i> He had the edge over the other applicants because he was a relative. <form>pihádu</form> be certain. <i>Pihádu kaáyu kung kawatan siya,</i> I&apos;m certain he is a thief. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; a12]</itype> make, become sure of s.t. <i>Pihadúa úsag túa na ba siya,</i> Make sure he&apos;s gone first.

<p><form>pihaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>embarrassed</tr>, <tr>self-conscious</tr>. <i>Pihaw kaáyu ang íyang linihukan,</i> She acts in a very self-conscious manner. <number>2</number> <tr>out of tune</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> embarrass slightly. <i>Napihaw ku kay hisakpan kung nagpasiklap,</i> I was embarrassed because she caught me stealing a glance at her. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; a1]</itype> get out of tune, off-key. <i>Mapihaw ku ug mutaas ang núta,</i> I go off-key on the high notes.

<p><form>pihig</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>slanting</tr>, not straight. <i>Ang halígi pihig sa tuu,</i> The post is tilted to the right. <number>2</number> favoring. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; a]</itype> become leaning or slanting. <i>Napihig man nang ímung hinápay,</i> The part in your hair is crooked. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> show partiality in favor of. <i>Dì ku mupihig kang bísan kinsa,</i> I won&apos;t play favorites with anyone. <number>3</number> separate according to class or kind. <i>Pihigun (ipihig) ang gagmay nga lísu,</i> Separate out the small seeds. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> one discriminated against.

<p><form>pihing</form> <pos>a</pos> being not quite spherical, irregular. <i>Ságad sa buungun pihing,</i> Most pomelos are not quite spherical. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> become uneven or irregular, not quite round. <i>Mupihing ang úlu sa bátà ug pirming magtakilid,</i> The child&apos;s head will grow uneven if you always have it lie on one side.

<p><form>píhu, píhù</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sure</tr>, <tr>certain</tr>. <i>Píhu kaáyu nga siya ang sad-an,</i> It is certain that he is the culprit. <form>&mdash; na lang</form> obviously. <i>Píhu na lang nga mangísug siya ug mamakak ka,</i> Of course he will get mad if you tell lies. <form>prisyu &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fixed price</tr>. <i>Wà nay hangyù, prisyu píhu na,</i> You can&apos;t bargain. It&apos;s fixed price. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B]</itype> become certain. <i>Nagkapíhu na ang kadaúgan sa ákung kandidátu,</i> My candidate&apos;s victory is getting more and more certain. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> verify, see if s.t. is true. <i>Pihúa usà ka musumbung,</i> Make sure it&apos;s true before you report it.

<p><form>pihuk</form> <xr>= <sc>PILHUK<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pii</form> <pos>a</pos> be not perfectly spherical or circular. <i>Pii ang ligid kay nadusmug ang mutur sa paril,</i> The wheel is not round any more because the motorcycle crashed into a wall. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> be out of true. <i>Mupii (mapii) ang yanta ug hugut kaáyu ang radiyus,</i> The rim will be out of true if the spokes are too tight.

<p><form>píi</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for P.E., <tr>Physical Education</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> hold <xr><sc>P.E</sc>.</xr> activities.

<p><form>píis</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for P.S., <tr>postscript</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> write a postscript. <i>Ipíis ku na lang nang ímung panúgun,</i> I&apos;ll put your request in the postscript.

<p><form>piit</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>too narrow</tr>. <i>Piit kaáyu siyag sinínà,</i> She has a very tight dress on. <i>Piit kaáyung dálan,</i> Too narrow a street. <number>2</number> close, not affording proper distance. <i>Piit kaáyu siya nga mubayli,</i> He dances too close. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; a]</itype> for an area to be too narrow or small, get into too narrow a place. <i>Napiit ang ilagà sa káhuy,</i> The mouse was wedged tight in the firewood. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> hold s.t. tightly, in a close embrace. <i>Gipiit ni Inting ang láwas ni Tabúra,</i> Inting held Tabora&apos;s body in a close embrace. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> compel s.o. to do s.t. with pressure. <i>Pit-un gánì ku, mutug-an na lang ku,</i> If I&apos;m pressed, I&apos;ll tell the truth. <number>3</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> for a singing voice to be tight and forced on a high pitch. <i>Mupiit ang tíngug ug taas kaáyu ang núta,</i> The singing voice becomes tight on very high notes. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> contrivance to squeeze juice out of s.t. slowly, made of two pieces of wood, the top of which is weighed down.

<p><form>pík</form> <pos>n</pos> a game of hammer, scissors, paper, used esp. to decide who is it in games. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a]</itype> play this game. <i>Píkun giyud arun way bagulbul,</i> Let&apos;s decide it by playing hammer, scissors, paper so that no one will grumble.

<p><form>pika</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>beat</tr>, <tr>strike</tr>. <i>Human makapika sa táwu, nanágan sila,</i> After beating the man, they fled. <i>Pikhi nang tawhána,</i> Give that fellow a beating. <number>2</number> berate s.o. with stinging words. <i>Gipikahan ni Maryu ug insultu ang kandidátu sa upusisiyun,</i> Mario insulted the opposition candidate with stinging criticisms. <number>3</number> take a picture. <i>Gipikhan ku níya samtang nagsáyaw,</i> He took a picture of me dancing. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> have sexual intercourse (euphemism). <i>Makapika ka bag kalima?</i> Can you do it five times? <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> blow delivered. <pb n=757><number>2</number> action of having intercourse.

<p><form>píkak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>peacock</tr>.

<p><form>pikal, píkal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>irritability</tr>, <tr>bad temper</tr>. <i>Ayaw paubani ug pikal ang ímung trabáhu,</i> Don&apos;t work in a bad mood. (Lit. Don&apos;t bring irritability to work with you.) <i>Pikal kaáyung tan-áwun ang íyang nawung,</i> Just to look at his face is enough to make anybody angry. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> bad mood, state of being annoyed. <i>Tungud sa ákung kapíkal wà gánì ku makapanumbaling níya,</i> I was in such a bad mood I didn&apos;t pay any attention to her. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> characterized with or having irritation or anger. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> get in a bad mood. <i>Mapikal siya kun samúkun,</i> He gets angry if you bother him.

<p><form>pik-ap<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> pickup, <tr>acceleration</tr>. <i>Maáyug pik-ap ang íyang dyip kay bag-u ang makina,</i> His jeep has excellent pickup because it is new. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> pick up speed. <i>Mubagrung ang awtu kun mupik-ap na,</i> The car zooms the moment it picks up speed.

<p><form>pik-ap<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a small passenger bus plying unscheduled routes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> take a pickup, bring in a pickup bus.

<p><form>pik-ap<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> contact microphone for guitars. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> for a microphone to pick up sound. <i>Kusug mupik-ap sa sáwun ning maykrupúna kay sinsitib,</i> The microphone picks up sound well because it is sensitive.

<p><form>pik-ap<sub>4</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2N; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> pick s.o. up on the way s.w. <i>Kun makapik-ap ka nákus upisína, pik-ápa na lang ku kay dúna ka may sakyanan,</i> If you can pick me up at the office, please do so, as you have a car. <number>2</number> pick up girls of easy virtue in public places. <i>Namik-ap mig babáyi sa pwinti,</i> We found some pickups at the park.

<p><form>píkas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P; a]</itype> split, cut s.t. into halves lengthwise. <i>Siyay mipíkas sa kawáyan,</i> He split the bamboos. <i>Pikása ang isdang ibuwad,</i> Split the fish you are going to dry. <number>2</number> <itype>[C2; a2]</itype> share half of s.t. with s.o. else. <i>Magpíkas ta áning pán,</i> Let&apos;s split this piece of bread. <i>Pikási siyas ímung gikaun,</i> Split what you&apos;re eating with him. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> half of s.t. sliced in two. <i>Usa ka píkas kík,</i> A piece of cake. <number>2</number> the other one of a pair. <i>Dakù ang íyang píkas tiil,</i> His one foot is bigger than the other. <i>Píkas tumuy,</i> The other end. <number>3</number> the other side. <i>Píkas kwartu,</i> The next room. <number>4</number> the other place (said of people who may be in either one of two places). <i>Túa siya sa píkas báy,</i> He is in the other house. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B456; a1]</itype> get to be half undone, half the wrong thing. <i>Mupikas ang linung-ag ug dílì maángay ang kaláyu,</i> The rice will get cooked on only one side if the fire is uneven. <i>Nagpikas ang ímung sapátus,</i> You&apos;re wearing shoes of two different pairs. <i>Nagpikas ang sawug kay katungà ray gilampasúhan,</i> The floor is unevenly cleaned because only half of it was polished. <pos>a</pos> for s.t. to be uneven and half-done or in pairs. <i>Pikas nga linung-ag,</i> Unevenly cooked rice. <pos>n</pos> general name for flatfishes (soles, flounders, et al.). <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> part in the hair. <i>Náa sa tungà ang íyang piníkas,</i> His hair is parted in the middle. <number>2</number> combing the hair with a part. <i>Piníkas ang íyang sinudlayan,</i> He wears his hair parted. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> split, cut. <number>2</number> for physical characteristics to be similar, alike. <i>Kanang ímung anak mu ra ug piníkas gíkan nímu,</i> Your son is a chip of the old block (lit. like a half cut off of you). <form>ka-, &mdash; sa kinabúhì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>spouse</tr>. <form>&mdash; dughan, kasingkásing</form> one&apos;s loved one, <tr>sweetheart</tr>. <form>pikaspikas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> divide into pieces. <i>Gipikaspikas ni Hisus ang pán,</i> Jesus broke the bread into pieces.

<p><form>pikat<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; a2]</itype> draw down the lower eyelid either to get s.t. out of it or to make faces at a person in a gesture of disrespect. <i>Ug dì ka mupikat sa ímung mata unsáun man pagkúhà sa puling,</i> If you do not pull the lower eyelid down, how can I get the particle out. <i>Pikatan ta ka ug dílì musalir nang ímung kaláki,</i> I will make faces at you (by pulling my eyelid down) if your idea does not work right. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> for the eyelids to get deformed. <i>Mapikat ang mata ug hubagan ang tabuntábun,</i> The eyes will get deformed if the eyelids have a boil. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for the eyes to be slightly deformed. <number>2</number> interjection used to embarrass s.o. who made a mistake or who has been denied s.t., uttered together with the gesture of putting the index finger to the lower eyelid and drawing it down. <i>Pikat! Wà siya tagáig kwarta, Nma!</i> You didn&apos;t get any money.

<p><form>pikat<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> push tall grass or s.t. flexible to the sides in order to clear a path, get a clear view. <i>Ang mag-una mauy mupikat sa mga tag-as sagbut,</i> The one in front has to push the tall grass to the sides. <i>Pikata (ipikat) ang kurtína kay ngitngit,</i> Push the curtains to the side because it&apos;s dark in here.

<p><form>pikatúrum</form> expression denoting sudden, mild surprise. <i>Pikatúrum. Ímu pung gimab-an ang sukud nga wà ku pahibaw-a,</i> Humph! You gave me less without telling me you were going to do so.

<p><form>pikbung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sound produced by the Japanese infantry rifles of World War II. It fires with a tick followed by a bong. <number>2</number> the rifle producing this sound.

<p><form>pikdul, pikdung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b2]</itype> rap s.o. with s.t. <pb n=758>long and rigid with a short jerk of the forearm (not with the whole arm raised above the head). <i>Hingpikdungan si Nik sa sungkud sa amahan sa dalága,</i> The father of the girl rapped Nick on the head with his cane.

<p><form>pikdut</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>cute</tr>, <tr>cuddly</tr>. <i>Pikdut kaáyu nang batáa,</i> That child is very cuddly.

<p><form>piki</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pique</tr>, k.o. cloth.

<p><form>pikì<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PITÌ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pikì<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> margin shells, small colorful seashells of numerous species and designs.

<p><form>píking</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> play a guitar by plucking the strings a note at a time. <i>Nindut siyang mupíking sa &lsquo;Báya Kun Díyus&rsquo;,</i> He plays &lsquo;Vaya Con Dios&rsquo; beautifully, plucking the strings. <pos>n</pos> playing the guitar by plucking the strings.

<p><form>píkit<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> hold s.t. by clipping or joining it in some way. <i>Pikítun (ipíkit) nátù nang ímung sinínà ug alpilir,</i> Let us fasten your dress with a pin. <i>Pikíti ang ímung buhuk arun dílì ilupad sa hángin,</i> Put a clasp in your hair so it will not fly in the wind. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> glue s.t., stick together. <i>Pikíta (ipíkit) nang nagísing mápa,</i> Paste the torn map back together. <i>Nagkapíkit núun ning mga silyu,</i> The stamps are all stuck together. <number>3</number> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> make s.t. close, tight. <i>Nagkapíkit mig lingkud,</i> We sat too close to each other. <i>Ug ímung pikítun (ipíkit) ang ímung sinínà mulakra ang ímung samput,</i> If your dress is too tight, your buttocks will show. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> clip or ferrule tied around s.t. to hold it together: handle of knives, swords, and the like, hoop of a barrel, loop to hold the outriggers to the body of the boat. <number>2</number> glue or s.t. used to fasten things in place or together. <number>3</number> ring (slang). <i>Gitagáan siya sa iyang bána ug pikit nga diyamanti,</i> Her husband gave her a diamond ring. <pos>a</pos> <tr>sticking</tr>, <tr>stuck</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B6]</itype> become stuck. <i>Mupikit ang buling ug dì ka malígù,</i> The dirt will stick to you if you don&apos;t bathe. <number>2</number> <itype>[C; c]</itype> wear a ring (slang).

<p><form>píkit<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b1(1)]</itype> <tr>picket</tr>. <i>Gipikítan níla ang kumpaníya,</i> They picketed the company. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>picketing</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>picket line</tr>. <form>&mdash; layin</form> <tr>picket line</tr>. <form>-ir</form> <pos>n</pos> one who pickets.

<p><form>piknat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> twist and pull at s.t. with the thumb and forefinger. <i>Piknátun ku nang dalunggan mu ug dílì ka mamínaw,</i> I will tweak your ears if you don&apos;t listen. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> pull and fluff up cotton fibers and loosen them from the seeds prior to putting them in a deseeding device. <i>Nagpiknat kug gápas pára ilúnud sa dutdutan,</i> I am fluffing up the cotton before I put it into the deseeding device.

<p><form>piknik, piknit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>picnic</tr> on the beach. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> hold a picnic.

<p><form>pikpik</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> pat, tap lightly on the body. <i>Dinhay nagpikpik sa ákung abága,</i> S.o. tapped me on the shoulder. <i>Pikpíka ang tiyan sa bátà ug dì ba butud,</i> Tap the child&apos;s stomach to see if he doesn&apos;t have gas. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make pottery by tapping with a flat wooden paddle. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> hammer out dents in a car. <i>Kinsay nagpikpik sa mga lumping sa tapalúdus awtu?</i> Who hammered out the dents in the car fender? <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> small and short wooden paddle used by the potters in shaping pots. <number>2</number> k.o. sorcery inflicted by tapping s.o. on the back, counteracted by tapping the person who sent it on his back. <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>potter</tr>. <number>2</number> person who removes dents from an automotive vehicle body. <form>maN-l-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sorcerer</tr> who causes illness by means of <ix>pikpik</ix>.

<p><form>piktus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> hit with a chopping blow. <i>Gipiktúsan nákù íyang kamut nga naggunit sa kurta,</i> I hit the hand that was holding a knife with a chop.

<p><form>piktiyur tíking</form> <pos>n</pos> taking pictures at parties or other events. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> for a group to have their picture taken. <i>Magpiktiyur tíking ta sa átung piknik,</i> Let&apos;s have our pictures taken at our picnic.

<p><form>píku<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pick axe</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> dig with a pick axe.

<p><form>píku<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>picul</tr>, a measure of around 63 kilograms. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> weigh s.t. heavy on a steelyard.

<p><form>pikù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> for s.t. pliant to bend into a position where it stays, cause it to do so. <i>Magpikù tag kartun himúung kálù,</i> Let&apos;s bend some cardboard to make hats. <i>Nagpikung alambri,</i> A bent piece of wire. <i>Pik-a ang hábul,</i> Fold the blanket. <pos>a</pos> <tr>folded</tr>, <tr>bent</tr>. <form>pikùpíkù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> be <tr>doubled up</tr>, <tr>bent over</tr>. <i>Nagpikùpíkù mig katáwa,</i> We were doubled up with laughter. <form>&mdash; nga páyung</form> <tr>folding umbrella</tr>. <form>&mdash; nga síya</form> <tr>folding chair</tr>.

<p><form>píkuls</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pickles</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> make, have pickles.

<p><form>pikun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sensitive</tr>, easily provoked to anger or hurt. <i>Ayawg sugsúga nang pikun,</i> Don&apos;t tease s.o. who is too sensitive. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become easily provoked or sensitive. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> of a sensitive, easily provoked sort.

<p><form>píkut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; a12]</itype> close a long, narrow opening, get closed. <i>Nagkapíkut na ang samad,</i> My wound is gradually closing up now. <i>Pikúta ang bàbà sa sáku,</i> Sew the mouth of the sack. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> for the eyes to become mere slits. <i>Napíkut ang íyang mata sa paghinílak,</i> Her eyes became mere slits from crying. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> having slant eyes. <number>2</number> name <pb n=759>given to the Japanese during World War II.

<p><form>píkut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> corner a man into marriage (slang). <i>Gipíkut si Luis sa tigúwang dága,</i> Luis was trapped into marriage by the old maid.

<p><form>pikuy</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>PIRÍKU</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> child&apos;s word for the penis.

<p><form>píl<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab8]</itype> fail a student. <i>Mupíl ku sa bátà nga dílì makamau,</i> I&apos;ll fail a pupil who doesn&apos;t know anything. <i>Napíl si Birting sa klási,</i> Berting failed in his class.

<p><form>píl<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> peel moles off the face chemically.

<p><form>pila</form> <number>1</number> how much, how many, to what extent. <i>Pila ka buuk ímung palitun?</i> How many are you going to buy? <number>1a</number> how much does it cost. <i>Pila man ni?</i> How much does this cost? <number>1b</number> <formx>-y pálad</formx> who knows. <i>Pilay pálad ug madátù ku,</i> Who knows, I might get rich. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>PIPILA</sc>.</xr> <number>3</number> <ix>in phrases</ix>: <number>3a</number> <formx>&mdash; ra gud</formx> it&apos;s nothing, what does it amount to anyway? <i>Pila ra gud nà ug buut buhátun?</i> What does it amount to anyway if you put your heart into it? <number>3b</number> <formx>&mdash; may sugílun</formx> to make a long story short. <i>Pila may sugílun, si Binut nahímung magsusúlat ug nabantúgan,</i> To make a long story short, Binot became a writer and became famous. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> consider s.t. to be very little. <i>Gipilahan ka ba íni nga daghan kaáyu ni?</i> You think this isn&apos;t very much, when it is so much? <form>(&larr;)</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>TAG-(&larr;)</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>PILA</sc>, <i>3a.</i></xr> <form>piláhay</form> <number>1</number> only recently, not so long ago. <i>Piláhay pa tung naminyù si Buduy,</i> Bodoy got married not so long ago. <number>2</number> a few. <i>Piláhay na lang ang nanghibilin sa ámung buungun,</i> Only a few of our pomelos are left. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>PILA</sc>, <i>3a.</i></xr> <form>ika-</form> which [number] is it? <i>Ikapila na nà ka (nga) básu nang ímung giinum?</i> That makes how many glasses that you have drunk? <form>ka-</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>PILA</sc>, <i>3a.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>MAKA-</sc>.</xr> <form>kapiláhay</form> <xr>= <sc>PILÁHAY</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr> <form>kapid-an</form> <pos>a</pos> group of many. <i>Kapid-an na ka adlaw walà pa mahiulì ang amahan,</i> For several days now, the father has not returned. <form>maka-, ka-</form> how many times? <i>Makapila nímu hugási ning imbaw?</i> How many times did you wash these clams? <form>tag-(&larr;)</form> how much apiece? <i>Tagpíla man nang mansánas?</i> How much are those apples each? <form>tinag-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> do s.t. in lots or multiples. <i>Gitinagpila man nímug dala ang káhuy?</i> How many pieces of wood did you bring at one time? <form>piláun, pilahun, tagpilahun</form> <pos>n</pos> the kind that cost how much. <i>Pilahun (tagpilahun) man tung íyang gipalit?</i> What kind (the kind costing how much) did he buy? <form>r-</form> <number>1</number> <tr>several</tr>. <i>Human sa pipila ka úras, haúna,</i> Take it out after a few hours. <number>2</number> a few. <i>Pipila na lang ang nahibilin,</i> Only a few are left.

<p><form>píla</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>queue</tr>. <i>Taas kaáyu ang píla sa manan-áway sa sini,</i> There was a long line of people waiting to get into the show. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2P]</itype> queue up.

<p><form>pílak</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>silver</tr>. <i>Ang pintúrang pílak many ságad ipintal sa puthaw,</i> They usually use silver paint to paint metal. <number>2</number> <tr>money</tr>. <i>Daghan siyag pílak apan dalù,</i> He has plenty of money, but he is stingy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> plate with silver. <i>Gipilákan ang kuptanan sa pultahan,</i> The door knob is silver-plated. <pos>a</pos> <tr>silvery</tr>, <tr>silver-coated</tr>. <form>-nun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>silvery</tr>.

<p><form>pilantrupu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>philanthropist</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be or become a philanthropist.

<p><form>pil-ap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> fill out forms. <i>Pil-ápi ang ímung purma,</i> Fill out your forms.

<p><form>pilápil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rice field</tr>; <tr>rice paddy</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> prepare a piece of land for planting rice. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>PILÁPIL</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p><form>pílas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b4]</itype> <number>1</number> get <tr>chafed</tr>. <i>Mupílas (pilásan) ang bukubuku sa kabáyù ug way hampílù,</i> The back of the horse will get chafed if you don&apos;t use a saddlecloth. <i>Gipilásan ang ákung páa pagsinakay sa kabáyù,</i> My thighs got chafed from too much horseback riding. <number>2</number> <tr>chafe</tr><note>chafed</note>, <tr>sore</tr>. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>PÍLAS</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p><form>piláta</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>snooty</tr>, <tr>stuck up</tr>. <i>Ang piláta bayà wà na giyud patim-aw dinhi sukad nakadyakpat ug Amirkánu,</i> Now that she landed an American she&apos;s too damn high class to come around here any more.

<p><form>pilátu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>rowdy</tr>, <tr>naughty</tr>, <tr>mischievous</tr> (from <ix>Pilátu</ix>, Pontius Pilate). <i>Magubut giyud ang punduk ug musalga na ni si Pilátu,</i> The whole group becomes disorderly when this ruffian (Pontius Pilate) joins them. <i>Kapilátu bayà íning batáa. Magpakúgus,</i> What a naughty child this is. He wants to be carried all the time.

<p><form>pilaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vigil</tr>. <i>Dúgay kaáyu ang ámung pilaw sa minatay,</i> We held a long vigil for the dead. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>drowsy</tr>, <tr>sleepy</tr>. <number>2</number> not having sleep. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> become drowsy or feel sleepy. <i>Makapilaw (makapapilaw) man ning trabahúa,</i> This work makes you sleepy. <i>Gipilaw na ku,</i> I&apos;m sleepy. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> take a <tr>nap</tr>, snatch <tr>sleep</tr>. <i>Mipilaw kug kadalì únà mutrabáhu,</i> I took a quick nap before I went to work. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> go without sleep, have a vigil. <i>Pilawan námug bantay ang kawatan,</i> We will stay up all night watching for the robber. <form>tag-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> take a quick nap. <i>Mutagpilaw ku kadiyut,</i> I&apos;ll take a quick nap. <form>hatag-, hitag-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1246; b8]</itype> <tr>doze off</tr>. <i>Nahitagpilaw ku sa sinihan,</i> I dozed off in the movies.

<p><form>pílay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2S6; a]</itype> bend or droop at its base <pb n=760>limply. <i>Nagpilay ang bátà nga nahikatulug sa silya,</i> The child drooped his head when he fell asleep in his seat. <i>Nagpílay ang humay nga naagian sa bahà,</i> The rice plants were bent double after the flood rushed over them. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> fell trees. <i>Mangadtu ta sa lasang magpílay ug káhuy,</i> Let&apos;s go to the forest to cut trees. <form>pilaypílay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> be swaying to and fro. <i>Nagpilaypílay ang uhay,</i> The rice stalks are swaying. a spineless, as a person without conviction. <i>Pilaypílay nà sa pulitika,</i> He has no convictions in his politics. &dagger;

<p><form>pilbaks</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. homemade bomb used in street demonstrations.

<p><form>pildi</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P; a]</itype> <tr>lose</tr> in a contest. <i>Mupildi siyag nilibu,</i> He loses by the thousands. <i>Wà pay nakapildi sa kampiyun,</i> No one has beaten the champion yet. <i>Mu ra ka mag napildi sa sugal,</i> You look as if you lost in gambling. <i>Gipildi ang ílang kandidáta sa ámù,</i> Our candidate beat theirs. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; a4]</itype> die of a sickness. <i>Pildíhun (mapildi) ka sa tísis ug dì ka mupatambal,</i> You&apos;ll die of TB if you don&apos;t get treatment. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> cause a woman to lose her virtue. <i>Ang uyuan ray mipildi ánang bayhána,</i> That woman was despoiled by her own uncle. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>loser</tr>. <i>Kinsay pildi?</i> Who lost? <number>2</number> <tr>loss</tr>, as in gambling, business, crops. <i>Dakù ang pildi sa ákung humay pagbagyu,</i> The rice field suffered a big loss because of the storm. a <number>1</number> <tr>outclassed</tr>. <i>Pildi kaáyu ang tím ninyu,</i> Your team was severely beaten. <number>2</number> an exclamation of disgust, disappointment. <i>&lsquo;Pildi!&rsquo; nakasinggit si Isku. &lsquo;Gihabhab ang ákung karsúnis sa bábuy,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Damn!&rsquo; shouted Esco. &lsquo;The pig ate my trousers.&rsquo; <form>kapildíhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>loss</tr>, <tr>defeat</tr>. <i>Angkúna ang ímung kapildíhan,</i> Concede your defeat. <form>-ru</form> <pos>n</pos> loser (male). <i>Pildíru sa iliksiyun,</i> The losers in the election. <form>-ra</form> <xr>= <sc>PILDÍRU</sc></xr> (female). &dagger;

<p><form>pildir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>outfielder</tr> in baseball. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> be an outfielder.

<p><form>pildúra</form> <xr>= <sc>PILDÚRAS</sc></xr> (singular).

<p><form>pildúras</form> <pos>n</pos> medicinal <tr>pills</tr>.

<p><form>pilhuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> take a <tr>catnap</tr>. <i>Mupilhuk kug kadiyut kay dúna kuy pamuwáwan,</i> I&apos;ll take a catnap because I have to work all night through. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1]</itype> for the eyes to droop in drowsiness. <i>Kat&umacracu;g na kay nagpilhuk na nang ímung mata,</i> You&apos;d better go to sleep now because your eyes are drooping.

<p><form>pilhuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> deep <tr>dent</tr>, fairly deep hollow made in a surface. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> dent s.t. rather deeply, but not too broadly. <i>Kinsay nagpilhuk sa tapalúdu sa bisiklíta?</i> Who made a dent on the bicycle fender? <number>2</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for the eyes to be sunken. <i>Nagkapilhuk ang mata nga masakitun,</i> The diseased eye is gradually becoming sunken.

<p><form>pilhung</form> <pos>n</pos> large shallow <tr>dent</tr> in the surface of s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> make a large shallow dent in the surface of s.t. <i>Napilhungan (napilhung) ang planggána nga natumban,</i> The basin got dented when s.o. stepped on it.

<p><form>píli</form> <pos>n</pos> the pili nut tree of the primary forest also cultivated for its almond-like nuts. The sap is used for waterproofing boats: <bio>Canarium ovatum</bio>.

<p><form>pílì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3S; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>choose</tr>, <tr>pick</tr> a choice. <i>Pílì háiy ímu,</i> Choose which one you want to have. <i>Nakapilì kug barut,</i> I happened to choose an inferior kind. <number>1a</number> <tr>elect</tr> s.o. to office. <i>Mupílì tag maligdung nga pangúlu,</i> We should elect a leader of integrity. <number>2</number> sort out the good or bad. <i>Nagpílì ang kumpradur sa mga mangga,</i> The wholesale buyer is sorting the mangoes. <i>Pilíi ang bugas kay daghang tipasì,</i> Clean (lit. sort) the rice that has lots of unhusked grains in it. <number>3</number> <formx>walay ma-</formx> all the same. <i>Tapulan ang íyang mga anak way mapílì,</i> Her children are all lazy. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> be a candidate. <i>Mupapílì si Mádu pagkamayur,</i> Mado is running for mayor. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <xr>= <sc>HIN-(&rarr;)</sc>.</xr> <form>-ay(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>election</tr>. <form>haN-</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>noble</tr>, <tr>highly-esteemed</tr>. <i>Kagíkan siya sa hamílì nga bánay,</i> He comes from a noble family. <i>Hamíling katilingban, maáyung gabíi,</i> Friends (highly-esteemed people), good evening. <form>kahaN-</form> <pos>n</pos> state of being noble. <form>hiN-(&rarr;), hiN-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>choosy</tr>, <tr>finnicky</tr>. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. or s.o. elected or chosen. <number>2</number> s.t. select, especial, select k.o. large-grained rice. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. left over after choosing. <form>-um-r-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>elector</tr>, <tr>voter</tr>. <form>-unun(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>candidate</tr> for election.

<p><form>pilígis</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a <tr>pleat</tr>, fold sewn in s.t. <number>2</number> <tr>crease</tr>. <i>Ayúhag plantsa ang pilígis,</i> Iron the crease carefully. <i>Daghang pilígis sa íyang agtang,</i> He had lots of wrinkles on his forehead. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make <tr>pleats</tr>, <tr>creases</tr> in s.t. <number>2</number> <itype>[B4N]</itype> get creases. <i>Namilígis ang nawung sa katigúlang,</i> His face was creased with age.

<p><form>piligru</form> <pos>a</pos> offering or exposed to danger. <i>Piligru ang kahimtang sa masakitun,</i> The patient&apos;s condition is critical. <i>Piligru ang kinabúhì sa ismaglir,</i> A smuggler&apos;s life is full of danger. <i>Piligru ning baláya,</i> This house is unsafe. <pos>n</pos> <tr>danger</tr>. <i>Ginúu ilikay ku sa mga piligru!</i> Lord, keep me safe from danger. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> be in danger. <i>Mamiligru ku dinhing masakpan,</i> I am in danger of getting caught in this place. <form>-su</form> <xr>= <sc>PILIGRU</sc>, <i>a</i>.</xr>

<p><form>pilígu</form> <pos>n</pos> a sheet of galvanized iron, plywood, paper. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c16]</itype> count by the sheets.

<pb n=761>

<p><form>pilíik</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S; c1]</itype> cry loudly in a high-pitched voice, <tr>squeal</tr>. <i>Mipilíik ang bátà nga íyang gikusì,</i> The child he pinched shrieked. <i>Nagpiliik na ang mga bábuy. Pasáwi na,</i> The pigs are squealing. Feed them. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2S]</itype> for the tires to screech on braking or negotiating a curve. <pos>n</pos> high-pitched <tr>screeching</tr> or <tr>squealing</tr> sound.

<p><form>pilik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> spatter liquid by shaking s.t. or flipping. <i>Gipilikan ku ang inarmirulan,</i> I sprinkled water on the clothes to iron. <form>pilikpilik<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> shake the body, flap the wings, such that water gets spattered. <i>Mupilikpilik (mamilikpilik) ang bábuy human siya makalúnang sa lápuk,</i> The pig shakes the mud off its body after it wallows.

<p><form>pilikpilik<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> choose a person to do s.t. by flipping coins, drawing lots, counting off (pinpin), etc. <i>Magpilikpilik ta ug kinsay muúna,</i> Let&apos;s count potatoes to see who goes first. <i>Pilikpilikun lang nátug kinsay makatag-íya sa kábaw,</i> We will just draw lots to determine who will get the carabao.

<p><form>pilikpilik<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. night bird. When it shows itself it is thought to indicate that s.t. bad is happening in the vicinity.

<p><form>pilikula</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>motion pictures</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>film industry</tr>.

<p><form>pilínu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> drive an animal or car. <i>Rás ang namilínu sa kutsi,</i> The person who is driving the car is reckless. <i>Dì na pilinúhan ning kabáwa kay katultul na,</i> You don&apos;t have to drive this carabao because he knows the way. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make s.t. spin. <i>Akuy únang mupilínu sa ákung kasing,</i> I&apos;ll make my top spin first. <pos>n</pos> the rope used for leading a draft animal. <pos>a</pos> <tr>spinning wheel</tr>.

<p><form>pilípig</form> <pos>n</pos> roasted young rice grains. After being roasted the grains are pounded, winnowed, and used for making sweets. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make <ix>pilípig</ix>.

<p><form>Pilipína</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Filipino woman</tr>.

<p><form>Pilipínas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Philippines</tr>. <form>pilipinismu</form> <pos>n</pos> Filipinism.

<p><form>pilipinista</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the Philippine Independent (Aglipayan) Church. <number>2</number> a member of this church. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> become a member of the Aglipayan church.

<p><form>Pilipínu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>Filipino</tr> person. <number>2</number> the national language of the Philippines. <form>pilipinhun</form> <pos>n</pos> Filipino, from the Philippines. <i>Laráwan sa Pilipinhung mithì,</i> A picture of the Filipino virtues.

<p><form>pilípit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> roll or twist s.t. small between the fingers or with the palm of the hand. <i>Pilipítun paghugut nang lumbuy,</i> Roll that <ix>lumbuy</ix> leaf tight (for a cigar). <form>&mdash; ang dílà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN]</itype> get <tr>tongue-tied</tr>. <i>Mupilípit nang íyang dílà ug magsulti siyag Binisayà,</i> She gets all tongue-tied when she speaks Visayan.

<p><form>pilipíti</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> roll or twist s.t. very small in the hands or between the fingers. <i>Pilipitíha ang hílu arun masulud sa dágum,</i> Twist the thread to make it easy to pass through the eye of the needle. <i>Pilipit-i (pilipitíhi) ug balhíbu ang ímung dunggan,</i> Twirl a feather around in your ears.

<p><form>pilípug</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. dwarf coconut, growing no more than three meters, producing small fruits. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> of the <ix>pilípug</ix> sort.

<p><form>pilípul</form> <pos>n</pos> crown of the head where the hair forms a whorl. <i>Duhay pilípul ánang batáa,</i> That child is double-crowned.

<p><form>pílir</form> <pos>n</pos> loose-leaf paper filler for a notebook.

<p><form>pílir gids</form> <pos>n</pos> feeler, a thickness gauge consisting of a thin, narrow strip of metal of a given thickness.

<p><form>pilis</form> <pos>n</pos> a pinch of s.t. fibrous as cotton, fiber, thread, etc. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b]</itype> get a pinch of s.t. fibrous. <i>Pilisi kug gápas nga ákung ihúnad,</i> Get me a pinch of cotton to dress the wound with.

<p><form>pilit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC3; b6]</itype> <tr>stick on</tr>. <i>Mipilit ang tikì sa ákung tangkúgù,</i> The gecko stuck to the nape of my neck. <i>Nagpílit ang mga silyu,</i> The stamps got stuck to each other. <i>Pitlan tag istíkir ang kutsi,</i> Let&apos;s stick a sticker on the car. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> stick to one&apos;s lover (slang). <i>Mupilit nà siya nímu ug ímung makúhà,</i> She&apos;ll stick to you once you manage to get her to go to bed with you. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for one&apos;s gaze to be fixed. <i>Mipilit ang ákung panan-aw sa íyang atubangan,</i> My gaze rested on her front (genital region). <pos>a</pos> sticky so as to adhere. <i>Pilit kaáyu ning papilíta,</i> This paste is very sticky. <pos>n</pos> sticky rice, used for sweets. <form>&mdash; mais</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. corn that produces sticky grits, used for making desserts. <form>&mdash; ug kamut</form> <tr>thieving</tr>. <form>&mdash; ug dílà</form> having difficulty pronouncing. <form>(&larr;)<sub>1</sub> &mdash; ang dílà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> have difficulty pronouncing. <i>Nagpílit ang ákung dílag pangatarúngan,</i> I got all tongue-tied trying to explain. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>paste</tr>, stick s.t. to s.t. <i>Mipapilit siyag pahibalu sa bungbung,</i> She pasted an announcement on the wall. <pos>n</pos> <tr>paste</tr>. <form>pilitpílit</form> <pos>a</pos> having difficulty enunciating. <i>Walay pilitpílit nga pamatíun,</i> He speaks glibly. (Lit. You don&apos;t hear the tongue sticking.) &dagger;

<p><form>pílit<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>insist</tr> on doing s.t. or that s.o. else do s.t. <i>Mipílit siya pagsulud sa kwartu nga ngitngit kaáyu,</i> He insisted on getting inside the very dark room. <i>Ayaw kug pilíta sa pagpasulti sa tinúud,</i> Don&apos;t force me to say the truth. <form>ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>insistent</tr>.

<pb n=762>

<p><form>pilíti</form> <xr>= <sc>PLÍTI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pilitína</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>drawstring</tr> in the waistline used instead of a garter. <number>1a</number> <tr>apron strings</tr>. <form>pahikut sa &mdash;</form> for a man to get married (lit. allow himself to get tied to the apron strings). <number>2</number> belt worn around the waist. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make into a drawstring or belt.

<p><form>píliw</form> <pos>a</pos> area of the sea near the shore, but still covered at low tide. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B25; c]</itype> go to the sea near the shore. <i>Akuy dalas timun ug mupíliw na ang lansa,</i> I&apos;ll take the wheel when the launch gets in close to the shore. <i>Nagkapiliw na ta. Palawri ug diyútay,</i> We are slowly moving toward the shore. Steer toward the deeper waters. <form>pa-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b1]</itype> go toward the sea near the shore. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> portion of the sea near the shore. <form>kina-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> part of the sea nearest the shore (but covered at low tide).

<p><form>pilkag</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for the Philippine Civic Action Group, a group of soldiers sent to South Vietnam in the mid 1960&apos;s.

<p><form>pilm</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>film</tr> for cameras.

<p><form>pilpil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> slap s.o.&apos;s hands lightly. <i>Pilpílun ang kamut sa bátang hugawan,</i> Any child that plays with dirt, I will slap his hands. <pos>n</pos> slapping the hands.

<p><form>píls</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>contraceptive pills</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> take contraceptive pills.

<p><form>pilt</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>felt</tr>.

<p><form>piltir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> filter tips of cigarettes. <number>2</number> filter. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put, make a <tr>filter</tr>. <i>Kinsay nagpiltir sa tangki sa túbig?</i> Who put a filter in the water tank?

<p><form>pilu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> look down on, have a low regard for s.o. <i>Dílì ángay kapiluhan ang kapubri sa táwu,</i> It isn&apos;t right to look down on s.o. just because he&apos;s poor.

<p><form>pílu</form> <pos>n</pos> the cutting edge of a saw.

<p><form>pilù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> fold s.t. flat. <i>Pil-a (pilua) ang mga lampin,</i> Fold the diapers. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> crease, get creased. <i>Napilù ang litrátu kay gipasuk lang sa subri,</i> The photo got creased because it was just stuffed into the envelope. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> make a crease in; turn a hem up. <i>Nahíwì man pagpilù ang sidsid,</i> The hem is crooked. <i>Ayawg pil-i ang karsúnis,</i> Don&apos;t put a crease in the trousers. <number>4</number> <itype>[B25; a12]</itype> be doubled, multiplied several times. <i>Patubúun kini hangtud mupilù ang gidak-un,</i> Let it rise until there is double the amount. <i>Katulu piluun (pil-un) ang ákung gastu kay sa imúha,</i> My expenses are three times greater than yours. <number>5</number> <formx>&mdash; sa, ang túhud</formx> <itype>[A3; c1]</itype> bend one&apos;s knees to ask forgiveness. <i>Dì ku pasaylúun ang ákung asáwa bísag magpilù pa siya sa íyang túhud,</i> I will never forgive my wife even if she crawls to me on hands and knees. <number>6</number> <itype>[B3]</itype> for the eyes to close in falling asleep. <i>Duyána ang bátà kay nagpilù na ang mata,</i> Put the baby in the cradle because it&apos;s asleep. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the hem or fold in s.t. <number>2</number> the crease. <number>3</number> the number of times s.t. increases. <i>Pila ka pilù ang pagdaghan sa liwat?</i> How much has the stock multiplied by now? <form>&mdash; sa &mdash;</form> to the fullest extent. <i>Pilù sa pilù ang ákung pagbásul, paghigugma, pag-úyun, pagláum,</i> I regret, love, agree, hope (etc.) with all my heart and soul. <form>pilùpilù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B456; a]</itype> be doubled or multiplied several times. <i>Mupilùpilù ang panalángin ug manggihatágun ka,</i> Your blessings will be multiplied if you are generous. <form>pinil-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the crease or mark made by folding. <number>2</number> s.t. on which a hem or fold has been made.

<p><form>piluk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>eyelash</tr>. <number>2</number> fringe, trimming of cords or threads hanging like eyelashes. <form>&mdash; sa nípà</form> end tips of nipa shingles. <number>3</number> <tr>wink</tr> or <tr>blink</tr> of an eye. <number>4</number> first few days of the third quarter (so called because only the width of the eyelash has been taken away from the moon). <i>Primírung, ikaduhang piluk,</i> The first, second day of the third quarter. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2N; c1]</itype> wink or blink the eyes. <i>Ayawg ipiluk (piluka) ímung mata ug han-an ka,</i> Don&apos;t blink when he raises his fist to strike you. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put eyelashes, a fringe on s.t. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. adorned with fringes. <number>2</number> way of blinking the eyes. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> a wink of an eye. <i>Sa usa ka pamiluk nawálà siya,</i> He vanished in the blink of an eye.

<p><form>pilúka</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wig</tr>, <tr>wiglet</tr>, false hair. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> use a wig or false hair.

<p><form>piluk maríya</form> <xr>= <sc>AGÚHÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pilung</form> <pos>a</pos> for a pointed instrument to be bent out of shape at the tip. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> bend the point of an instrument. <i>Napilung ang tumuy sa pín pagkahúlug,</i> The pen point was bent out of shape when I dropped it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> cut the ear or part of it so that it dangles, usually as an identifying mark.

<p><form>pilus</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. cloth with a soft, furry surface.

<p><form>pilusupíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>philosophy</tr>.

<p><form>pilusupu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>philosopher</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>argumentative</tr>, given to meticulous argumentations on trivial points. <i>Pilusupu kaáyung tawhána kay lantugíun bísag gagmayng butang,</i> He is a very argumentative person because he argues on even the most trivial of things. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a12]</itype> become argumentative. <form>Culu-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> acting argumentative on trivial points where one shouldn&apos;t do so. <i>Dì siya makapupilusupu nákù kay suphun man dáyun,</i> He can&apos;t start subjecting me to his spidery logic because I&apos;ll cut him short.

<pb n=763>

<p><form>pílut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> sew up, patch a hole permanently, become so. <i>Akuy mupílut sa gisì sa ímung sinínà,</i> I&apos;ll mend the tear in your dress. <i>Mapílut ang lungag sa dawunggan ug dílì ariyúsan,</i> The holes in your ear will close if you do not wear earrings. <i>Pilútun ang mga lungaglungag úsà silákan,</i> The tiny holes are filled before you apply shellac. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>slit-eyed</tr>. <number>2</number> for seeds or fruits to be thin, compressed. <i>Dílì maáyung itanum ang mga lísung pilut,</i> It is no good to plant scrawny seeds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B25]</itype> for seeds or fruits to be too thin or scrawny.

<p><form>pilutári</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jai alai player</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be a jai alai player.

<p><form>pilútu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pilot</tr> of a plane or boat. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> pilot s.t. <number>2</number> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> be, become a pilot.

<p><form>pilya</form> <xr>= <sc>PILYU</sc></xr> (female).

<p><form>pilyu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>naughty</tr>, <tr>mischievous</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become naughty, mischievous. <i>Napilyu siya kay pinatuyángan sa kapritsu,</i> He became a naughty child because they catered to his caprices. <form>&mdash; sa babáyi</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>philanderer</tr>. <form>-in-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> behave mischievously, usually at s.o.&apos;s expense. <i>Mangasábà ang maistra ug pinilyuhun (ipinilyu) nímu pagpangutána,</i> The teacher will scold you if you ask questions in a naughty way.

<p><form>píma</form> <pos>n</pos> cloth made of pima cotton. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear s.t. of pima.

<p><form>pimbríra</form> <xr>= <sc>TIMBRÍRA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>piminta</form> <xr>= <sc>PIMYINTA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pimríra</form> <xr>= <sc>TIMBRÍRA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pimyinta</form> <pos>n</pos> black or white pepper. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> put pepper in s.t.

<p><form>pín<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> pen point of a fountain pen. <form>&mdash; puyint</form> pen point of a dip pen.

<p><form>pín<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> pin a ribbon or badge of honor, an ornament, and the like. <i>Pínan ang balidikturyan ug midalya,</i> They&apos;ll pin a medal on the valedictorian.

<p><form>pina-</form> prefix consisting of <ix>pa-</ix> plus <ix>-in-<sub>2</sub></ix>.

<p><form>pína<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> tell s.o. not to do s.t. <i>Nagpína si Tátay nga dì ta pagul-un,</i> Father told us not to go out. <i>Gipináhan ang dinakpan sa dílì pagpamakak,</i> The suspect was told to tell the truth. <i>Tumána ang ákung gipína nímu,</i> If I tell you not to do s.t., don&apos;t do it.

<p><form>pína<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> hit s.t. at an angle instead of directly. <i>Pináhi ang burilyus arun mapingkian ang tupad,</i> Hit the bowling pin obliquely so that it will knock the other pins over, too. <pos>a</pos> grazing a target or hitting it obliquely.

<p><form>pinal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> be laboring for breath on one&apos;s deathbed. <i>Nagpinal pa gánì ang amahan, nag-ílug na sila sa katigayúnan,</i> The father was still laboring for breath on his deathbed, and they were already quarreling about the inheritance. <form>kudigu &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>penal code</tr>. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>KUDIGU</sc>, <i>n2,</i> <i>v</i>.</xr>

<p><form>pináli</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>finale</tr>, the closing of a show.

<p><form>pinápul</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. ornamental cactus which has pineapple-like leaves with thorny margins and pinkish tips.

<p><form>pinatbátir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>peanut butter</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, use peanut butter.

<p><form>pinay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Filipina</tr> (colloquial).

<p><form>pinbuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pin boy</tr> in a bowling alley. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be a pin boy.

<p><form>pindaypinday</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> move in a wobbly way. <i>Nagpindaypinday ang kabáyung bag-ung nahimugsù,</i> The horse that was just born is tottering.

<p><form>pindì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> remove unhusked rice or corn grains or pebbles from a batch of rice or grits one is about to cook. <number>2</number> select good ears of corn from a group. <i>Pindía ang mais nga pára binhì,</i> Select the good ears of corn for seeds. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> rice from which the unhusked grains or pebbles have been culled. <number>2</number> ears of corn not selected.

<p><form>pinding</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pending</tr>, unacted on as of yet. <i>Pinding ang kásu,</i> The case is pending.

<p><form>pindir</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>fielder</tr> in baseball.

<p><form>pindisítis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>appendicitis</tr>.

<p><form>pindulu, pindulum</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pendulum</tr> in a clock.

<p><form>pindulun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>king post</tr> supporting a roof.

<p><form>ping</form> <pos>n</pos> word used in writing to represent the sound of a bullet hitting s.t.

<p><form>píngag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>chip</tr> the edge. <i>Napíngag ang daplin sa pinggan,</i> The edge of the plate chipped. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>chipped</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be a chipped one. <i>Ug mapingag ang tadiyaw ayawg palita,</i> If the jar is chipped, don&apos;t buy it.

<p><form>pingak</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>flat-nosed</tr>, esp. at the bridge. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become flat-nosed.

<p><form>pingakpíngak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> breathe laboriously with a wheezing sound in the breast, as in stifling a sob or in an asthmatic spasm. <i>Mupingakpíngak dáyun nà siya ug kasab-an,</i> She starts sniffling when she&apos;s scolded just the slightest bit. <i>Nagpingakpíngak ang hubákun,</i> The asthmatic is breathing laboriously.

<p><form>pingay</form> <pos>n</pos> child&apos;s talk for female genitalia.

<p><form>pingga</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> carry s.o. in a chair with poles attached to it. <i>Gipingga ang Santu Pápa,</i> The pope was carried seated on a throne. <pos>n</pos> chair used to carry s.o. <form>pinggahan</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>PINGGA</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p><form>pinggan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dinner plate</tr>, usually china. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> eat from china plates. <i>Dì ta magpinggan kay kápuy paghúgas,</i> We won&apos;t use plates because it&apos;s tiresome to wash them. <form>pingganpinggan</form> <xr>= <sc>BUKINGGAN</sc></xr>: <bio>Gomphrena <pb n=764>globosa</bio>.

<p><form>pinggiring</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fingering</tr> in playing an instrument or operating a typewriter. <i>Unsay pinggiring íning nutáha?</i> What&apos;s the fingering for this note?

<p><form>pinggir prin, pinggir print</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fingerprint</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> take s.o.&apos;s fingerprints.

<p><form>pinghuy</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>disappointed</tr> and <tr>downhearted</tr>. <i>Pinghuy ang nawung sa pildíru,</i> The man who lost in gambling had a dejected look on his face. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN; c1]</itype> be disappointed and downhearted. <i>Naminghuy siya sa pagkahibalu nga wà siya dawáta,</i> He was disappointed when he discovered he was not accepted.

<p><form>pingis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; ab]</itype> fail to hit s.t. directly or right on the mark. <i>Gipingsan sa bála ang ákung agtang,</i> The bullet grazed my fore-*head. a not hit directly. <i>Pingis rang pagkaigúa maung nakalupad,</i> I just grazed it so it managed to fly away.

<p><form>ping-it</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <tr>grimace</tr>, usually in pain or suffering. <i>Miping-it siya sa kasakit,</i> He grimaced in pain. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>suffer</tr> in much misery or difficulty. <i>Nagping-it ang tanan sa kamahal sa palalítun,</i> Everybody is suffering from the high prices of commodities.

<p><form>pingk</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>pink-colored</tr>.

<p><form>pingkaw</form> <xr>= <sc>SINGKAW</sc>, <i>n2,</i> <i>v</i>.</xr>

<p><form>pingkì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; ac]</itype> knock lightly, esp. s.t. that produces a clinking noise. <i>Hináyag pingkì ang duha ka básu,</i> Clink the two glasses together lightly. <i>Pingkíun ku unyà nang inyung úlu,</i> I think I&apos;ll knock your heads against each other. <pos>a</pos> <tr>knock-kneed</tr>. <i>Pingkì ang babáyi nga íyang naasáwa,</i> He married a knock-kneed woman. <pos>n</pos> <tr>clinking</tr>, <tr>clanking</tr> sound. <i>Ang pingkì sa yílu sa básu,</i> The clinking of the ice against the glass. <form>-in-</form> <xr>= <sc>PINGKÌ</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p><form>pingkit</form> <pos>a</pos> for things that are alike to be joined by some part of themselves. <i>Pingkit ang tiil sa bíbi,</i> Ducks have webbed feet. <i>Pingkit nga ságing,</i> Two bananas joined together as one. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> tie things together using a part of them to do the tying. <i>Nagpingkit siya sa mga butung nga dad-un,</i> He tied the two young coconuts together for us to take home. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> things joined in this way.

<p><form>pingpung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ping-pong</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>ping-pong ball</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; b6]</itype> play ping-pong. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> place to play ping-pong.

<p><form>pinguspingus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> make quick sniffs at intervals as in sobbing or simply drawing mucus back into the nose. <i>Naghilak tingáli ang bátà kay nagpinguspingus man,</i> The child must have been crying because he is sniffling. <pos>n</pos> <tr>sniffling</tr>.

<p><form>píngut</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>irritated</tr>, slightly angry. <i>Píngut kaáyu ug makakità kug bátang húgaw,</i> I get very annoyed if I see a dirty child. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; ab3c5]</itype> get annoyed, irritated. <i>Nagpíngut ning ákung úlu sa kasábà,</i> My head is buzzing from the noise. <i>Kinsay dílì mapíngut sa kabúgù nímu?</i> Who wouldn&apos;t be irritated by your stupidity? <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>irritation</tr>, <tr>anger</tr>.

<p><form>ping-ut</form> <pos>a</pos> for the nose to be stuffed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b4]</itype> have a stuffed nose. <i>Muping-ut (maping-ut) ang ákung ilung ug hitun-ugan ku,</i> I will get a stuffed nose if I expose myself to the draft.

<p><form>pinguypinguy</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a3]</itype> let one&apos;s head hang limply, as in being sleepy, drunk, feeble, and the like. <i>Nagpinguypinguy siya kay gitulug,</i> His head is hanging limply because he is so sleepy. <number>3</number> <itype>[AP; b6]</itype> hang one&apos;s head in shame. <i>Mupinguypinguy (mupapinguypinguy) lang nà siyag kasab-an,</i> He just hangs his head when he is reprimanded.

<p><form>pingwit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>BINGWIT</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> <tr>pick pockets</tr>, <tr>filch</tr> (slang). <i>Gipingwit ang mga sinínà nga gihayhay sa kwartu,</i> The clothes that were hung in the room were stolen. <i>Pingwíti ang íyang bulsa,</i> Pick his pocket. <number>3</number> fish for a compliment, gossip, and the like. <pos>n</pos> the equipment for hook and line fishing in shallow or moderately deep sea waters. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fish caught by hook and line in shallow or not too deep waters. <number>2</number> thing stolen or pickpocketed. <number>3</number> talk gathered.

<p><form>pinhuldir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>penholder</tr> for a dip pen. <number>2</number> <tr>dip pen</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> use, write with a dip pen. <i>Magpinhuldir mi sa ámung tim rayting,</i> We&apos;ll use dip pens for writing our themes.

<p><form>pinid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> separate things out by class. <number>2</number> do s.t. in proper order, not skipping around. <i>Pinira ang paglimpiyu sa salug arun dì ka magbalikbálik,</i> Clean the floor square at a time so you don&apos;t keep having to go over the same things again and again. <i>Akuy mupinid sa mga maáyung púsù sa dì maáyu,</i> I&apos;ll separate the good ears of corn from the bad ones. <i>Pinira ang mga piryudiku sa tinuig,</i> Separate the newspapers out according to years.

<p><form>pinig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>put aside</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>sort</tr> or separate according to kind. <i>Nagpinig kug dagkung lubi pára ibinhì,</i> I put aside the large coconuts for seedlings. <number>3</number> <tr>exclude</tr> from. <i>Gipinig siya sa iks&acaron;m,</i> She was excused from the exam. <number>4</number> <tr>favor</tr>, show <tr>partiality</tr> to or discrimination against. <form>ma-un(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> showing discrimination. <i>Mapinígun siyag higála,</i> He is choosy about who he makes friends with.

<p><form>pinikáda</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. disinfectant solution. <form>agwa &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>PINIKÁDA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pinikítu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> enforce rules or collect <pb n=765>debts in a strict manner. <i>Dúnay mga kumirsiyanti nga kusug mupinikítu ug paningil,</i> Some business people are merciless when it comes to collecting their debts. <i>Gipinikítu (gipinikitúhan) na run sa gubyirnu ang mga ismaglir,</i> The government is tightening the reins on the smugglers.

<p><form>*píning</form> <form>maáyu ang &mdash;</form> throwing the ball in bowling so that lots of pins are knocked over. <i>Dakù siyag puntus kay maáyu ang íyang píning,</i> He has a large score because he knocked lots of pins over.

<p><form>pinípig</form> <xr>= <sc>PILÍPIG</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; krans</form> <pos>n</pos> ice cream on sticks with chocolate coating that has <ix>pilípig</ix> embedded in it.

<p><form>pinipíta</form> <xr>= <sc>SIRBILYÍTA<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pinisilin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>penicillin</tr>.

<p><form>pinising, pinísing</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>finish</tr>, <tr>final coating</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> apply finish. <i>Hámis ang simintung pinisíngan,</i> The concrete floor will be smooth after it has been finished. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. nail without a head used to nail things in such a way that it is invisible.

<p><form>pinitinsiya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>penance</tr>. <pos>a</pos> involving difficulty or suffering. <i>Pinitinsiya kaáyu, kita pay mulíhuk nga nagsakit ta,</i> It is purgatory to do household chores when you&apos;re not feeling well. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> impose penance. <i>Gipinitinsiyáhan kug usa ka nubína,</i> I was given the penance of performing a novena. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> annoy or burden s.o. with sufferings. <i>Pinitinsiyáhan ta ka arun ku makabalus,</i> I&apos;ll make you go through hell so I can get even with you.

<p><form>pinkaw</form> <xr>= <sc>SINGKAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pinkusyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pincushion</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> use a pincushion.

<p><form>pinpal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pen pal</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; c3]</itype> have a pen pal, be pen pals. <i>Makigpinpal ang tigúlang pinsiyunádu ug Pilipína,</i> The old pensioner wants to engage in correspondence with a Filipina (for the purpose of marriage).

<p><form>pinpin</form> <pos>n</pos> game of eeny, meeny, miny, mo. One version of the rhyme: <i>Pinpin sirapin, kutsilyu dialmasin. Hawhaw dikarabaw, bá tú tin.</i> Another version: <i>Pinpin sarapin dilmun. Bayintisingku kapun. Kulikulik bastun.</i> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2; a12]</itype> choose by <ix>pinpin</ix>.

<p><form>pinsa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fence of wood or bamboo slats. <number>2</number> space fenced with slats under a house which is raised on posts. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> fence s.t. <number>2</number> fence the part under a house. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> rough walling made of bamboo slats, groups of two vertical slats woven through groups of three horizontal slats.

<p><form>pinsar, pins&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> think of a way, solution. <i>Pinsárun (pinsarun) ta nig maáyu ug unsay maáyung paági,</i> Let&apos;s think hard about this, what the best solution is. <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s way of thinking, thought processes. <i>Hínay kaáyu ang íyang pinsar, apan pulus hustu,</i> He thinks slowly, but it is always correct. <form>paN-</form> <xr>= <sc>PINSAR</sc>.</xr> <form>pinsáda</form> <xr>= <sc>PINSAR</sc>.</xr> <form>pinsamintu, pinsamyintu</form> <xr>= <sc>PINSAR</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p><form>pinsil<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> treat a puncture with drops from a burning tobacco midrib dipped in coconut oil. <i>Kinahanglang pinsílan ang tunuk sa lansang,</i> The way to treat that wound from the nail is to apply tobacco and coconut oil drops.

<p><form>pinsil<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> skirt, cut like a sheath, straight, narrow at the hips and all the way down to the hem. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> wear, make a skirt of this type. <form>&mdash; kat</form> <xr>= <sc>PINSIL<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pinsing</form> <pos>n</pos> the sport of <tr>fencing</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; b3]</itype> fence.

<p><form>pinsit</form> <pos>n</pos> dish made of ground meat, wrapped in triangular pieces of dough and fried crisp. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make <ix>pinsit</ix>.

<p><form>pinsiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pension</tr>. <number>2</number> allowance given to a son or daughter with a family of his own. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give or support a daughter or son with a family of his own. <i>Gipinsiyunan mi sa ákung ginikánan samtang wà kuy trabáhu,</i> My parents are sending us an allowance until I find a job. <form>-áda</form> <xr>= <sc>PINSIYUNÁDU</sc></xr> (female). <form>-ádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> one who receives a pension. <number>2</number> person whose studies are subsidized by the government. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become a <ix>pinsiyunádu</ix>.

<p><form>pinta<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; abc]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. all at once. <i>Pintáha paghákut ang káhuy,</i> Carry the firewood all together. <i>Pintáhig báyad ang iskuyláhan,</i> Pay the school fees all at once. <number>2</number> do s.t. in large quantities. <i>Pintáhag palit arun mabarátu,</i> Buy it in large quantities so it will be cheap. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> hit s.t. squarely such that it has complete effect. <i>Ug mapintag búnal ang irù mamatay giyud,</i> If you hit the dog squarely, you&apos;ll kill him. <pos>a</pos> be hit squarely. <form>-da</form> <xr>= <sc>PINTA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pinta<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a1]</itype> guess the value of an inverted mahjong piece by feeling it with the finger<note>space?</note>tips. <i>Pintáhun<note>questionable accent. P2</note> ku ang ímung witingan,</i> I&apos;ll feel the piece to see which one is the one you are waiting for. <form>-da</form> <xr>= <sc>PINTA<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pintakási<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> work in a group without pay on a public project. <i>Gipintakasíhan sa tagibaryu ang iskuylahan,</i> The people in the village held a working bee to construct the school. <pos>n</pos> free group work on a public project or the action of taking part in this k.o. group work.

<p><form>pintakási<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> licensed cockfight of champion fighting cocks. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> hold, have a champion cockfight. <i>Magpintakási sa ámung baryu <pb n=766>mapista,</i> They hold champion cockfights in our village during fiestas.

<p><form>pintal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>paint</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> paint s.t. <i>Pintáli ug asul ang lantsa,</i> Paint the launch blue. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2N]</itype> put lipstick on. <i>Mamintal lang ku iniglakaw,</i> I put lipstick on when I go out. <number>3</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> for one&apos;s feeling to show in the face. <i>Napintal sa ílang nawung ang dakung katingála,</i> Their great surprise showed on their faces. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>paintings</tr>. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. that has been painted. <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>painter</tr>: <number>1</number> <tr>artist</tr>. <number>2</number> painter of houses, furniture, etc. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> style of painting. <number>2</number> occupation of painting.

<p><form>pintas</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>ferocious</tr>, <tr>cruel</tr> and <tr>merciless</tr>. <i>Pintas kaáyu ang liyun,</i> A very fierce lion. <i>Ang pintas nga mga balud,</i> The raging waves. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become cruel and ferocious. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ferocity</tr>, <tr>brutality</tr>. <i>Ang kapintas sa mga kaáway mauy gikahadlúkan sa mga sibilyan,</i> The civilians feared the merciless enemy.

<p><form>pintik<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>slingshot</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> shoot with a slingshot. <i>Pintíkun nátù ang hinug nga búnga,</i> Let&apos;s knock the ripe fruit down with a slingshot.

<p><form>pintik<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PUNTIK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pintikustis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Whitsunday</tr>.

<p><form>pintuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>terse</tr>, to the point. <i>Památig maáyu kay pintuk ning ákung túgun,</i> Pay close attention because I&apos;m going to tell you in a couple of words what I want you to do. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; c16]</itype> talk or answer in a terse manner. <form>pintukpintuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> do s.t. once in a while in short, irregular periods of time and usually not whole-heartedly. <i>Wà mahuman ang trabáhu kay pintukpintúkan lang,</i> The work never got done because he didn&apos;t stick to it and he didn&apos;t have his heart in it.

<p><form>pintuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> hit s.o. in back of one accidentally. <i>Ayaw ug barug sa ákung luyu kay hingpintukan unyà kas atsa,</i> Don&apos;t stand in back of me because you might get hit with my axe.

<p><form>pintil pin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>felt-tip pen</tr>.

<p><form>pintul</form> (from <ix>putul</ix>) <pos>n</pos> pieces of wood left over after carpentry. <i>Magámit pa ning pintul pára sa bangkítu,</i> We can use these <corr sic=piece>pieces</corr> of wood for a stool. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> cut wood into short lengths, chop logs crosswise. <i>Nagpintul siya sa mga sugnud,</i> He is cutting the firewood into lengths. <number>2</number> shorten or stub s.t. by cutting off a length. <i>Gipintúlan níya ang mga tabákù,</i> She cut off the tops of the tobacco. a cut off short, into short lengths. <i>Irù nga pintul ug íkug,</i> A dog with a stubbed tail.

<p><form>pintur, pint&ucaron;r</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>painter</tr>: <number>1</number> <tr>artist</tr>. <number>2</number> painter of houses and the like. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be, become a painter.

<p><form>pintúra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>paint</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> paint s.t. <i>Nabag-u ang balay nga gipinturáhan,</i> Their house looks new because it was just painted. <form>ka-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> get paint all over it.

<p><form>pintus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sweet made of shredded young corn mixed with condensed milk or coconut milk and sugar, wrapped in husk and steamed (<xr>= <sc>ALUPÌ</sc></xr>). <number>2</number> the same sort of sweet made with fine corn grits (<ix>tiktik</ix>) or sweet potatoes or cassava and wrapped in coconut or banana leaves. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make <ix>pintus</ix>.

<p><form>pínu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> refined, not coarse in manners. <i>Pínug linihukan,</i> Refined in movement. <number>1a</number> fine, of delicate composition. <i>Pínug lís,</i> Fine lace. <number>2</number> fine, not coarse in texture. <i>Pínug kútis,</i> Soft skin. <i>Pínug buhuk,</i> Fine hair. <i>Pínung pagkagaling,</i> Milled finely. <number>2a</number> done in small pieces. <i>Pínung pagkahíwà,</i> Cut up fine. <number>2b</number> closely spaced. <i>Ang súlud usa ka sudlay nga pínug tangu,</i> The comb for lice is a very fine-toothed comb. <number>2c</number> very tiny. <i>Pínung kinusian,</i> A small and sharp pinch. <pos>n</pos> children, as opposed to grown-ups. <i>Ilain ug lamísa ang mga pínu,</i> Set another table for the children. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> become refined, do s.t. in a refined way. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make s.t. fine. <form>pinupinu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a1]</itype> break, reduce into tiny bits. <form>pinuhan</form> <pos>n</pos> a whetting stone of fine texture used for the finishing touches.

<p><form>pínu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pine tree</tr>.

<p><form>pínul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> press hard on the muscles with the tips of the thumb and fingers to massage them.

<p><form>pin-ut</form> <xr>= <sc>PING-UT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pinúun</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. ginger plant similar to <ix>alimpuyang</ix>, producing small, sweet berries.

<p><form>pinuy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Filipino</tr>, esp. one who is a resident abroad.

<p><form>pinuy, pínuy</form> <pos>n</pos> duck&apos;s eggs cooked after they have began to develop. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, have <ix>pinuy</ix>.

<p><form>pinya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pineapple</tr>. <number>2</number> cloth woven from the fibers of the pineapple leaves. <form>pinyahan</form> <pos>n</pos> pineapple plantation.

<p><form>pinyátu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>peanut brittle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a1]</itype> make peanut brittle.

<p><form>pípa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>cigarette holder</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>pipe</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> smoke a pipe or cigarettes with a cigarette holder. <i>Magpípa ku arun dì madág ang ákung tudlù,</i> I use a cigarette holder so that my fingers don&apos;t get yellowed.

<p><form>pípar bag</form> <pos>n</pos> large paper sack with a handle.

<p><form>pípì</form> <pos>n</pos> child&apos;s word for female genitalia.

<p><form>pìpì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> hammer or pat s.t. into shape. <i>Nagpìpì siyag kúlun,</i> He&apos;s shaping a pot by patting it. <i>Pìpíun nátù ang tapalúdung nalumping,</i> Let&apos;s hammer the dented <pb n=767>fender back into shape.

<p><form>pipínu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cucumber</tr>.

<p><form>pípir</form> <pos>n</pos> canned white or black <tr>pepper</tr> in powder form. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b]</itype> use or put pepper.

<p><form>pípir bag</form> <xr>= <sc>PÍPAR BAG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pipis</form> <pos>n</pos> a small bundle of abaca fibers (about the size of a finger) used for tying s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make abaca fibers into such a bundle. <i>Pipisun nákù ning lánut kay ákung ibángan sa sugnud,</i> I&apos;m going to bundle up this abaca fiber to use it to tie up the firewood.

<p><form>pípis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cotton bud</tr> that is about to open. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> for cotton buds to be about to open.

<p><form>piplum</form> <pos>n</pos> peplum, a short flared skirt attached at the waist of a dress, blouse, or jacket, and extending around the hips. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> add a peplum to clothing.

<p><form>pipsi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pepsi cola</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> have, offer pepsi cola. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> money to buy a pepsi.

<p><form>pipti</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC2; b6]</itype> share s.o.&apos;s cigarette or drink with him. <i>Mupipti ku ánang ímung gitangag, ha?</i> Let me share your cigarette with you, may I? <form>piptipipti</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>equal</tr>, <tr>even</tr> (colloquial). <i>Piptipipti ang ílang báhin sa ginansiya,</i> They share the profit equally.

<p><form>pír</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pier</tr>.

<p><form>pira</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. bladed hand weapon 18&Prime; to 24&Prime; with a blade that curves upwards slightly toward the tip and flat at the tip.

<p><form>píras</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pear</tr>.

<p><form>pirásu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> cut s.t. to pieces. <i>Pirasúhun ang nangkà arun ibaligyà,</i> Cut the jackfruit into pieces to sell it. <pos>n</pos> a piece of s.t. <i>Usa ka pirásung karni,</i> A piece of meat. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. cut into pieces. <i>Ang pinirásung karni dílì na mahímung hamun,</i> You can&apos;t use the meat for ham once it has been cut up. <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>by the piece</tr>. <i>Pinirasu ang íyang iniphan sa labáda,</i> She charges for the laundry by the piece. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> pay or charge by the piece.

<p><form>pirat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B146; a4]</itype> be <tr>sleepy</tr>. <i>Gipirat (nagpirat) na kug binása,</i> I&apos;m sleepy from reading so much. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> dilly-dally, take time in doing s.t. <i>Nagpirat sila sa ílang trabáhu kay wà swilduhi,</i> They worked slowly because they didn&apos;t get their salary. <pos>n</pos> <tr>lazy</tr>, <tr>loafer</tr>. <i>Ang pirat nga trabahadur wà umintuhi,</i> He was a lazy worker so he didn&apos;t get a raise. <form>piratpirat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> blink the eyes. <i>Nagpiratpirat pa ang íyang mata nga mibángun,</i> He was still blinking his eyes when he got out of bed. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for a flame to flicker. <i>Gási ang sugà kay nagpiratpirat na,</i> Put kerosene in the lamp because it is flickering.

<p><form>piráta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pirate</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> become a pirate.

<p><form>piraypiray, piraypíray</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; c1]</itype> move unsteadily as if about to collapse. <i>Nagpiraypiray ang masakitun,</i> The patient walked on unsteady feet. <form>sam-</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>SAMPIRAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pir bay pir</form> <pos>a</pos> being <tr>paired off</tr>, esp. boys with girls. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12C; c16]</itype> do s.t. paired off, be paired off. <i>Nagpir bay pir ang mga nagdít sa Pwinti,</i> The couples dating in the park are paired off.

<p><form>pir dayim</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>per diem</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> give or have a per diem allowance. <i>Magpirdayim (pir dayman) mig diyis písus ang adlaw,</i> We get a per diem of ten pesos. <i>Ang kumpaníya magpirdayim námug diyis,</i> The company gives us a per diem of ten pesos.

<p><form>pirdi</form> <xr>= <sc>PILDI</sc>.</xr> <form>-da</form> <pos>a</pos> for a woman to have lost her virginity.

<p><form>pirdigána</form> <pos>n</pos> game of chess, checkers, or the like in which the object is to make the opponent win all the pieces. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2; c1]</itype> play <ix>pirdigána</ix>.

<p><form>pirdigun, pirdigúnis</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>air rifle</tr> or <tr>shotgun</tr> pellets. <number>2</number> seeds of the mung bean (humorous). <i>Nag-útan mig pirdigúnis,</i> We&apos;re having mung bean stew.

<p><form>pirdisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>loss</tr> or <tr>destruction</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; b4(1)]</itype> cause loss or destruction. <i>Napirdisiyunan mig diyútay sa ámung mga lubi sa pagbagyu,</i> We lost a few of our coconut trees during the typhoon.

<p><form>pird&ucaron;n</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> release from temporal punishment or from punishment for a soul in purgatory. <number>2</number> candle blessed on February 2 in the <ix>kandilarya</ix> celebration together with the <ix>kandilarya</ix> candles. The <ix>pird&ucaron;n</ix> candles are lighted to ask forgiveness for the sins of a dying man. <form>kandílà sa &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>PIRD&Ucaron;N</sc>, <bx>2</bx>.</xr>

<p><form>pirgula</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pergola</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6(1)]</itype> make a pergola.

<p><form>pirhisyu</form> <xr>= <sc>PIRHWISYU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pirhwisyu</form> <pos>a</pos> making a nuisance of oneself. <i>Pahatud ka sa iskuylahan. Pakúhà. Pirhwisyu ka kaáyu,</i> I have to bring you to school and get you. You&apos;re a nuisance. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> make a nuisance of oneself. <i>Nagpirhwisyu ang bátà kay giinítan,</i> The child is crying in an annoying way because he feels hot. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> be put to useless effort or inconvenience. <i>Napirhwisyu kug adtu sa Karkar kay wà didtu ag ámung túyù,</i> I went to a lot of trouble for nothing when I went to Carcar because the person we wanted to see was not there.

<p><form>piri</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b2c3]</itype> surpass in ability or possessions. <i>Dílì giyud nang bayhána mapiri sa mga istayil,</i> That woman has to keep up with the latest styles at all costs. <i>Dì nà siya hipirihan sa pagkagwápa,</i> She is second to none in her beauty. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> allow oneself to get surpassed in ability or possessions. <i>Ug sukmatan, dì siya papiri. Mutubag pud,</i> If you scold him, he won&apos;t let you get the <pb n=768>last word. He talks back.

<p><form>píri</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ferry</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> ferry; go, take on a ferry. <form>&mdash; but</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ferry boat</tr>.

<p><form>pirigpirig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; c16]</itype> wobble, move unsteadily. <i>Dì pa ku manáug kay nagpirigpirig pa ku,</i> I won&apos;t go out yet because I still feel wobbly. <i>Nagpirigpirig siya sa hagdan nga nagkurugkurug,</i> He was walking gingerly on the wobbly steps.

<p><form>pirigrínu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pilgrim</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> make a pilgrimage. <form>pirigrinasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pilgrimage</tr>.

<p><form>pirigula</form> <xr>= <sc>PIRGULA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pirihisyu</form> <xr>= <sc>PIRHWISYU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>piríku</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>parrot</tr>, esp. the blue-naped parrot: <bio>Tanygnathus lucionensis</bio>. <number>2</number> one who mouths and repeats things without understanding them. <form>&mdash; pikuy</form> <number>1</number> <tr>parrot</tr>. <number>2</number> male genitalia (child&apos;s talk). <form>&mdash; táwu</form> phrase uttered to a parrot to make him answer the same thing. <form>pirikúhun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>parrot-like</tr>. <i>Taas untà siyag ilung apan pirikúhun,</i> He has a long nose; only it&apos;s like a parrot&apos;s.

<p><form>pirimyu</form> <xr>= <sc>PRIMYU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pirinda</form> <xr>= <sc>PRINDA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>piris wil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ferris wheel</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> ride in a ferris wheel.

<p><form>pirítu</form> <xr>= <sc>PRÍTU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pirkal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>percale</tr>, k.o. closely woven cotton, usually with large flowery designs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> wear clothing made of percale.

<p><form>pirlas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pearl</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[N2; b6]</itype> dive for pearls. <pos>n</pos> <tr>pearl diving</tr>. <form>mag-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pearl diver</tr>.

<p><form>pirma<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>signature</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> affix one&apos;s signature. <i>Pirmáhi ang tsíki sa luyu,</i> Sign your name on the back of the check.

<p><form>pirma<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>KUMPIRMA</sc>, <pos>n</pos>, <i>v1.</i></xr>

<p><form>pirmaninti</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>permanent</tr>. <i>Kaswal lang ku. Dílì pirmaninti ning ákung trabáhu,</i> I&apos;m just a casual employee. My work is not permanent. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be permanent, make s.t. permanent. <i>Maáyug magpirmaninti ning ákung dibuynas,</i> It would be nice if my luck were a permanent thing. <i>Pirmanintíhun (ipirmaninti) na nátù ang átung kapilya,</i> We&apos;ll build a permanent chapel.

<p><form>pirmi</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>always</tr>. <i>Pirmi ka lang malít,</i> You&apos;re always late. <number>2</number> <tr>steadily</tr>, <tr>consistent</tr>. <i>Ug pirmi ang inandaran sa mutur, way daut,</i> If the motor runs steadily, there&apos;s nothing wrong. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> do s.t. always or regularly all the time. <i>Nagpirmi lang siyag katúlug,</i> He is sleeping all the time. <i>Pirmíha ang ímung maáyung gáwì,</i> Maintain your good ways. <i>Ipirmi ang ímung kamut sa ákung tiyan,</i> Keep your hand on my stomach. <form>&mdash; ang táku</form> <number>1</number> hold on to the cue in billiards&mdash;i.e., not lose the play. (When one misses, the cue is passed to the next players.) <number>2</number> go steady with a girl. <number>2a</number> have intercourse steadily. <number>3</number> be employed steadily in one job. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB6; c16]</itype> keep the cue in billiards. <number>2</number> go steady with s.o. <i>Mupirmi (mapirmi) ang táku nátù kun pahagkun ku nímu,</i> I will go steady with you if you will let me kiss you. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> have sexual intercourse regularly. <i>Nagpirmi ang ílang táku kay nahigám,</i> They always make love because they have come to learn how much fun it is. <number>3</number> <itype>[B6; c16]</itype> become permanent in a job. <i>Mapirmi ang ímung táku basta maáyu ang ímung ági,</i> I will keep employing you if you do well.

<p><form>pirmíru</form> <xr>= <sc>PRIMÍRU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pirmísu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>permission</tr>, <tr>permit</tr>. <i>Dúnay pirmísu ang ílang bayli,</i> They have a permit to hold their dances. <i>Milakaw silang way pirmísu sa inahan,</i> They went out without their mother&apos;s permission. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> give permission.

<p><form>pirmisyas</form> <xr>= <sc>PRIMISYAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pirmit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>permit</tr>, <tr>license</tr> to do s.t.

<p><form>pirnu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bolt</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make, use a bolt s.w.

<p><form>pirpiktu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>perfect</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> make s.t. perfect.

<p><form>pirpitwa</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>KADÍNA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pirpúmi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>perfume</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> use perfume.

<p><form>pirs</form> <xr>= <sc>PIRST</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pirsigir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a3c]</itype> force oneself or s.o. to do s.t.; do s.t. with persistence and determination. <i>Mipirsigir ang masakitun pagtindug,</i> The patient forced himself to get up. <i>Pirsigiha siya pagpakasal sa íyang gipirdi,</i> Make him marry the woman he disgraced.

<p><form>pirsing kap</form> <pos>n</pos> cap with a visor in the front, of the type worn by army officers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear such a cap.

<p><form>pirst</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>first place</tr> in a competition. <number>1a</number> one who is first place, first-placer. <i>Akuy pirst sa ámung klási,</i> I&apos;m the best in my class. <number>2</number> the one before the second. <i>Ang ímung ngán pirst sa lista,</i> Your name is at the top of the list. <form>&mdash; bis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>first base</tr> in baseball. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b4(1)]</itype> reach first base. <i>Hingpirstbisan ta sa átung kuntra,</i> Our opponents managed to reach the first base. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get to first base with a girl, get a favorable reaction. <i>Gidatungan kug maáyu ang inahan piru wà giyud ku makapirst bis sa anak,</i> I bribed the mother, but I still couldn&apos;t get to first base with the daughter. <form>&mdash; hap</form> <pos>n</pos> first half of a basketball game. <form>-id</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>first aid</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> give first aid. <i>Pirst-íri dáyun ug dúnay makuyapang kadíti,</i> If a cadet faints, give him first aid immediately. <form>&mdash; klas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>first class</tr>. <i>Pirst klas nga pasahíru,</i> First-class passenger. <i>Púru mga pirst klas ang ákung saput,</i> My clothes are all of the best quality. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> go <pb n=769>by way of first class, get first class things. <form>&mdash; lídi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>first lady</tr>, wife of the top official. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be the first lady. <form>&mdash; prayis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>first prize</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> win the first prize. <form>&mdash; plur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ground floor</tr>. <form>&mdash; ran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>first-run movie</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be a first-run movie. <form>&mdash; trip</form> the first trip of the day of a passenger vehicle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> go on the first trip.

<p><form>pirsúna</form> <pos>n</pos> one of the three persons of the Holy Trinity.

<p><form>pirsunáhi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> participant in a movie or play. <number>2</number> important persons. <i>Mga pirsunáhi sa nátad sa kasinihan,</i> Important personages in the movie world.

<p><form>pirsunal</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>in person</tr>. <i>Gustu kung makítà si Núra Unur sa pirsunal,</i> I want to see Nora Aunor in person. <number>2</number> <tr>personal</tr>, pertaining to one&apos;s private life. <i>Ayawg basáha ang sulat kay pirsunal kanà,</i> Don&apos;t read that letter. It&apos;s personal. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c16]</itype> do s.t. in person. <i>Pirsunalun (ipirsunal) nákù paghátag ang rigálu,</i> I&apos;ll give the gift in person. <form>&mdash; apírans</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>personal appearance</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make a personal appearance. <i>Mupirsunal apírans sa istudiyu ang Mis Yunibirs,</i> Miss Universe will make a personal appearance at the studio. <form>-minti</form> <xr>= <sc>PIRSUNAL</sc>, <i>a1.</i></xr>

<p><form>pirsunalidad</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>personality</tr>, personal charm or attraction. <i>Wà giyud siyay pirsunalidad,</i> He has no personality.

<p><form>pirtilaysir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fertilizer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> use fertilizer.

<p><form>piru, píru</form> <tr>but</tr>. <i>Mahal piru maáyu,</i> It&apos;s expensive, but good.

<p><form>pirù</form> <xr>= <sc>PIRUK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>piruhwisyu</form> <xr>= <sc>PIRHWISYU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>piruk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> for the eyes to <tr>blink</tr> once. <form>pirukpiruk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for the eyes to keep blinking. <i>Dì na mupirukpiruk ang ákung tabuntabun sukad ákung gihílut,</i> My eyelids don&apos;t blink anymore after I massaged them. <i>Nagpirukpiruk lang siyang gipangutána,</i> She simply blinked her eyes when she was interrogated. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for a flame or light to flicker.

<p><form>pirukpiruk</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. bird with light brown feathers and black speckles, inhabiting meadows, usually staying perched, singing a rhythm which sounds <ix>pirukpiruk</ix>.

<p><form>pírul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pay roll</tr>. <number>2</number> amount of money to make the pay roll. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> make out the pay roll.

<p><form>pirut, pírut</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a small bird of meadows, the grass warbler: <bio>Cisticola sp</bio>. <number>2</number> the smallest person in a group.

<p><form>piruypiruy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> be unsteady and trembly on one&apos;s feet. <i>Magpiruypiruy pa kug mubángun ku,</i> I&apos;m very wobbly if I try to get up.

<p><form>pirwil parti</form> <xr>= <sc>DISPIDÍDA</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>DISPIDIR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pirwisyu</form> <xr>= <sc>PIRHWISYU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pirya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fair</tr>, <tr>carnival</tr>. <number>2</number> booth in a fair. <i>Daghang pirya sa karnabal,</i> There are lots of booths in the carnival. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> hold a fair.

<p><form>piryud</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>period</tr>, punctuation mark. <number>2</number> <tr>period</tr>, there&apos;s no more to be said about. <i>Dì ka makalakaw. Piryud,</i> You can&apos;t go, and that&apos;s all there is to it. <i>Piryud na mi kay hustu ra ang tulu,</i> We&apos;re not going to have any more children. Three is enough. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> put a period.

<p><form>piryudikal</form> <pos>n</pos> periodical test given prior to the grading period. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> have, take a periodical test. <form>&mdash; tist</form> <xr>= <sc>PIRYUDIKAL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>piryudiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>newspaper</tr>.

<p><form>piryudista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>journalist</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be, become a journalist.

<p><form>pís</form> <xr>= <sc>PYIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>písa<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> spare parts of a machine. <number>2</number> bolt or roll of cloth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c16]</itype> buy cloth by the bolt.

<p><form>písa<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>music</tr>, <tr>musical score</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> use the music in playing. <i>Maáyung magpísa arun dì masayup ang pagtukar,</i> Better use the music so you won&apos;t make a mistake.

<p><form>pisà, písà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; a]</itype> press down s.t. hard and move back and forth over it to crush or mash it. <i>Magpisà kug ságing ipakáun sa bátà,</i> I&apos;ll mash a ripe banana for the child. <i>Pisaa ang lisay hangtud mawálà,</i> Press down hard on the swollen lymph node until it disappears.

<p><form>pisáda<sub>1</sub>, pisadur</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PISAR<sub>3</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pisáda<sub>2</sub></form>. <pos>n</pos> the measurement or distance between the frets of stringed instruments. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> measure the fret distance.

<p><form>pisak, písak</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>muddy ground</tr>, <tr>mire</tr>. <i>Pisak kaáyu ang dálan kay nag-ulan man,</i> The street has turned to mud because it was raining. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c6]</itype> become a mire. <i>Mupisak (mapisak) nang silung ug pirmihag yabu sa hinúgas,</i> The ground underneath the kitchen will turn into a mire if you keep throwing the dishwater on it. <form>pisakpisak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> spatter or splatter dirt or liquid. <i>Nabasà ang sawug kay nagpisakpisak ang bátà sa banyu,</i> The floor got wet because the children were splashing around in the bathtub. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> make a spattering sound. <i>Hilabihan nga nakapisakpisak ang ulan sa gawas,</i> How the rain went pat, pat, pat. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> spattering, wet spot caused by spattering. <number>2</number> spattering sound.

<p><form>pis-ak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> split wood along the grain, or by extension, split similar materials. <i>Nagpis-ak ka na ba ug káhuy isugnud?</i> Have you split wood to use for fuel? <pos>n</pos> piece chopped off.

<pb n=770>

<p><form>pisami</form> <xr>= <sc>KISAMI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pisan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a1]</itype> buy s.t. in bulk. <i>Pisánun ku ang ímung pitu ka alat mangga,</i> I&apos;ll buy your seven basketfuls of mangoes. <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> one who buys in bulk.

<p><form>pisar<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> press down on. <i>Nagpisar kaniya ang daghang prublíma,</i> Numerous problems weigh down on him. <i>Pisara siya arun mutug-an,</i> Press him so he will tell. <i>Napisar siya sa duha ka dagkung batu,</i> He was pressed between two huge boulders.

<p><form>pisar<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> think about, weigh s.t. in the mind. <i>Gipisar niya kun muadtu ba siya u dílì,</i> He is weighing it in his mind whether to go or not.

<p><form>pisar<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> for a dealer to weigh goods he is going to buy. <i>Átung pisarun ang ímung bábuy,</i> I&apos;ll weigh your pig (to buy it). <form>pisáda</form> <pos>n</pos> computation of how much s.t. weighs and is worth. <form>pisadur</form> <pos>n</pos> the one who weighs produce being bought, usually copra. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> become a weigher.

<p><form>pisára</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>blackboard</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> use, write on the blackboard.

<p><form>pisat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> mash, squash s.t. <i>Napisat ang kamátis nga natumban,</i> He squashed the tomato when he stepped on it. <pos>a</pos> <tr>crushed</tr>, <tr>flattened</tr>.

<p><form>pisaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <pos>a</pos> k.o. <tr>kitchen knife</tr> usually with a metal handle.

<p><form>písi</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for P.C., the <tr>Philippine Constabulary</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be, become a member of the P.C. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> have the P.C. arrest s.o. <i>Ipapísi (papisíhan) nang hubug,</i> Have the P.C. arrest (watch) that drunk. <form>&mdash; kuntrul</form> <pos>n</pos> P.C. control. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> put under the control of the P.C. <i>Gipísi kuntrul ang lungsud kay gubut pirmi,</i> The town was placed under P.C. control because of the frequent outbreaks of violence.

<p><form>písì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rope</tr> consisting of two or three strands (<ix>lúbid</ix>) twisted together, usually made of fiber. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a rope, twist s.t. like a rope. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> a device for twisting rope. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> tidbit, made of a heavy dough twisted like a rope and fried until it is brown and crunchy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make, have <ix>pinísì</ix>. <form>mag-r-, maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rope maker</tr>. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> fiber to be made into a rope.

<p><form>pisik</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b2c1]</itype> <tr>spatter</tr>, <tr>splatter</tr>. Hingpiksan kug lápuk, I got spattered with mud. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b2c]</itype> channel s.t., cause a little bit of s.t. to come to certain people. Kinsang kandidatúhay nagpisik ug kwarta pára sa átung lungsud? Which candidate was it that cornered a little bit of money for our town? Hingpiksan kug diyútay sa íyang daug, I managed to get my hands on a little of his winnings. <pos>a</pos> spattering, shooting off of droplets. <i>Pisik duul sa bintánà ug mag-uwan,</i> The water splashes next to the window if it rains. <form>hiN-</form>/<form>haN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> for a small amount to be channeled off to s.o. <i>Way sud-ang nahimisik sa mga mutsatsa. Gihurut ug káun sa bisíta,</i> Not a bit of food seeped to the servants. The visitors ate every bit. <number>2</number> <formx>walà, dílì &mdash;</formx> not spared. <i>Way mahimisik sa kaligutgut sa Diyus,</i> No one is spared God&apos;s wrath.

<p><form>pisikal</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> pertaining to the body as opposed to the mind. <number>2</number> physical education class. <number>3</number> physical examination. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> have a physical education. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> give a physical examination.

<p><form>písiks</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>physics</tr> course or class. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> have a physics class.

<p><form>pisil, písil</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> squeeze s.t. with the tips of the fingers fairly far apart. <i>Pisíla (pisla) ang mangga ug humuk na ba,</i> Squeeze the mango to see if it is ripe yet. <number>2</number> squeeze with the fingers to massage or convey a feeling. <i>Kamau kang mamísil (mupísil) sa gilabdan ug úlu?</i> Do you know how to massage a headache? <i>Gipisil níya ang kamut sa dalága,</i> She gently squeezed the girl&apos;s hand.

<p><form>piskadur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fisherman</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be, become a fisherman.

<p><form>piskal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fiscal</tr>, <tr>district attorney</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa simbahan</form> <pos>n</pos> church clerk or one in charge of keeping the records of the church. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be or become a fiscal. <form>-íya</form> <pos>n</pos> office of the district attorney.

<p><form>piskanti</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> box in a carriage where the driver sits. <number>2</number> <tr>balcony</tr> on the outside of a house. <i>Didtu siya magdiskursu sa piskanti,</i> He made a speech from the balcony. <number>3</number> <tr>davit</tr>, a crane projecting over the side of a ship for hoisting lifeboats.

<p><form>piskat<sub>1</sub></form> (euphemism for <ix>pisti</ix>) <number>1</number> expression of <tr>disgruntlement</tr>. <i>Piskat ning kinabuhía kay kanúnay lang tang gidimalas,</i> What a hell of a life this is. We always have bad luck. <number>2</number> expression of surprise after having done s.t. inadvertently or failing to have done s.t. <i>Piskat nabyaan ang ákung pitáka,</i> Heavens! I forgot my wallet.

<p><form>piskat<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>MITMIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>piskay</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> alert, active and full of energy. <number>2</number> full of life. <i>Piskay ang plásag maduminggu,</i> The plaza is lively on Sundays. <number>3</number> good-looking or well-dressed woman. <number>4</number> pretty in general. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> active and full of energy, sprightly. <i>Mupiskay ang átung láwas basta hustug túlug,</i> You are full of vim and vigor if you get the right amount of sleep. <i>Nagkapiskay <pb n=771>na ang masakitun,</i> The patient is getting stronger. <i>Gipiskáyan ku sa ákung gibátì karun,</i> I feel sprightly now. <number>1a</number> <itype>[AB; a]</itype> do s.t. briskly or hurriedly. <i>Nagkapiskay ang ámung paglakaw pagtaligsik,</i> We walked faster when it started to rain. <i>Piskáya ang pagkuwinta kay naghulat siya,</i> Hurry up with your counting because she is waiting. <number>2</number> get lively and bright. <i>Kining mga búlak ang nakapiskay sa ámung panimalay,</i> These flowers made our home lively. <number>3</number> <itype>[B12; a1]</itype> get nice looking, pretty. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> of a lively, alert, cheerful sort.

<p><form>piskul</form> <xr>= <sc>PISKAT<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>piskur</form> <pos>n</pos> U.S. <tr>Peace Corps</tr> volunteer. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be a Peace Corps volunteer.

<p><form>piskut, piskuy</form> <xr>= <sc>PISKAT<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pislà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6c1]</itype> spurt s.t. out. <i>Ang mga táwung dilì idukádu mupislà lang sa bungbung ug manlúwà,</i> Uneducated people go out and spit their saliva against the walls. <i>Magpislà ang núkus sa íyang átà ug matugaw,</i> Squids spurt out ink if you disturb them. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> produce a splattering, plopping sound. <i>Mupislà ang lápuk ug tunubtunuban,</i> Mud produces a plopping sound when you step in it.

<p><form>pislangù</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having a stuffy nose. <number>2</number> <tr>flat-nosed</tr>. <i>Madaníhun nang bayhána bísag pislangù,</i> She&apos;s charming even if she&apos;s flat-nosed. <number>3</number> ugly in manner or looks. <i>Wà tay pagaunúhan kay gawas nga pislangù ug dagway, pislangù pa giyud ug batásan,</i> She doesn&apos;t have a single redeeming feature because aside from being homely she has an unpleasant disposition as well. <pos>n</pos> light disease of chickens similar to colds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a4]</itype> have a nasal voice due to cold. <i>Nagpislangù (gipislangù) ku kay giulanan,</i> I have a bad cold because I got caught in the rain.

<p><form>pislat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>squash</tr>, <tr>flatten</tr> and mash s.t. <i>Pisláta ang ságing nga ipakáun sa bátà,</i> Crush the banana to feed to the baby. <number>2</number> <itype>[B16; b6]</itype> have a flat nose. <i>Ug ang mga ginikánan pislat, mapislat pud ang anak,</i> If the parents are flat-nosed, the offspring will also be flat-nosed. <pos>a</pos> <tr>flat-nosed</tr>. <i>Ayaw ug panaway kay pislat ka man sad kaáyu,</i> Don&apos;t ever criticize for your nose is flat, too.

<p><form>pislayit</form> <xr>= <sc>PLASLÁYIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pislit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> press s.t. hard with the fingers. <i>Kinsay mipislit sa timbri?</i> Who pushed the buzzer? <i>Ayaw pislíta ang mangga kay mabun-ug,</i> Don&apos;t squeeze the mango because you will bruise it. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> massage s.o. by pressing with the finger tips. <i>Pislítun ta ka arun maw&amacrgra; ang ímung pamául,</i> I&apos;ll massage you so that your muscle pains will disappear. <form>&mdash; layit</form> <pos>n</pos> flashlight (humorous).

<p><form>pisluk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> go to sleep (said in anger). <i>Mupisluk (mapisluk) ka na ba sad nga buntag na man?</i> Are you going to go back to sleep again when it&apos;s morning already? <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be dark, be getting dark (said in anger). <i>Nagkapisluk na núun mau pay ipangáhuy!</i> Why do you wait until it begins to get dark to look for firewood!

<p><form>pislun</form> <pos>n</pos> a brand of strong synthetic thread used in line fishing and in weaving into fishing nets.

<p><form>pislung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dent</tr>, a slight depression, small hollow. <pos>a</pos> <tr>dented</tr>. <i>Pislung ug ilung,</i> Having a flat nose. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB126; a1]</itype> dent s.t. on the surface. <i>Kinsay nagpislung sa takurì?<note> &apos;t&apos; guessed</note></i> Who dented the kettle?

<p><form>pislut</form> <xr>= <sc>PIDLASUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pismil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fish meal</tr>, ground dried fish used as feed for poultry. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> make fish meal.

<p><form>pisngà, pisngag, pisngi, pisngì, pisngig</form> mild cuss word expressing disgust (euphemism for pisti). <i>Pisngì! Ngánung nalimtan man nákug dala,</i> Darn! Why did I forget to bring it?

<p><form>pisngù</form> <xr>= <sc>PISLANGÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pispan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fishpond</tr>. <i>Kasagáran sa pansat gíkan sa pispan,</i> Most prawns come from the fishpond. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make a fishpond. <i>Magpispan ku sa may katunggan,</i> I&apos;ll make a fishpond near the mangrove swamps. <i>Pispánun níya ang swíming pul,</i> He will convert the swimming pool into a fishpond.

<p><form>pispis</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. green tree insect that makes a shrill sound at night (so called from its sound). It is believed that a <ix>pispis</ix> in the house is the voice of a departed one who has come to ask for help in the form of prayers for his salvation. <form>aN-r-</form> <xr>= <sc>PISPIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pista</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> feast in honor of a patron saint. <form>&mdash; upisiyal</form> public holiday. <form>&mdash; sa simbahan</form> church holiday. <number>2</number> expression meaning &lsquo;your slip is showing&rsquo; (humorous&mdash;from the notion that people hang out curtains during fiesta and another way of calling a woman&apos;s attention that her slip is showing is to use <ix>pangurtína</ix> which literally means, &lsquo;hang out curtains&rsquo;). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> hold or celebrate a feast day. <i>Magpista mi sa tris di Máyu,</i> We hold our celebration on the third of May. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> <form>&mdash; sa inyu</form> your slip is showing (they&apos;re celebrating the feast day in your place). <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> it would be a miracle if (such-and-such an unlikely thing) were to happen. <i>Magpista ug muanhi pa tu siya,</i> It would be a miracle if he ever were to <pb n=772>come here. <i>Magpista ug sugtun ka ni Maríya,</i> It would be a miracle if Maria were to accept you. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> attend the celebration of a feast day. <i>Nakapamista sila sa pista sa Santu Ninyu,</i> They attended the celebration of the feast of the Holy Child. <form>ika-*paN-</form> presentable, look good enough to take to a fiesta. <i>Bubintahag nawung ang bána ni Nilya, ikapamista man sab,</i> Nelia&apos;s husband is good-looking enough. You wouldn&apos;t be ashamed of him. <form>-in-</form> <pos>a</pos> eating in large quantities like at a feast. <form>maN-r-, mamistáhay</form> <pos>n</pos> fiesta goers.

<p><form>pistayim</form> <pos>n</pos> the period immediately after the war. <i>Pistayim na kug maminyù,</i> I got married after the war. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126C]</itype> be in good terms after a quarrel or misunderstanding, usually said of couples. <i>Nagkapistayim na ang magtiáyung nag-áway,</i> The quarreling couple are in good terms again.

<p><form>pisti</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pestilence</tr>. <number>2</number> s.o. or s.t. who causes a pestilence. <i>Tambal bátuk sa mga pisti,</i> Medicine against germs. <number>3</number> strong curse expressing anger or disgust. <i>Pisting yáwà gikáwat ang mga búnga,</i> God damn it to hell. They stole the fruits. <i>Pisti ning kinabuhía. Kanúnay lang way kwarta,</i> What a god-*damned life! We never have money. <form>-ng yáwà</form> <pos>n</pos> strong curse expressing anger or disgust. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> <number>1</number> be affected with pestilence. <i>Ang ginharían nalúpig dihang gipisti ang mga ginsakpan,</i> The kingdom was vanquished when a pestilence hit the people. <number>2</number> go to hell. <i>Pistihun ka pa untà,</i> Go to hell! (Lit. I hope a pestilence takes you.)

<p><form>pistud</form> <xr>= <sc>PISTUL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pistul</form> (euphemism for <ix>pisti</ix>) exclamation of disgust. <i>Pistul! Nalimtan ku ag bálun, Darn!</i> I left my lunch home. <form>&mdash; (nga) yawáa</form> euphemism for <ix>pisting yáwà</ix> exclamation of disgust.

<p><form>pistúla</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pistol</tr>, <tr>revolver</tr>. <number>2</number> prominent hipbone (humorous). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> shoot or hit s.o. with a pistol. <i>Gipistúla ang kaáway,</i> He shot the enemy (or he hit the enemy on the head) with a pistol.

<p><form>pistun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>piston</tr>. <form>&mdash; ring</form> <tr>piston ring</tr>. <form>&mdash; rad</form> <tr>piston rod</tr>.

<p><form>pistun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> home-made detonator put into dynamite, made of a little cigarette-sized roll of tin plate, filled with gunpowder. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c3]</itype> attach or use a detonator of this sort.

<p><form>písu<sub>1</sub></form> <tr>peso</tr>, the Philippine unit of currency (singular). <i>Un písu,</i> One peso. <number>2</number> peso bill. <i>Duha ka písu,</i> Two peso bills. <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; kuntra usa ka dakù</formx> [so-and-so] is nothing (a penny) as compared with s.o. else who is s.t. (a peso). <i>Ngánung ashan pa nímug súkul nà nga písu ka man kuntra usa ka dakù?</i> Why do you have to bother fighting with that bum who&apos;s nothing but so much trash compared to you? <form>-s</form> peso. <i>Pila ni? Písus? Dus písus?</i> How much is this? A peso? Two pesos? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B56; a2]</itype> cost a <tr>peso</tr>. <i>Nagpísus na ang kílu sa kamátis,</i> Tomatoes cost a peso a kilogram. <i>Pisúsa lang ni,</i> Let me have it for a peso. <number>2</number> <itype>[A123S]</itype> receive a scolding. <i>Makapisus ka sa ímung gibúhat,</i> You&apos;ll get a scolding for what you did. <form>maN-, maN-(&rarr;)</form> costing a <tr>peso</tr> each. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> <number>1</number> price s.t. at a peso. <number>2</number> change s.t. into one-peso notes. <form>maN-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the one-peso kind. <number>2</number> one-peso bills.

<p><form>písu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> storey of a building. <i>Náa sa ikaduhang písu ang íyang klási,</i> Her class is on the second <tr>floor</tr>.

<p><form>pisù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>chick</tr> or young of other birds. <number>2</number> endearing reference for one&apos;s children. <number>3</number> <tr>novice</tr>, s.o. new to s.t. Pisù pa lang siya sa panuwat, He is new to the writing profession. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> hatch an egg. <i>Ang ubang himungáan dì mupisù sa ílang itlug,</i> Some hens won&apos;t hatch their eggs. <form>(&larr;)<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> birdling. <form>pis-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> hen or bird that has chicks. <number>2</number> an egg that has a chick in it.

<p><form>písù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> press the tip of one&apos;s fingers over a part of the body to <tr>massage</tr> it. <i>Magpísù pa ku sa ákung buktun nga namanhud,</i> I&apos;ll massage my arms because they are numb. <i>Hipisuan ku ang íyang hubag,</i> I accidentally pressed her boil when I massaged her.

<p><form>pisuk, písuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>push</tr> s.t. small into a depressed position. <i>Pisúkun ku nang mata mu,</i> I will push your eyes into your head. <number>2</number> hit a certain small point right on the head (as if it were being pushed inwards). <i>Pisúkun ku nang batu sa ákung kasing,</i> I will hit the stone directly with my top. <number>3</number> make a <tr>dent</tr> in s.t., covering only a small area. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for s.t. small to be <tr>depressed</tr>, <tr>sunken</tr>. <i>Maglisud pagtútuy ang bátà kay pisuk ug atngal ang inahan,</i> The child has difficulty suckling because the mother has inverted nipples. <number>2</number> being hit right at the spot aimed for.

<p><form>pisukut</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> inflammation of the eyes characterized by watery and mucal secretion. <number>2</number> disease of poultry characterized by watery eyes, eruptions, and debility. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a4]</itype> <number>1</number> get this eye infection. <i>Nagpisikut (gipisikut) ang íyang mata,</i> His eyes are infected. <number>2</number> for chickens to get this sickness.

<p><form>písul</form> <xr>= <sc>PÍSÙ<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>písun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>steamroller</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>steamroller</tr>. <i>Hámis ang dálan kay human na man pisuna (pisuni),</i> The road is smooth because it has <pb n=773>been steamrollered.

<p><form>pisut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>uncircumcised</tr>. <number>2</number> not having holes in the ears. <number>3</number> an <tr>inexperienced</tr> beginner. <i>Ikaw nga pisut pa ánang tárì, dílì ángay nga mupusta ug dakù,</i> You&apos;re just a greenhorn so you should not bet great amounts. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> turn out to be <tr>uncircumcised</tr>.

<p><form>pisut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small edible <tr>sea cucumber</tr>, dark brown to black in color.

<p><form>pisyat</form><xr>= <sc>PISLAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pisyu</form> (from <ix>upisyu</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; abc]</itype> <tr>always</tr>, keep on doing s.t. <i>Ngánung nagpisyu siyag hilak?</i> Why is he always crying? <i>Pagminatarung. Mau nay gipisyug maymay sa ákung mga ginikánan,</i> Be good. That&apos;s what my parents always remind me to do.

<p><form>pisyútis</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>tiller</tr> in small boats. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> attach, make into a tiller.

<p><form>píta</form> <pos>n</pos> an ordinary variety of <tr>rice</tr> with white grains.

<p><form>pità</form> <pos>n</pos> ground which is muddy and dirty. <i>Ang bábuy milúnang sa pità,</i> The pig wallowed in the mud. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> become muddy and dirty. <i>Mupità (mapità) nang sílung ug sigíhag yabu ug hinúgas,</i> The ground underneath the kitchen will become a dirty mire if you keep throwing the dishwater there.

<p><form>pitáda</form> <pos>n</pos> the sound of a loud and sharp <tr>whistle blast</tr> or <tr>siren</tr>.

<p><form>pitak</form> <pos>n</pos> muddy area, <tr>mudhole</tr> full of water. <pos>n</pos> muddy place. <i>Ayaw tumbi ang pitak,</i> Don&apos;t step in the mud puddle. <form>(&larr;)<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become muddy or a mud puddle. <i>Napitak ang nataran nga gisigíhag uwan,</i> The yard became a mire because it kept raining all the time.

<p><form>pítak<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> for s.t. <tr>fragile</tr> to be <tr>crushed</tr> into pieces. <i>Napítak ang ákung bulpin nga natumban,</i> My ball-point pen was broken because s.o. stepped on it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; c1]</itype> squash s.t. flat leaving it intact. <i>Dagkung makina ang mupítak sa mga awtung gubà,</i> Huge machines will flatten the old cars. <i>Napítak ang mga kamátis,</i> The tomatoes got squashed flat.

<p><form>pitáka</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>purse</tr>, <tr>wallet</tr>, <tr>pocketbook</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> use a purse, wallet, pocketbook. <i>Nagpitáka ku bisan ug way sáping ikasulud,</i> I was carrying a purse even though I didn&apos;t have any money to put inside it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain a purse, wallet, pocketbook. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put s.t. in a purse, wallet, pocketbook. <i>Ipitáka nang ribulbir,</i> Put the revolver in a pocketbook.

<p><form>pitáti</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>mat</tr> (banig) made of heavy straw woven through fine fibers. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> use a pitáti mat. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> obtain, make into a pitáti mat.

<p><form>pítay</form> <pos>n</pos> loose hanging skin or cock&apos;s wattles: the loose skin on the underside of a circumcised penis, the skin hanging under the chin or on the upper part of the neck.

<p><form>piti<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for the body to be wet and dirty with things sticking to it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> get dirty and sticky. <i>Nagpiti ang ímung buhuk,</i> Your hair is all sticky with oil.

<p><form>piti<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PITIW</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr>

<p><form>pitì</form> <pos>n</pos> slapping, <tr>crackling</tr>, or <tr>popping</tr> sound. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> resound with this sound. <i>Mipitì ang íyang nawung kay nagtubagtubag man,</i> She received a slap because she answered me back. <i>Mipitì ang papkurn,</i> The popcorn crackled. <i>Nagpitìpitì ang kakugnan nga nasúnug,</i> The grass field was crackling as it burnt. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> intense action of producing this sound. <i>Pítì lang ang ílang kinatsilà ay,</i> They&apos;re rattling off Spanish. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make this sound intensely.

<p><form>pitibut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>PT boat</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; ac]</itype> take a, go by PT boat.

<p><form>pitii</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>PTA</tr>, acronym for the Parent-Teachers&apos; Association. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> have a PTA meeting.

<p><form>pitik</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>flick</tr> s.t. with the thumb and forefinger. <i>Kinsay nagpitik sa ákung dawunggan?</i> Who flicked my ear? <i>Gipitkan níyang ákung kúmù,</i> He flicked my knuckles. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>flick</tr> s.t. away with the fingers. <i>Anhà sa astri ipitik ang sigarilyu,</i> Flick your ashes into the ash tray. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> in carpentry, mark a line on a piece of wood by stretching a string soaked in dye or soot and letting it snap onto the wood. <number>1c</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>shot</tr> with a slingshot. <i>Pitkun ku nang manuk ihálas,</i> I&apos;ll shoot that wild chicken with a slingshot. <number>1d</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>whip</tr> s.o. with s.t. small, making a snapping sound. <i>Ákung gipitkan ang íyang tiil ug tualya,</i> I flicked a towel at his legs. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for the heart or pulse to <tr>beat</tr>. <i>Nagpitik pa ang íyang pulsu,</i> His pulse is still beating. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for the heart to <tr>beat</tr> for s.o. <i>Mupitik lang ang ákung kasingkásing kang Artúru,</i> My heart beats only for Arturo. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a click, as when a mechanism is released. <i>Mipitik lang ang pistúla. Wà nay bála,</i> The pistol clicked. There were no more bullets. <i>Pahíyum kay ákù nang pitkun (ipitik) ang kamira,</i> Smile because I&apos;m going to snap the camera now. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. which flicks or snaps: slingshot, chalk line in carpentry, et al. <number>2</number> beating of the heart. <number>3</number> <tr>clicking</tr>, <tr>snapping</tr> sound. <number>4</number> action of flicking or snapping. -in- <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> continuous sound of the heartbeat. <number>2</number> the dictates of the heart. <i>Sunda ang pinitik sa ímung kasingkásing,</i> Follow the dictates <pb n=774>of your heart.

<p><form>pitikut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>petticoat</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> wear a petticoat. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make into a petticoat.

<p><form>pitimini</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. rose with very tiny pink, red, or white flowers.

<p><form>píting</form> <pos>a</pos> tight-fitting clothes. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> sew s.t. that fits well. <i>Maáyu nang sastríhang mupíting,</i> That seamstress sews clothes that fit well. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2; a12]</itype> become, make <tr>tight-fitting</tr>. <i>Mupíting (mapíting) nang pulúha ug muk&umacrgra;<note> macron with grave</note> nà,</i> That shirt will be tight if it shrinks. <i>Pitíngun nátù ning karsúnis nímu pagtahì,</i> Let&apos;s cut your pants in a tight-fitting style. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear a tight-fitting outfit. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> have a fitting of s.t. sewn. <i>Dì na lang ku mupíting kay hustu lagi nà,</i> I don&apos;t need fitting because I&apos;m quite sure it fits. <form>&mdash; rum</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fitting room</tr>.

<p><form>pitisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>petition</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c3]</itype> <tr>petition</tr> for s.t. <i>Ipitisyun sa pamúnù ang inyung prublíma,</i> Make a petition to the President about your problems.

<p><form>pitiw</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> trigger device in a trap which actuates a spring. <number>2</number> <tr>clitoris</tr> (humorous). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> put a pitiw in a trap. <form>pitiwpítiw</form> <xr>= <sc>PITIW</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr>

<p><form>pitla</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>untangle</tr> hair or fibers, <tr>separate</tr> things that are stuck or crumpled together. <i>Nagpitla mi sa mga pahína sa librung nagpílit,</i> We are separating the pages of the book that got stuck together. <i>Ákung gipitla ang hílu nga nagubut,</i> I untangled the thread.

<p><form>pitlà</form> <xr>= <sc>PIDLÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pitlag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>turn</tr> sheets of paper or pages of a book over one by one. <i>Ipitlag (pitlága) nang únang lima ka dahun,</i> Leaf through the first five pages.

<p><form>pitlagung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> bamboo stick with a tufted end used to clean the palm toddy containers left in the tree (sugung) (so called from the sound produced by using it). <number>2</number> sound produced by using the pitlagung. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> clean a toddy container.

<p><form>pitlud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> pluck off the ends of young stems to make the plant spread. <i>Pitluran ang tabákù arun managkù ang dáhun,</i> They pluck the tops of the tobacco plants so that the leaves will grow big. <number>2</number> break off of young stems in general.

<p><form>pitluk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>strangle</tr> s.o. with the hands. <i>Pitlúkun ta ka ug mutug-an ka,</i> I&apos;ll strangle you if you tell. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> swipe fowls (slang). <i>Limbaruk! Gipitluk ang ámung sunuy gabíi,</i> Damn! They swiped our rooster last night! <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> thrust the finger in s.o.&apos;s eyes. <i>Bísag pitlukun pa ang mata sa tudlù dílì makítà tungud sa kangitngit,</i> It&apos;s so dark you couldn&apos;t see a finger thrust into your eyes.

<p><form>pitnit</form> <xr>= <sc>PIKNIK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pitpit<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B46N]</itype> be wet through so that clothing, hair or feathers stick to the body. <i>Nagpitpit siyang miabut sa balay,</i> She was dripping wet when she arrived in the house. <number>2</number> <itype>[BN; a4]</itype> for the eyes to get sticky with yellowish discharge. <i>Mupitpit (mapitpit, pitpítun) ang ímung mata ug tagimatahun ka,</i> Your eyes get filled with yellowish discharge if you have sore eyes. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2N; b(1)]</itype> for the strands of hair to be thick with nits. <i>Mupitpit (mamitpit) ang buhuk sa lusà ug dílì hugútan,</i> The hair gets thick with nits if you don&apos;t get rid of them. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having pussy eyes.

<p><form>pitpit<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. <tr>swift</tr>. <number>2</number> the mahjong piece with one bamboo that resembles the pitpit bird. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123; b6]</itype> get a pitpit.

<p><form>pitpit<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>squeal</tr> about a crime or <tr>tattle</tr> (slang). <i>Mipitpit na ang dinakpan,</i> The suspect that was arrested squealed. <i>Kinsay nagpitpit sa maistra nga nangupya ku,</i> Who told the teacher that I copied?

<p><form>pitpíta</form> <pos>n</pos> chicken ailment characterized by the development of a thick rough epidermis on the outer layer of the tongue rendering it difficult for the chicken to eat. <i>Dílì mukáun ang manuk kun may pitpíta,</i> A chicken with pitpíta will not eat. <form>pitpitáhun</form> <pos>a</pos> of a sort having this disease.

<p><form>pí trap</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>P-trap</tr>, an S-shaped tube for the escape of water or gas that prevents the water or gas from returning. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> put a P-trap s.w.

<p><form>pitrulyu, pitrulyum</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>petroleum</tr>. <number>2</number> kerosene. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6(1)]</itype> fill up with kerosene. <i>Gipitrulyuman ang kusinilya,</i> They put kerosene in the pressurized stove.

<p><form>pitrumaks</form> <pos>n</pos> a pressurized kerosene lantern (so called from the brand name petromax). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> use a petromax.

<p><form>pits<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>peaches</tr>.

<p><form>pits<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pitch</tr> of a note.

<p><form>pits<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>pitch</tr> in a baseball game.

<p><form>pitsa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>date</tr>. <i>Unsang pitsáha run?</i> What date is it today? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> put or write the date. <i>Núlu kanang kuntrátu kay wà pitsáhi,</i> That contract is null and void because it wasn&apos;t dated.

<p><form>pitsas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> mahjong <tr>pieces</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>chips</tr> in poker. <number>3</number> <tr>money</tr> (slang). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> have a particular mahjong piece in one&apos;s hand. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> use chips in playing a game. <form>-an</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>moneyed</tr>, <tr>rich</tr> (slang). <i>Pitsásan nang bayhána maáyu pangasaw-un,</i> That woman is well-heeled. She&apos;d make a good wife. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become moneyed.

<pb n=775>

<p><form>pitsay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Chinese cabbage</tr>, a vegetable cultivated for its long, whitish leaves, eaten cooked: <bio>Brassica pekinensis</bio>. <form>&mdash; bisayà</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <ix>pitsay</ix> with darker leaves: <bio>Brassica chinensis</bio>.

<p><form>pitsbuy</form> <xr>= <sc>PIDSBUY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pitsi</form> <xr>= <sc>PIPSI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pitsikurnu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>brass knuckles</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> use brass knuckles.

<p><form>pitsil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pitcher</tr>, a container for holding and pouring liquids. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> place s.t. in a pitcher.

<p><form>pit sinyur</form> exclamation shouted when dancers dance the <ix>sinulug</ix> in front of the image of the Holy Child (<ix>Santu Ninyu</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> exclaim <ix>pit sinyur</ix>.

<p><form>pitsipitsi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> miscellaneous sundry goods. <i>Mga pitsipitsi ra ning ákung baligyà,</i> I just have small, sundry goods here. <number>2</number> miscellaneous, trivial things. <i>Mga pitsipitsing balità gikan sa barbiríya,</i> Bits of trivial news and information from the barber shop. <number>3</number> s.t. trivial, not worth paying attention to. <i>Pitsipitsi ang inyung gikaawáyan,</i> You are quarreling over nothing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a1b]</itype> buy or sell s.t. in small amounts. <i>Pitsipitsihun (ipitsipitsi) nákù ang pagpalit sa ákung mga kinahanglanun,</i> I&apos;ll buy the things I need a little bit at a time.

<p><form>pitsir<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PITSIL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pitsir<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pitcher</tr> in baseball. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56; c1]</itype> be, make s.o. the pitcher.

<p><form>pitsu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> breast of fowl or birds. <number>2</number> <tr>chest</tr> bones, <tr>sternum</tr>. <i>Balíun ku ang ímung pitsu ug magbinúang ka,</i> I will break your ribs if you do foolishness. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> hit s.o. in the chest. <form>punta &mdash;</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>PUNTA<sub>2</sub>, n5</sc>.

<p><form>pitsukurnu</form> <xr>= <sc>PITSIKURNU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pitu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>seven</tr>. <form>labangun ug &mdash; ka láwud</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>LABANG</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <xr>see <sc>TULU</sc>.</xr> <form>ika-</form> <tr>seventh</tr>. <i>Ang ikapitu ka (nga) táwu,</i> The seventh man. <i>Ikapitung lángit,</i> Seventh heaven, <tr>bliss</tr>. <form>kapituan</form> <tr>seventy</tr>. <form>ka-, maka-</form> seven times. <form>tag-(&larr;)</form> seven at a time.

<p><form>pítu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>whistle</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>whistling</tr> sound. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> blow a <tr>whistle</tr>, usually as a <tr>signal</tr>. <i>Mipítu ang barku paglarga,</i> The ship blew its whistle as it left port. <i>Gipitúhan ka sa ripiri,</i> The referee blew his whistle on you.

<p><form>pítu<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PITÚRU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pitúgu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ornamental plant with pinnate leaves resembling a palm. The male plant produces once a year an enormous cone at the tip of the stem: <bio>Cycas rumphii</bio>.

<p><form>pituk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>flick</tr> the fingers. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> for an instrument to hit s.t. accidentally. <i>Paháwà dihà kay hipitukan ka sa sundang,</i> Get out of there because the bolo will hit you. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>hit</tr> with a sudden, sharp blow. <i>Gipituk níya ang babáyi sa martilyu,</i> He hit the woman with a hammer. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>flick</tr> of the fingers. <number>2</number> sharp, sudden <tr>blows</tr>.

<p><form>pituk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> for the eyes to <tr>stare</tr> blankly into space. <i>Nagpituk ang íyang mata kay lawum ang íyang gipinsar,</i> He stared blankly into space because he was absorbed in deep thought. <form>pitukpituk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; c1]</itype> <tr>stare</tr> without thought, blinking the eyes. <i>Mupitukpituk lang nang batáa ug latiguhun, dílì muhílak,</i> The child will just stare and blink his eyes if you whip him. He won&apos;t cry. <i>Nagpitukpituk lang ang búang nga gisultíhan,</i> The deranged man just kept staring and blinking his eyes as they talked to him. <number>2</number> <itype>[B46]</itype> for a light to <tr>blink</tr> on and off. <i>Mipitukpituk ang síga sa lamparilya kay wà may gas,</i> The light of the kerosene lamp is flickering because it has no more kerosene. <i>Pitukpitukun (ipitukpituk) gánì níya ang plaslayit, kanà libri na ta pagsulud,</i> When he blinks the flashlight, that will mean that we are free to enter.

<p><form>pítul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> impose punishment to <tr>discipline</tr>. <i>Dì na siya magpabuyag kay napítul na siya nákù,</i> He won&apos;t make a nuisance of himself any longer because I gave him a good whipping.

<p><form>pitupitu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> mosquito <tr>wrigglers</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>tadpole</tr>. <form>(&larr;)</form> game played with small children where the child puts the fingers on the palm of the adult&apos;s hand who recites or sings a rhyme closing the fingers on the child&apos;s hand. One version: <i>Pitupítu santubud, kan-un púru budbud, Putdang sanggutan, ang bílin kawatan, Pitupítu santubud,</i> all he eats is <ix>budbud</ix>, Cut the toddy-producing tree down, Whoever is left is the thief. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infested with mosquito <tr>wrigglers</tr> or <tr>tadpoles</tr>. <i>Gipitupitu ang danaw,</i> The pond is full of mosquito larvae (tadpoles). <number>2</number> <itype>[B256]</itype> become mosquito wrigglers, tadpoles.

<p><form>pitúru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>enema</tr> tip.

<p><form>pit-us</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> not affording enough space. <i>Pit-us nga kwartu,</i> A room that is too small. <i>Pit-us ang dálan ngadtu sa búkid,</i> It&apos;s a narrow road that goes into the mountains. <number>2</number> hard up financially. <i>Pit-us kaáyu mi kay wà kuy trabáhu,</i> We&apos;re very hard up because I don&apos;t have a job. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; a]</itype> make s.t. narrow. <i>Nagkapit-us ang asíras sa mga tinda,</i> The sidewalks are getting jammed because of all the goods for sale. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> be hard up financially. <number>3</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> be in a difficult situation, in a tight corner, etc. <i>Musúkul ku ug mapit-usan,</i> I&apos;ll fight back if I am cornered. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tightness</tr>, esp. of one&apos;s financial condition.

<pb n=776>

<p><form>pitut</form> <pos>n</pos> act of <tr>derision</tr> made by expelling air with the two lips allowing them to vibrate a couple of times and punctuating it with a <ix>t</ix>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; b(1)]</itype> make this sound. <i>Sagpáun ku siya ug pamitutan ku níyag usab,</i> I will slap her if she says &lsquo;ptt&rsquo; to me again.

<p><form>pitwurk</form> <pos>n</pos> footwork of a boxer.

<p><form>piud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>hold</tr>, press close to oneself. <i>Gipiud níyag maáyu ang libru arun dílì mabasà sa ulan,</i> She held the book close to her so it wouldn&apos;t get wet in the rain.

<p><form>píud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> weave the edges of s.t. made of straw in such a way that it won&apos;t come undone. <i>Gipiúran ku pa ang banig,</i> I&apos;m still weaving the edges of the mat.

<p><form>piug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> forcibly keep s.t. from moving. <i>Way nakapiug sa búang nga nangísug,</i> No one can control the violent madman. <number>2</number> keep under control. <i>Mapiug lang nátù ang bátà kun mulatus ta,</i> We can keep the child under control only if we whip him. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> allow oneself to be prevailed upon. <i>Dílì giyud nà siya magpapiug. Gustu giyung manimawus,</i> He can&apos;t be prevailed upon. He wants to take revenge.

<p><form>piut</form><xr>= <sc>PIG-UT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>píward</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ward</tr> in a hospital where the patient is charged, as opposed to a private room or charity ward. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> stay in a pay ward.

<p><form>píyad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> for the back to become bent and, by extension, the stomach. <i>Nagpíyad ang bukubuku sa kabáyù sa kabug-at sa íyang dala,</i> The horse&apos;s back sagged under the burden of his load. <i>Ipíyad (pyára) ang ímung tiyan arun magtakdù ang bakus,</i> Pull your stomach in so the belt will go all the way around. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> stick out the stomach. <i>Ug ímung pyarun (ipiyad) ang ímung tiyan mu ra kag mabdus,</i> If you stick your stomach out, you&apos;ll look like a pregnant woman. <form>piyadpiyad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; c1]</itype> walk and writhe at the same time. <i>Mupiyadpiyad ang magbatì,</i> A woman that is in labor will writhe as she walks.

<p><form>piyak<sub>1</sub>, píyak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cheeping</tr> sound of chicks or young birds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>peep</tr>, <tr>cheep</tr>. <i>Pangitáa rung pisù nga nagpiyak,</i> Look for the chick that is peeping. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> stand a chance to win (lit. get a chance to cheep). <i>Wà makapiyak ang ákung singku písus nga gidúlà,</i> I bet five pesos, but they didn&apos;t get a chance.

<p><form>piyak<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for the stomach or flank of an animal to be thin, not full. <i>Pasabsába ang kábaw kay piyak kaáyug tiyan,</i> Put the carabao out to pasture because its flank is very thin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> having an empty stomach.

<p><form>piyal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>trust</tr>. <i>Way mupiyal ánang tawhána kay bakákun,</i> No one trusts that man because he is a liar. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>entrust</tr> s.t. to s.o. <i>Ayawg ipiyal ang mga bátà sa binatunan,</i> Don&apos;t entrust your children to the maid. <i>Kapyalan kaáyung tawhána,</i> A very trustworthy person. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> a person who is entrusted with a responsibility of caring for, looking after s.t.

<p><form>piyangpiyang, piyangpíyang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>cymbal</tr>, a musical instrument which is a pair of metal concave plates that ring when struck together. <number>2</number> a <tr>lesbian</tr> (humorous metaphor). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> play a cymbal. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make into cymbals. <number>3</number> <itype>[C1; b2]</itype> do lesbian acts; be a lesbian.

<p><form>píyas</form> <pos>a</pos> for s.t. which was full to be without its contents and flat and crinkled. <i>Dì na píyas ang tiyan sa bátà nga nakakaun na,</i> Now that the child has eaten, his stomach isn&apos;t sunken. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> cause s.t. that was bulging to flatten out. <i>Mapíyas ang ligid sa awtu ug way hángin,</i> The tire of the car goes flat when there is no air. <i>Nagpíyas ang sáku nga way sulud,</i> The empty sack was crinkled. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>split</tr> s.t. laterally or <tr>peel</tr> around the edges. <i>Gipíyas níya ang íyang pitáka ug gipakítà ang sulud,</i> He opened his wallet to show the contents. <i>Gipíyas níya ang ságing nga mantikaan,</i> She cut the bananas in half to fry them.

<p><form>piyatpiyat</form> <pos>n</pos> variation of <tr>poker</tr> with up to four players, each of which is dealt thirteen cards, which are divided into three groups, two with five cards each, and one with three cards. The players&apos; three different hands are pitted against each other, and the player who has two winning hands gets the pot. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> play this sort of poker.

<p><form>píyu</form> <xr>see <sc>PRISYU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>píyù</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible fresh water crab about 2&Prime; by 3&Prime; in size.

<p><form>píyuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S3; ab7P]</itype> for lamps or lights to grow <tr>dim</tr>. <i>Nagpiyuk man ang sugà. Limpiyúhi ang túbu,</i> Why is the light dim? Clean the chimney.

<p><form>piyun, píyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> common <tr>laborer</tr>, esp. the lowest-ranking. <number>2</number> pawn in chess. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be, become a common <tr>laborer</tr>. <i>Mapíyun giyud kag dì ka mulampus,</i> You&apos;ll become nothing but a common laborer if you don&apos;t succeed in your studies.

<p><form>píyung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; c1]</itype> close the eyes. <i>Pyúnga (ipíyung) ang ímung mata; unyà tag-ána ni,</i> Close your eyes; then guess what it is. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b6]</itype> for one to be so good at doing s.t. he can do it with the eyes closed. <i>Pyúngan nà nákug áyu,</i> I can fix that with my eyes <pb n=777>closed. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> close one&apos;s eyes to s.t. bad, tolerate it. <i>Kadtung nagpíyung sa ílang mga mata sa mga kasaypánan sad-an pud,</i> Those who close their eyes to the irregularities are also guilty. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> for the eyes to be closed. <form>tag-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> take a short <tr>nap</tr>. <i>Mutagpiyung lang kug kadiyut,</i> I&apos;ll just take a short nap. <i>Natagpiyung tingali siya kay naawahi man sa trabáhu,</i> He must have dozed off because he was late to work.

<p><form>plág</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>electrical plug</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>PLAG-IN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>plag-in</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>plug in</tr> an electrical plug.

<p><form>plagpul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>flagpole</tr>.

<p><form>plagrísing</form> <pos>n</pos> flag-raising ceremony before the day&apos;s activities start. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> hold the flag-raising ceremony.

<p><form>plagritr&icaron;t</form> <pos>n</pos> flag retreat ceremony at the end of the day&apos;s activities. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> engage in a flag retreat ceremony.

<p><form>plagsirimúni</form> <pos>n</pos> flag-raising ceremony. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> hold a flag-raising ceremony.

<p><form>plagsut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B246; b8]</itype> pop out when squeezed, be propelled from a confined space when pressed. <i>Muplagsut ang lísu ug pislítun nímu ang búnga,</i> The seed will pop out if you squeeze the fruit. <i>Naplagsutan siyag asíti pagbumba nákù sa tangki,</i> When I pumped the tank, oil spurted out on her.

<p><form>plahúta</form> <xr>= <sc>PLAWTA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pláka</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> phonograph <tr>record</tr>. <number>2</number> plate from which a photograph is made. <number>3</number> <tr>plaque</tr>. <number>4</number> <tr>license plate</tr> of a vehicle. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> record s.t. on a phonograph record. <number>2</number> <itype>[b]</itype> use a plate in a camera. <number>3</number> <itype>[A]</itype> get, give, have a license plate.

<p><form>plakul</form> <xr>= <sc>PALAKUL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>plamingku</form> <xr>= <sc>PALAMINGKU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>plámir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>plumber</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be a plumber.

<p><form>plán</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>custard</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make, have custard.

<p><form>planggána</form> <pos>n</pos> wash <tr>basin</tr>.

<p><form>plangganíta</form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>basin</tr>.

<p><form>plangka</form> <pos>n</pos> service <tr>switch</tr>, the <tr>switch</tr> on a service box used to connect or disconnect electricity to a house. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> put a service <tr>switch</tr> s.w.

<p><form>plangkíru</form> <pos>n</pos> one who saws timber into planks or controls the machine doing so.

<p><form>planhay</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sloping</tr> gradually. <i>Planhay ang ílang yútà dì bakilid dì sad pátag,</i> Their land is a gradual slope. It is not steep, nor is it level. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <tr>slope</tr> slightly or gradually. <i>Iplanhay (planháya) pag-atup,</i> Make the roof at a slight slope.

<p><form>planíla</form> <xr>= <sc>PRANÍLA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>planíta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>planet</tr>, esp. as a source of astrological information.

<p><form>plansa</form> <xr>= <sc>PLANTSA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>planta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>plant</tr>, <tr>factory</tr>, <tr>powerhouse</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b6]</itype> put up a plant.

<p><form>plantáda</form> <pos>a</pos> in plain, <tr>unobstructed</tr> view. <i>Plantáda kaáyu ang ílang balay gíkan sa iskína,</i> You can see their house clearly from the corner. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c6]</itype> be in full view, cause s.t. to be so. <i>Miplantáda siyag lingkud arun makit-an sa tanan,</i> She sat where everybody could see her. <i>Kanang munumintung nagplantáda dihà,</i> The monument that you see there.

<p><form>plantasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>plantation</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> have a plantation.

<p><form>plantilya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> list of permanent employees. <i>Wà ka sa plantilya kay kaswal pa ka,</i> You are not in the roster because you are a temporary employee. <number>2</number> cut-out <tr>pattern</tr>, sheet <tr>pattern</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make a list of employees. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make, make with a <tr>pattern</tr>. <i>Plantilyaha (iplantilya) ning dáan nga sín,</i> Use this old iron sheet for your patterns. <i>Plantilyáhi ang panaptun arun sayun ra tabásun,</i> Use a pattern on the cloth so that it will be easy to cut.

<p><form>plantsa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>flatiron</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>trowel</tr>. <number>3</number> <tr>crew cut</tr>. <pos>a</pos> for iron sheets to be flat and smooth. <i>Plantsang sín ang itaptap sa lamísa,</i> Cover the table with smooth sheets of tin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>iron</tr> s.t. <i>Plantsáha ri day,</i> Please iron this for me, Miss. <number>1a</number> <tr>flatten</tr> out metal sheets that are corrugated or wrinkled. <number>2</number> <tr>smooth</tr> out cement. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> give a <tr>crew cut</tr>. <form>plantsahan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ironing board</tr>. <form>-du, -wu</form> <pos>n</pos> ironed clothes. <form>-dur(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>presser</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become a <tr>presser</tr>. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. <tr>ironed</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>crew cut</tr>. <form>plantsahun, plantsahúnun, plantsaduhun</form> <pos>n</pos> clothes to iron.

<p><form>plánu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>plan</tr> of s.t. constructed on a piece of ground. <number>2</number> <tr>plan</tr>, <tr>program</tr> of what one is going to do. <number>2a</number> <tr>plan</tr>, <tr>intention</tr>. <i>Wà kuy plánu paglangyaw,</i> I have no plans to go abroad. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make a <tr>plan</tr> of s.t. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ab]</itype> make plans, devise a plan for s.t. <i>Akuy muplánu sa kasal,</i> I&apos;ll make the wedding plans. <i>Giplánu giyug maáyu ang pagtúlis sa bangku,</i> The bank robbery was well planned. <number>2a</number> <tr>plan</tr>, intend to do s.t.

<p><form>plaríti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ribbing</tr> of a boat to which the walling is attached. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> make the <tr>ribbing</tr> for a boat.

<p><form>*plas</form> <form>&mdash; <r>[<ix>number of English origin</ix>]</r></form> [so-and-so] many points advantage. <i>Hatágan níyag plas payib ang bangà níyang kuntra,</i> He will give his weaker opponent a five-point advantage.

<p><form>plás<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b1c]</itype> <tr>flush</tr> the toilet, <tr>flush</tr> water over an area. <i>Iplás ang kasilyas humag gámit,</i> Flush the toilet after using it. <i>Giplásan <pb n=778>níya ug túhig ang húgaw sa salug sa banyu,</i> She flushed water over the bathroom floor to get rid of the dirt. <pos>n</pos> flush mechanism.

<p><form>plás<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>flash</tr> equipment of a camera. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> <tr>flash</tr> news over the radio or on the screen. <i>Ang kalit nga kamatáyun sa prisidinti sa násud giplás sa radiyu karun,</i> The sudden death of the president was flashed over the radio now. <form>-ing<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> appearance of the characters on stage before a play begins. <number>2</number> short advertisement flashed on the screen in the movies before the show begins.

<p><form>plása</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>plaza</tr>, a <tr>public square</tr> or <tr>market place</tr> in a city or town. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ac]</itype> make a <tr>plaza</tr>.

<p><form>plas balb</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>flash bulb</tr>.

<p><form>plasíbu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> feast celebrated in the evening before All Souls&apos; Day where food is prepared as an offering to the departed. Originally it was unsalted and put at the altar or before a grave. It marks the end of a novena. <number>2</number> the food prepared for this occasion. <number>3</number> <tr>funeral rites</tr> preceding a burial accompanied or followed by a solemn tolling of bells. <i>Human sa plasíbu dad-un sa mintiryu ang minatay,</i> After the church ceremony the body will be taken to the cemetery. <number>3a</number> the tolling of the bells for the dead. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> hold this feast or funeral ceremony. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> partake of this feast. <i>Mamlasíbu ta karung gabíi sa íla,</i> We will participate in their All Souls&apos; Eve celebration.

<p><form>plásing<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>flashing</tr> at the edge of a roof. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> put up the <tr>flashing</tr> at the edge of a roof.

<p><form>plásis</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> hand in mahjong consisting of only one unit: sirkuls, or bambu, or karaktir with any other combination of wind pieces (bintus) or dragons (drágun). <number>2</number> flush hand in a card game. <i>Lúpig ang plásis sa pulháwus,</i> A flush can&apos;t beat a full house.

<p><form>plaskíya</form> <pos>n</pos> long, wooden <tr>straightedge</tr><note>two words?</note> of no standard length.

<p><form>plasláyit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>flashlight</tr>. <number>v</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> shine a <tr>flashlight</tr> on, use a <tr>flashlight</tr>.

<p><form>plasta, plast&acaron;r</form> <xr>= <sc>PALAST&Acaron;R</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>plastik</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>plastic</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>plastic surgery</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> perform plastic surgery. <form>&mdash; surdyiri</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>plastic surgery</tr>.

<p><form>plastir</form> <pos>n</pos> medical plaster or adhesive. <form>&mdash; ab paris</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>plaster of Paris</tr>. <form>&mdash; kast</form> <pos>n</pos> plaster cast. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> use, put a plaster to cover a wound or s.t. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> apply a plaster cast to s.o.

<p><form>plásu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>extension</tr>, <tr>postponement</tr> of the agreed deadline, esp. of payment. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> give an extension or postponement. <i>Giplasúhan lang kug usa ka búlan paghátag sa bugay,</i> I was given a month&apos;s extension to give the bride price.

<p><form>plat</form> <pos>n</pos> garden <tr>plot</tr><corr>.</corr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> divide a garden into plots.

<p><form>plát</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>flat</tr>, not having depressions or elevations on it. <i>Plát ug dughang bayhána,</i> A flat-chested woman. <number>2</number> completely without money, <tr>penniless</tr>. <i>Plát kaáyu ku run,</i> I am completely broke. <number>3</number> <tr>flat tire</tr>. <number>3a</number> tire without enough air. <i>Bumbáhi pa kay plát pa,</i> Put more air in it because it still is flat. <number>4</number> flat-heeled shoes. <number>5</number> be knocked flat. <i>Naigù sa ákung liphuk, dà plát lagi,</i> I hit him with my left hook and he was knocked out flat. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B]</itype> get to be flat. <i>Maplát ang bisiklíta ug sakyan ug tambuk,</i> The bicycle tires will get pressed down flat if a fat person rides on it. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; a]</itype> get a flat tire. <i>Naplátan mi, maung nadúgay mi,</i> We had a flat tire, and so we were delayed. <number>3</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> wear flat shoes, slippers. <number>4</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> <tr>refuse</tr> s.o. flatly. <i>Giplát ku níya dáyun nga wà kuy ispiransa,</i> She told me flatly that I had no hope. <form>&mdash; syus</form> <pos>n</pos> flat-heeled shoes. <form>&mdash; tayir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>flat tire</tr>. <form>&mdash; tap</form> <tr>crew cut</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> get a crew cut.

<p><form>pláta</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>silver</tr>. <number>2</number> silver coin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b]</itype> alloy s.t. with silver. <form>búda di-</form> <xr>see <sc>BÚDA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>plátap</form> <xr>= <sc>PLÁT TAP</sc>.</xr> <xr>see <sc>PLÁT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>platapurma</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>stage</tr>, <tr>platform</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>platform</tr> of a political party. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make a <tr>stage</tr> or <tr>platform</tr>.

<p><form>platik</form> <xr>= <sc>PALATIK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>platínu, platínum</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>interruptor</tr> of an internal combustion engine.

<p><form>platiríya</form> <pos>n</pos> goldsmith shop. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put up a goldsmith shop.

<p><form>platíru</form> <pos>n</pos> silver-, <tr>goldsmith</tr>.

<p><form>platítu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>saucer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a2]</itype> put a saucer or small plate.

<p><form>platítu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ornamental bush: <bio>Polyscias scutellaria</bio>.

<p><form>platnus</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>flat-nosed</tr>.

<p><form>plátu, platun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> general name for <tr>plates</tr> of any material, flat or deep. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> eat from plates. <form>hayang ang</form> &mdash; <xr>see <sc>HAYANG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>platun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>platoon</tr> in the military. <form>&mdash; lídir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>platoon leader</tr>.

<p><form>pláwir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>female genitalia</tr> (euphemism). <number>2</number> minor characters in a play, insignificant performers in a game. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>BÚLAK</sc>, <i>2a.</i></xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> be a minor character in a play or game. <i>Napláwir ku adtung duláa kay wà ku hipasahi,</i> I didn&apos;t do anything in that game because they never passed the ball to me once. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b6]</itype> draw a búlak in mahjong. <form>&mdash; bis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>vase</tr>. <form>&mdash; gil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>flower girl</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56; c16]</itype> be a <tr>flower girl</tr>. <form>&mdash; pat</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>flowerpot</tr>.

<p><form>plawta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>flute</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> play the <tr>flute</tr>, <pb n=779>make into a flute. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23N2; a12]</itype> eat s.t. long as if playing the flute. <i>Kusug siyang muplawta (mamlawta) ug inánag,</i> He really eats broiled corn on the cob fast.

<p><form>*play</form> <form>mu-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <xr>= <sc>UNGLÙ</sc></xr> (humorous&mdash;so called from the ability of the <ix>unglù</ix> to fly). <form>kan-(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>MUPL&Acaron;Y</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>play-awi</form> <pos>n</pos> hair style of shoulder-length hair hanging down loosely. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> fix, wear the hair in this style.

<p><form>playing súsir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>flying saucer</tr>.

<p><form>pláyir</form><xr>= <sc>PLAYIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>playis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pliers</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> use <tr>pliers</tr>.

<p><form>playit</form> <pos>n</pos> scheduled flight of an airplane. <i>Unsang urása ang ímung<note> imung?</note> playit?</i> What time is your flight? <form>&mdash; atindant</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>flight attendant</tr>.

<p><form>playwit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>flyweight</tr> boxer. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be in the flyweight class.

<p><form>playwud</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>plywood</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> use, make s.t. of plywood.

<p><form>plí<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> exclamation uttered to make a game start. <i>Nakatágù na mu? Plí!</i> Are you all hidden? Coming ready or not.

<p><form>plí<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; ab5c2]</itype> have sexual relations (euphemism). <i>Káda gabíi magplí sila,</i> They have sexual intercourse every night.

<p><form>plibisítu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>referendum</tr>,<note> aka: plebescite</note> special election over a single issue. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> hold a <tr>referendum</tr>.

<p><form>plíbul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> go along s.o. else&apos;s proposal or decision just to gain or stay in his good graces. <i>Kay mau may íyang gustu, muplíbul lang ta,</i> If that&apos;s what he wants, let&apos;s just go along with it.

<p><form>plíbuy<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> short-sleeved sport shirt. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, make into a sport shirt.

<p><form>plíbuy<sub>2</sub></form> a <tr>philanderer</tr>, one who plays around with lots of women. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be a <tr>philanderer</tr>.

<p><form>plígis</form> <xr>= <sc>PILÍGIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pligráwun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>playground</tr>. <number>2</number> a set of activities such as dances, calisthenics, gymnastics, and the like, performed en masse on an open area. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a2]</itype> make a playground. <form>&mdash; dimunstrisyun</form> <xr>= <sc>PLIGRÁWUN</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr>

<p><form>plígu</form> <xr>= <sc>PILÍGU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>plíma</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>phlegm</tr>.

<p><form>plimíru</form> <xr>= <sc>PRIMÍRU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>plín<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>airplane</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a1c]</itype> take, bring in an airplane. <i>Magplín ku paingun sa Manílà,</i> I&apos;ll take a plane to Manila.

<p><form>plín<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> cloth that is unfigured, untwilled.

<p><form>plirayid</form> <pos>n</pos> unofficial player in a game or gambling, participating as filler so that there is a full contingent of the required number of players. His scores are not counted and he cannot take part in betting. <i>Daghan untà kug puntus apan walà ikwinta kay plirayid ra man ku,</i> I got lots of points, but they were not counted because I just filled in. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> fill in to make a full contingent.

<p><form>plirt</form> <pos>a</pos> for a woman to be <tr>flirting</tr> or <tr>coquettish</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>flirt</tr> with s.o.

<p><form>plísing</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> in ball games, played with a net, place the ball in a certain spot in the opponent&apos;s side. <i>Iplísing sa wala ang búla ug náa siya sa tuu,</i> Place the ball in the left side if he is on the right side. a hitting in a place that is difficult to return the ball from.

<p><form>plismat</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>placemat</tr> for putting under dishes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> use <tr>placemats</tr>.

<p><form>plít</form> <xr>= <sc>PILÍGIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>plíti</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fare</tr>. <i>Pilay plíti ngadtus Manílà?</i> How much is the fare to Manila? <number>1a</number> <tr>fare</tr> money. <i>Díay ímung plíti,</i> Here&apos;s the money for your fare. <number>2</number> <tr>rental</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>rent</tr>. <i>Muplíti ra kug libru kay wà kuy ipalit,</i> I&apos;ll just rent my books because I don&apos;t have enough money to buy them. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> pay the rent, fare. <i>Siyay nagplíti nákù,</i> He paid my fare.

<p><form>plitína</form> <xr>= <sc>PILITÍNA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>plitnambir</form> <pos>n</pos> vehicle plate number. <form>walay &mdash;</form> palm <tr>toddy</tr> which is artificially made (slang). <i>Way plitnambir ning tubáa, magkalíbang ta íni,</i> This is an artificial palm toddy. We&apos;ll get diarrhea from it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> issue a plate number to a vehicle.

<p><form>plíts</form> <xr>= <sc>PILÍGIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>plitsa</form> <pos>n</pos> a four-wheeled horse-drawn <tr>carriage</tr> used in former times. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> ride in this sort of carriage.

<p><form>plú</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>flu</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a4]</itype> be sick with flu. <i>Plúhun gánì ka, pahúlay dáyun,</i> Go immediately to bed if you get the flu.

<p><form>plúhu</form> <xr>= <sc>PULÚHU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>plúma</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> ornamental feathers. <number>2</number> fountain, or dip pen, <tr>quill</tr>. <number>3</number> the <tr>graphite</tr> in pencils. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> adorn s.t. with feathers. <i>Giplumáhan ang mga kálù sa mga sundálung bitiránu,</i> The veterans adorned their hats with feathers. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> use, write with a fountain pen or dip pen. <i>Magplúma ta inigsulat sa átung tím,</i> We&apos;ll use a dip pen for writing our themes.

<p><form>plumáhi</form> <pos>n</pos> ornamental feathers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b]</itype> adorn s.t. with ornamental feathers.

<p><form>plumíru<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>feather duster</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> dust s.t. with a feather duster, make a feather duster.

<p><form>plumíru<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PLÁMIR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>plúmu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lead</tr>. <i>Plúmu ang gihímù níyang pamatu,</i> He used lead for his sinker. <number>2</number> <tr>washer</tr> put under nails. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> nail s.t. with a washer. <i>Ang lansang sa sín plumúhan arun dì mutúlù,</i> They put washers under the roof nails to prevent it from leaking.

<p><form>plur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>floor</tr>, <tr>storey</tr> of a building. <i>Unsang <pb n=780>plúra ang ímung upisína, sa pip plur?</i> What floor is your office, on the fifth floor?

<p><form>plúral upiring</form> <pos>n</pos> flower offering put on a monument or given to a beauty queen with a ceremony. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> hold such a ceremony.

<p><form>plurdilis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>zinnia</tr>.

<p><form>pluríra</form> <pos>n</pos> flower <tr>vase</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> use s.t. as a flower <tr>vase</tr>.

<p><form>plúris</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>BÚLAK</sc>, <i>2a.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; di Máyu</formx> season in the month of May when flowers are offered to the Virgin in the church. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; b6]</itype> draw a búlak in mahjong. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> hold the celebration of the May flowers.

<p><form>plurisin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fluorescent lamp</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> use, install a <tr>fluorescent lamp</tr>.

<p><form>plurlídir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> floor leader in the legislature. <number>2</number> the one of a group that sleeps on the floor (humorous). <i>Kay kúlang ug katri, ikay plurlídir,</i> There&apos;s not enough beds so you sleep on the floor. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B156; c16]</itype> be made the floor leader. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2B6; a12]</itype> be the one to sleep on the floor, cause one to be such.

<p><form>plurwaks</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>floor wax</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> apply <tr>floor wax</tr>.

<p><form>plút</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>float</tr> in a parade. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> ride on a float. <i>Magplút ang rayna nga iparáda,</i> The beauty queen will be paraded around on a float. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make s.t. into a float.

<p><form>plúting</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. dance wherein a dancer appears to float. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do this dance.

<p><form>plúting rít</form> <pos>n</pos> floating rate of currency. <i>Ang plúting rít mauy nakapamahal sa prisyu sa mga palalítun,</i> The floating rate is the reason prices have gone up. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> for the floating rate to be in effect.

<p><form>plúwid</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>cigarette lighter fluid</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> fill with lighter fluid.

<p><form>prá</form> (from <ix>pára</ix>) cry to get horses to stop: <tr>whoa</tr>.

<p><form>prabir</form> <xr>= <sc>PARABIR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pragáta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>frigate</tr> with sails. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> ride, load s.t. in a frigate.

<p><form>pragátus</form> <xr>= <sc>PARAGÁTUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pragmin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>frogmen</tr>.

<p><form>prak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> formal evening gown for women. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> wear such a frock. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a frock of this sort.

<p><form>prak<sub>2</sub>, prák</form> <pos>n</pos> onomatopoetic sound of exploding firecrackers.

<p><form>prakásu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> fail to carry out an agreement. <i>Makasálig ka nákù kay dì ku muprakásu ug sábut,</i> You can count on me because I do not break agreements.

<p><form>prakayda</form> <xr>= <sc>PARAKAYDA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>praktikal</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>practical</tr>, simple but useful. <i>Praktikal kaáyu ang sinínang dastir pára sa balay,</i> A duster is a very practical dress to wear in the house. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> do s.t. in a practical way.

<p><form>praktis</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>rehearse</tr>, <tr>train</tr> s.o. <i>Akuy mupraktis sa mga bátà ug kanta,</i> I&apos;ll train the children how to sing. <number>2</number> <tr>practice</tr>, <tr>rehearse</tr>. <i>Magpraktis ta sa átung drama,</i> Let&apos;s practice our drama. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>practice</tr> one&apos;s profession. <i>Mupraktis kug makapasar ku sa bár,</i> I will practice law if I pass the bar. <pos>n</pos> <tr>practice</tr> or <tr>rehearsal</tr>. <i>Lisdan ku magkinatsilà kay wà na kuy praktis,</i> I have a hard time speaking Spanish because I don&apos;t have practice. <form>walay &mdash;</form> <number>1</number> <tr>unskilled</tr> (as if lacking practice). <number>2</number> <tr>rough</tr>, accustomed to inflicting pain (derived from the sarcastic usage where s.o. good in fighting refers to himself as <ix>walay praktis</ix> &lsquo;unpracticed&rsquo;). <i>Makatilaw ka giyud íning kúmù kung way praktis,</i> If you don&apos;t watch out, I&apos;ll smack you one with my &lsquo;unpracticed&rsquo; fists. <form>&mdash; titsing</form> <pos>n</pos> practice teaching. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> do practice teaching. <form>praktisádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <i>1</i> <tr>proficient</tr> from having practiced. <i>Praktisádu nà siya sa karáti,</i> He is proficient in karate. <number>2</number> <tr>brawny</tr> due to constant body-building. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be, become <tr>well-practiced</tr> or <tr>trained</tr> in s.t.

<p><form>prákul</form> <xr>= <sc>PALAKUL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>prangha</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> <tr>decorate</tr>; dress up smartly, esp. with jewels. <i>Dílì musimba nang tigulánga ug dílì makaprangha,</i> The old woman never goes to church without her jewels. <i>Pranghái ang sakyanan sa bag-ung kinasal,</i> Decorate the automobile of the newly-weds.

<p><form>prangka</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>frank</tr>, saying exactly what one thinks. <i>Prangka pud kaáyu nímu,</i> How very frank of you! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> tell s.o. frankly. <i>Ákù siyang giprangkáhan nga wà kuy gustu níya,</i> I told him frankly that I don&apos;t like him.

<p><form>prangkísa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>franchise</tr>.

<p><form>prangkisíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>franchise</tr>.

<p><form>prangkíyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>postage stamp</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> put a postage stamp on s.t. <i>Giúlì ang sulat kay wà kaprangkiyúhi,</i> The letter was returned because they didn&apos;t put stamps on it.

<p><form>prangku<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> day off. <i>Dílì siya mutrabáhu karun kay prangku man níya,</i> He will not go to work today because it is his day off. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> take a day off from work. <i>Muprangku ku sa trabáhu ugmà kay magpagíkan ku sa ákung anak,</i> I&apos;ll take the day off tomorrow because I&apos;ll see my child off at the airport.

<p><form>prangku<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PRANGKA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>praníla</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>flannel</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> wear, make of flannel.

<p><form>pransis</form> <pos>n</pos> an elongated loaf of bread with pointed tips and a cut at the center.

<pb n=781>

<p><form>Pransiya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>France</tr>.

<p><form>prantáda</form> <xr>= <sc>PLANTÁDA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>prantsit</form> <xr>= <sc>PRUNSIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>prásis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> process papers or documents. <i>Madúgay pang prasísun ang mga papílis,</i> It will take time to get your papers processed. -ing(&rarr;) <number>1</number> preparation of s.t. <number>2</number> processing of papers.

<p><form>prasku</form> <pos>n</pos> tall wine bottle with four sides, holding more than a liter. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c16]</itype> put s.t. into a bottle of this sort.

<p><form>prawud</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>proud</tr> and <tr>arrogant</tr>. <i>Prawud kaáyu nà sila ábi sapían man,</i> They are arrogant just because they have money. <number>2</number> <tr>proud</tr> of s.t. <i>Prawud kaáyu ang ginikánan sa balidikturyan,</i> The valedictorian&apos;s parents were mighty proud. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> <number>1</number> become <tr>proud</tr> and <tr>arrogant</tr>. <number>2</number> become <tr>proud</tr>.

<p><form>praybasi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>privacy</tr> from view. <i>Dì ku malígù dinhi kay way praybasi,</i> I won&apos;t take a bath here because there&apos;s no privacy.

<p><form>praybit</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>private</tr>, not for public use. <i>Praybit dyíp,</i> Private jeep, not used for public transportation. <number>1a</number> <tr>private</tr>, not publicly maintained. <form>&mdash; iskul</form> <tr>private school</tr>. <form>&mdash; rud</form> road maintained by the owner. <number>1b</number> <tr>private</tr>, for the exclusive use of s.o. or a group. <form>&mdash; nars</form> private nurse. <form>&mdash; rum</form> private room in a hospital. <number>2</number> <tr>private</tr> rank in the military. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; c1]</itype> be a <tr>private</tr> enlisted man. <i>Magpraybit lang ku,</i> I&apos;ll content myself with being a private.

<p><form>prayid rayis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fried rice</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, have <tr>fried rice</tr>. <i>Prayid raysa ang kan-un,</i> Make fried rice of the food (rice).

<p><form>prayid tsíkin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fried chicken</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, have <tr>fried chicken</tr>.

<p><form>prayli</form> <pos>n</pos> Spanish priest that is a member of a religious order. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> become a Spanish <tr>friar</tr>.

<p><form>praymari</form> <xr>see <sc>PRIMARYA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pri</form> <xr>= <sc>PARI</sc>.</xr> <xr>see <sc>PÁRI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>prí</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>free</tr> to do as one likes. <number>2</number> without cost or <tr>free</tr>. <i>Kining tanan gihátag kanímung prí,</i> All these things are given free to you. <i>Prí ka sa pagkáun,</i> You don&apos;t have to pay for your food. <number>2</number> in a game, free to make a shot unhindered. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> allow s.o. to do s.t. free. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256; b(1)]</itype> get a chance to take a shot unhindered.

<p><form>pribáda, pribádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>private</tr>, not for public use or not financed by the government. <i>Dì nà dihà pasudlan kay pribádu,</i> You cannot go in there because it is private. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; c1]</itype> become <tr>private</tr>.

<p><form>pribilids</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>ISPL&Icaron;T<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; ispits</formx> privilege speech allowed to a member of Congress during its session.

<p><form>pribilihiyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>privilege</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> enjoy a privilege. <i>Tagsa ray táwung makapribilihiyu ug sáma sa átung naangkun karun,</i> It&apos;s rare for a person to get privileges of the sort we are enjoying now.

<p><form>pribinir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> set s.t. <tr>aside</tr> for a purpose. <i>Nakapribinir ka nag kwarta pára sa ímung pagpanganak?</i> Have you set anything aside for your delivery? <i>Pribinihi kug dagkung púsù pára binhì,</i> Set some big ears of corn aside for me for seedlings. <form>pribinídu</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>set aside</tr>. <i>Pribinídu ning pagkaúna pára sa kasíra,</i> This food has been set aside for the boarder.

<p><form>pribyu</form> <pos>n</pos> a showing of a movie before its normal run. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> see a <tr>preview</tr> showing of a movie. <i>Mga kadagkúan sa punduk sibiku mauy mupribyu niánang salidáha,</i> The heads of civic organizations will preview that movie.

<p><form>prídi</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. popular <tr>dance</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do this dance.

<p><form>pridikar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>preach</tr> the gospel. <i>Mupridikar ang Murmun bísag lingiwlingíwan,</i> The Mormons preach even if no one listens to them.

<p><form>pridikt&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> <tr>foretell</tr>, <tr>predict</tr>. <i>Íyang hingpridiktahan ang súnug sa wà pa mahitabù,</i> He predicted the fire before it happened.

<p><form>pridyidir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>refrigerator</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> use, own a frigidaire. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put s.t. in a frigidaire. <i>Maprisirb&acaron;r ang pagkáun ug ipridyidir,</i> Food keeps in the frigidaire.

<p><form>prigunta</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>ask</tr> s.o. a question, <tr>inquire</tr>. <i>Priguntahun ka gánì, sulti sa tinúud,</i> If they question you, tell the truth. <i>Unsa pay inyung iprigunta?</i> What else will you ask? <pos>n</pos> <tr>question</tr>.

<p><form>príhu</form> <xr>= <sc>PARÍHU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>prilansir</form> <pos><corr sic=a>n</corr></pos> <tr>free-lancer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a free-lancer.

<p><form>prílim</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>preliminary exam</tr> in school. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> have a prelim. <i>Magprílim ta karun tápus sa búlan,</i> We will have our prelims at the end of this month.

<p><form>priliminári</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>preliminary</tr> games or bouts in boxing, prior to the main event.

<p><form>prilimináris</form> <xr>= <sc>PRILIMINÁRI</sc> (plural).</xr>

<p><form>príma</form> <xr>= <sc>PRÍMU</sc> (female).</xr>

<p><form>primarya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>primary grades</tr>, from grades one to four. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> study on the primary level.

<p><form>primatiyur</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>premature</tr> in birth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b4(1)]</itype> have a premature delivery, be prematurely born. <i>Iingkiyubítur ang bátang maprimatiyur,</i> They put premature babies in the incubator.

<p><form>prí mid</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pre-medical</tr> course leading to a <pb n=782>B.S. degree. <number>2</number> <tr>girl</tr> who is just a servant (humorous). <i>Mangasáwa ka lag usa ka pri mid nga prupisyunal ka man?</i> You want to marry a mere maid when you work at a profession? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a pre-medical student.

<p><form>*primir</form> short for <bx>primíru</bx> <form>&mdash; grádu</form> <tr>first grade</tr>. <form>&mdash; kumuniyun</form> first <tr>communion</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> take first communion. <form>&mdash; ministru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prime minister</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56; c1]</itype> be, become a prime minister.

<p><form>primíra</form> <pos>a</pos> first. <form>&mdash; dáma</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>First Lady</tr>, wife of the highest official. <number>2</number> a beauty princess next in rank to the reigning beauty queen. <form>&mdash; klási</form> first class. <pos>n</pos> first <tr>gear</tr> in an automotive transmission. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put into first gear. <form>&mdash; kumuniyun</form> <pos>n</pos> first <tr>communion</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> have one&apos;s first communion. <form>di-</form> <form>klási, marka</form> <pos>n</pos> of the first rank in s.t. bad, number one. <i>Palaaway siyang diprimíra marka,</i> She is number one when it comes to picking fights.

<p><form>primíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>first</tr>, <tr>firstly</tr>. <i>Daghan kug balayran: primíru, ang iskuylahan, sunud, ang kasíra,</i> I have lots of payments to make: first, the school, then, my board. <number>1a</number> <formx>&mdash; nga <r>[<ix>verb</ix>]</r></formx> the first one that did, had [so-and-so] happen to it. <i>Ang primírung makakità níya,</i> The first one to see him. <i>Ang primírung masakpan,</i> The first one caught. <number>2</number> first day of a month. <i>Prímiru sa Marsu,</i> The first of March. <form>&mdash; anyu</form> first year of college or high school. <form>&mdash; grádu</form> first grade. <form>&mdash; upisiyal</form> chief mate on a boat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56]</itype> be, become first. <i>Nagprimíru na ang Marsu ug wà pa si Makuy,</i> Here it is the first of March, and Macoy still hasn&apos;t come.&dagger;

<p><form>primisyas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>celebration</tr> in thanksgiving for success attained or safe recovery from a disastrous event or illness. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b]</itype> give thanks with some sort of celebration. <i>Nagprimisyas kay nakadaug siyas iliksiyun,</i> He is celebrating because he won the election. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. to celebrate a thanksgiving with. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> celebrate a thanksgiving with.

<p><form>prímu</form> <pos>n</pos> male first <tr>cousin</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> have a male cousin. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC2; a]</itype> call s.o. &lsquo;cousin&rsquo;. <form>(&rarr;)</form> vocative.

<p><form>primyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>reward</tr>, <tr>prize</tr>, or <tr>premium</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give a reward, prize, premium. <i>Muprimyu ku sa makasalb&acaron;r sa ákung anak,</i> I&apos;ll give a reward to whoever rescues my child. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b]</itype> get a reward. <i>Nakaprimyu (naprimyuhan) siyag radiyu,</i> She got a radio as her prize.

<p><form>prinátal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prenatal</tr> care. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> give prenatal care.

<p><form>prinda</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>mortgage</tr> of land whereby the mortgagee uses the land in lieu of interest. <number>2</number> mortgage or <tr>pawn</tr> in general. <form>&mdash; indúnu</form> <xr>see <sc>INDÚNU</sc>.</xr> <form>&mdash; pálit</form> a mortgage where the mortgagee has the option to buy the thing mortgaged. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> mortgage, pawn s.t. <i>Nakaprinda siyag yútà tungud sa madyung,</i> He mortgaged a lot to pay for his mahjong debts. <i>Iprinda ring rilu sa ahinsiya,</i> Pawn this watch to the pawnshop. <form>prindahánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pawnshop</tr>. <form>-du, -in-, pinirinda</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. pawned.

<p><form>prinsa<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>printing press</tr> or a printing establishment. <number>2</number> the <tr>press</tr>: newspapers, magazines in general or the persons who write for them. <i>Kagawásan sa prinsa,</i> <tr>Freedom of the press</tr>.

<p><form>prinsa<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> plant for pressing abaca <tr>hemp</tr> into bales. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> press abaca hemp into bales.

<p><form>prinsipal<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>principal</tr> in a school. <number>2</number> <tr>lead</tr> role in a drama. <number>3</number> instrument that plays the lead, person who plays a lead instrument. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2c1]</itype> be a school principal, player of a lead role, lead instrument in a band.

<p><form>prinsipal<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>capital</tr> invested. <i>Ígù ra kung nakabawì sa prinsipal,</i> I barely recovered the capital. <number>2</number> amount of <tr>money</tr> for a large expense. <i>Wà silay prinsipal nga ipatunghà námù,</i> They have no funds to send us to school. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain capital. <i>Magnigusyu ku kun makaprinsipal,</i> I will go into business if I can secure capital. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> provide capital. <i>Láway ray giprinsipal námù,</i> All we could capitalize on was our gift for words (lit. spit). <i>Prinsipali ug dus míl,</i> Provide two thousand pesos capital.

<p><form>prinsipi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>prince</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>preeminent</tr> person in a class or group. <i>Si Pirnandu Pu mau ang prinsipi sa pilikulang Pilipínu,</i> Fernando Poe is the prince of the Philippine film. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> be, become a prince. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get a prince (as offspring). <form>&mdash; digális</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the <tr>Prince of Wales</tr>. <number>2</number> a man who is handsomely and smartly dressed.

<p><form>prinsipyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>principle</tr>, <tr>rules</tr> of conduct adhered to by persons of right conduct.

<p><form>prinsísa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>princess</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> be a princess. <form>prinsisíta</form> <tr>n</tr> little, young princess, esp. in festivities where people chosen as royalty take part in the program. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> be made a little princess.

<p><form>prinsis kat</form> <pos>n</pos> princess cut, a one-piece, close-fitting women&apos;s <tr>garment</tr>, gored and unbroken at the waistline. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> wear, make into a princess cut dress.

<p><form>prinspus</form> <pos>n</pos> the prince post supporting a roof.

<p><form>printing pris</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>printing press</tr>.

<p><form>prínu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>brakes</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> put on the brakes. <i>Prinúhi ang dyíp ug buut kang mupahúnung,</i> Apply the brakes if you want to <pb n=783>stop. <number>2</number> <tr>restrain</tr> one&apos;s actions or movements. <i>Ayawg húnung apan prinúhi lang ang ínum,</i> Don&apos;t stop but put a limit to your drinking.

<p><form>prípab</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pre-fabricated</tr> <tr>building</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> build a pre-fabricated building. <i>Pripábun (iprípab) na ang mga bag-ung iskuylahan karun,</i> The schools are all going to be pre-fabs.

<p><form>priparar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>prepare</tr>, get s.t. <tr>ready</tr>. <i>Priparaha ang pagkáun sa bisíta,</i> Prepare the food for the visitors. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> hold a <tr>feast</tr>. <i>Magpriparar giyud mig adlaw nákù,</i> We always hold a dinner party on my birthday. <form>priparádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>prepared</tr>. <i>Priparádu na mi kaáyu pára sa byáhi,</i> We are all prepared for the trip. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> get prepared. <form>priparasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>preparation</tr>. <i>Kining duláa nagkinahanglan maáyung priparasiyun,</i> This play requires a lot of preparation. <number>2</number> preparations for a banquet. <number>3</number> in <tr>billiards</tr>, shooting the cue ball in such a manner that it knocks the target ball into the pocket and at the same time is in perfect position to hit the next target ball. <i>Hináya lang pagtíra ang utsu arun priparasiyun sa nuybi,</i> Hit the number eight ball lightly so that the cue ball will be in vantage position for hitting the number nine. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b6]</itype> <xr>= <sc>PRIPARAR</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr>

<p><form>priparatúri</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>preparatory</tr> course preparing for a higher course.

<p><form>pris</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>press</tr>. <i>Miguwà sa pris ang maung balità,</i> The news came out in the press.

<p><form>prís</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>freeze</tr>, a game of <tr>statue</tr> telling the players not to move. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> freeze s.t., get frozen. <i>Maáyu kaáyung muprís ang ámung pridyidir,</i> Our frigidaire makes ice well. <i>Wà pa maprís ang ayisdrap,</i> The popsicles haven&apos;t frozen yet.

<p><form>Pris</form>. abbreviation for <ix>prisidinti</ix>.

<p><form>prisidinsiya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>town hall</tr>.

<p><form>prisidinsiyal</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>presidential</tr>. <form>&mdash; tíbul</form> <pos>n</pos> presidential table where the honored guests are seated.

<p><form>prisidint</form> <xr>= <sc>PRISIDINTI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>prisidinta</form> <xr>= <sc>PRISIDINTI</sc> (female).</xr>

<p><form>prisidinti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>president</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a]</itype> be a president.

<p><form>prisidiyu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> put to hard <tr>labor</tr>, make s.o. do heavy <tr>work</tr>. <i>Makamau giyung muprisidiyu nang bayhána sa íyang mga suluguun,</i> That woman certainly knows how to make her servants do heavy work. <i>Prisidiyuhun ka giyud sa kalabúsu ug hisakpan kang mangáwat,</i> You&apos;ll be sentenced to hard labor in prison if you are caught stealing.

<p><form>prisidiyu<sub>2</sub>, prisidiyum</form> <pos>n</pos> a local chapter of the <tr>Legion of Mary</tr>.

<p><form>prisintabli</form> <pos>a</pos> suitable for presentation. <i>Dì prisintabli ning sinináa,</i> This dress is not <tr>presentable</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> be presentable.

<p><form>prisint&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>present</tr> oneself for a job or to help do s.t. <i>Dúnay miprisint&acaron;r pagkasuluguun,</i> A girl came to apply as maid. <i>Way usa ninyu nga miprisint&acaron;r paglampásu,</i> Not one of you came forward to <tr>volunteer</tr> to polish the floor. <number>2</number> present an idea or a person. <i>Iprisint&acaron;r nang ímung mga idíya sa kadaghánan,</i> Present your ideas to the public. <form>prisintáda</form> <xr>= <sc>PRISINTÁDU</sc> (female).</xr> <form>prisintádu</form> <pos>a</pos> speaking when not spoken to, offering one&apos;s services unasked. <i>Prisintádu siyang mutábang apan way nahímù,</i> He is great in volunteering his services, but what has he ever accomplished? <i>Ngánung mutubag ka mang dì ikay gipangutána? Prisintádu kaáyu ka,</i> Why do you answer when I didn&apos;t ask you? You&apos;re very forward. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become rash to offer one&apos;s services, forward in speaking.

<p><form>prisintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>precinct</tr> for election purposes. <number>2</number> a polling place. <number>3</number> police precinct. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a2]</itype> make into a polling place, police precinct.

<p><form>prísir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>freezer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put in a freezer.

<p><form>prisirb</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>preserve</tr> food in jars. <pos>n</pos> <tr>preserves</tr>.

<p><form>prisirbing dyar</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jar</tr> for preserves.

<p><form>prisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>blood pressure</tr>. <number>2</number> prison <tr>sentence</tr> handed down by a court. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> have [such-and-such] blood pressure. <i>Miprisiyun siyag mubù,</i> He had low blood pressure. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>mete</tr> out a prison sentence. <i>Kamatáyun ang prisiyun sa manlulugus,</i> The rapist was sentenced to death. <form>alta &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> high blood pressure. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> have high blood pressure.

<p><form>priska</form> <xr>= <sc>PRISKU</sc>, <i>a2, v2</i> (female).</xr> <form>litsi &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> fresh <tr>milk</tr>. <i>Mas lamì ang litsi priska kay sa linata,</i> Fresh milk tastes better than canned milk.

<p><form>priskráyib</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>prescribe</tr> medicine. <i>Mau ning tambála ang gipriskráyib sa dukt&ucaron;r,</i> This is the medicine the doctor prescribed.

<p><form>priskripsiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> doctor&apos;s <tr>prescription</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> give a prescription. <i>Gipriskripsiyunan ka ba sa dukt&ucaron;r?</i> Did the doctor give you a prescription?

<p><form>prisku</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fresh</tr>. <number>1a</number> not spoiled or stale. <number>1b</number> <tr>fresh air</tr>. <i>Prisku nga hángin,</i> Fresh air. <number>1c</number> fresh in feeling. <number>2</number> fresh in behavior. <i>Prisku nà siyang manubagtubag,</i> He answers in a fresh way. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> be, become fresh. <i>Muprisku (maprisku) ang átung památì human malígù,</i> We feel fresh and vigorous after we take a bath. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> be, become rude or ill-mannered.

<p><form>pristihiyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prestige</tr>.

<pb n=784>

<p><form>prísu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prisoner</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P; a2]</itype> put in <tr>jail</tr>. <i>Unsang saláay nakaprísu (nakapaprísu) nímu?</i> What crime did you commit that you went to jail? <i>Prisúha ang nakapatay,</i> Send the murderer to jail. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB16]</itype> <tr>confine</tr>, be confined. <i>Siyay nagprísu sa bábuy sa álad,</i> She locked the pig in the pen. <i>Nagprísu siya sa kwartu tibuuk adlaw,</i> She locked herself in her room the whole day. <i>Naprísu ang mga isdà sa bungsud,</i> The fishes got caught in the fish corral. <form>&mdash; kabalyíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> trustee in a prison. <number>2</number> person under house arrest. <form>prisuhan</form> <pos>n</pos> jail.

<p><form>prisupwistu</form> <pos>n</pos> money or goods allocated for a certain purpose. <i>Dakù ra ang prisupwistu álang sa dipartamintu sa dipinsa nasyunal,</i> The department of defense gets much too large an <tr>allocation</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>allocate</tr> money or goods for s.t. <i>Kinahanglan magprisupwistu álang sa katigulangun,</i> It is necessary to set s.t. aside for one&apos;s old age.

<p><form>prisyat</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> foul shot in basketball. <number>2</number> free shot for a photograph. <i>Ang síkan prayis dúnay prisyat gíkan sa Bínus Istudyu,</i> The second prize winner receives a free shot from Venus Studios. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make a foul shot.

<p><form>prisyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>price</tr>. <pos>a</pos> <tr>high-priced</tr>. <i>Prisyu kaáyu ang isdà karun kay nihit man,</i> Fish is high-priced today because it is scarce. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB456; c]</itype> set a price on s.t., have a price. <i>Ug muprisyug barátu palita,</i> If it is priced cheap, buy it. <i>Dì ku makaprisyu ug ubus pa niánà,</i> I can&apos;t give a lower price. <i>Mahal ra tung ímung giprisyu nákù,</i> The price you quoted me was a bit high. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b]</itype> get s.t. for a certain price. <i>Wà ku makaprisyu (maprisyuhi) ug barátu niánà,</i> I couldn&apos;t get a low price on that. <form>&mdash; píhu, píyu</form> fixed price. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for a woman to conduct herself as if she were very high class in order to make a good marriage. <i>Ug magpaprisyu, lagmit dì ka mahálin,</i> If you set a high price on yourself, no one is going to buy you.

<p><form>pritind&icaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> show s.t. off. <i>Gipritindihan ku níya sa íyang mga pundang binurdáhan,</i> She showed her embroidered pillow cases off to me. <i>Ipritind&icaron;r ang maáyu, itágù ang dautan,</i> Show off the good; hide the bad.

<p><form>pritru</form> <xr>= <sc>PRISYAT</sc>, <i>n1, v.</i></xr>

<p><form>prítu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>cook</tr> s.t. in deep fat. <i>Pritúhun (iprítu) ta ang ságing,</i> Let&apos;s cook the bananas in deep fat. <pos>n</pos> <tr>fried food</tr>. <form>-in-</form> <xr>= <sc>PRÍTU</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p><form>príwar</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pre-war</tr>, from before World War II.

<p><form>príward</form> <pos>n</pos> free <tr>ward</tr> in a hospital. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> stay, put in a free ward.

<p><form>príwur</form> <xr>= <sc>PRÍWAR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>prubar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> try s.t. out. <i>Muprubar kug hímù ánang risipíha,</i> I&apos;ll try making that recipe. <i>Ákù siyang giprubahan (giprubaran) ug musugut ba,</i> I only tried her out to see if she would give in to me. <i>Prubahan ka lang ug makaapas ka sa trabáhu,</i> I&apos;ll try you out to see if you can do the job. <i>Iprubar lang nag haum ug masúd ba,</i> Try putting it in and see if it fits. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>prove</tr> s.t. <i>Dì ku makaprubar sa ákung tyuríya,</i> I can&apos;t prove my theory.

<p><form>prubidinsiya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Divine Providence</tr>.

<p><form>prubinsiya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>province</tr>, a political division of a country. <number>2</number> area not in the big city. <i>Daghang tagaprubinsiya muiskuyla sa Sugbu,</i> Lots of people from the province come to Cebu to study. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> be a province, be made into a province. <form>-na</form> <xr>= <sc>PRUBINSIYÁNU</sc> (female).</xr> <form>-nu, -nhun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> from the <tr>rural</tr> areas. <number>2</number> like s.o. from the rural areas, <tr>bumpkin</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> become like one from the country. <form>-l</form> <pos>a</pos> provincial, on the provincial level. <i>Bilangguang prubinsiyal,</i> Provincial jail.

<p><form>prubinsyal</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>provincial</tr>, on the provincial level (used only in set phrases from English). <form>&mdash; burd</form> <pos>n</pos> provincial board. <form>&mdash; dyil</form> Provincial jail.

<p><form>prubisung</form> <pos>n</pos> school <tr>supervisor</tr> (humorous).

<p><form>prubisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>clause</tr> in a contract, <tr>provision</tr> of a law.

<p><form>prubisyunal</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>temporary</tr>. <i>Prubisyunal lang ning kural tang kawáyan. Átù unyà ning ihalublak kun makakwarta ta,</i> This bamboo fence is just temporary. We&apos;ll replace it with hollow blocks when we can afford it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> have s.t. temporary. <i>Prubisyunali lang nag atup myintras tantu,</i> Just put up temporary roofing for the time being.

<p><form>prubits&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>avail</tr> oneself of some benefit that presents itself on occasion. <i>Kami ang nagprubits&acaron;r sa íyang balay samtang wà siya dinhi,</i> We availed ourselves of his house while he was gone. <i>Prubitsahi siyag súgù samtang nía pa siya,</i> Use him for your errands while he is still here. <form>prubitsáwu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>useful</tr>. <i>Karáan túud nig dagway, apan prubitsáwu kaáyu ni kanákù,</i> It looks old, but it is useful to me.

<p><form>prubitsu</form> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>PRUBITS&Acaron;R</sc>.</xr> <pos>n</pos> <tr>use</tr> that can be made of s.t. <i>Way prubitsung pagkatáwu ang tapulan,</i> A lazy person is useless. <i>Unsay prubitsu ánang gubà na man?</i> Of what use is that since it is broken?

<p><form>prublíma</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>problem</tr>. <i>Ímu nang prublíma. Sunud ayaw na pangútang,</i> That&apos;s your problem. From now on, don&apos;t borrow money. <i>Daghang prublíma ang migawas sa pasúlit,</i> Many problems came out in the exams. <pb n=785><pos>a</pos> being a problem. <i>Prublíma kaáyung anáka kay buluyágun,</i> That child is a terrible problem because he is mischievous. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> get to be a problem. <i>Nagkaprublíma na ning ákung alap-ap,</i> My rash is turning into a real problem.

<p><form>pruduksiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>yield</tr>, <tr>output</tr>. <i>Gamay ra ang pruduksiyun sa pabrika sa kámay,</i> The sugar refinery has a small output. <number>2</number> stage or movie production.

<p><form>pruduktu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>product</tr>, <tr>output</tr>, <tr>yield</tr>. <i>Dakug pruduktu ang ámung yútà,</i> Our lands have a high yield. <i>Ang pruduktu niíning pabrikáha,</i> The products of this factory. <number>1a</number> item of manufacture. <i>Ang kinabag-uhang pruduktu muabut niíning lugára,</i> The latest products reach this place. <number>2</number> one&apos;s <tr>children</tr> (humorous). <i>Duha nay ílang pruduktu,</i> They have two kids now. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> yield, have [so-and-so great] an output. <i>Nakapruduktu na ning anáya ug kinyintus písus,</i> This sow has yielded five hundred pesos (worth of piglets). <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> have children (colloquial).

<p><form>prudyúsir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>producer</tr> of a play or movie. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be, become a movie producer.

<p><form>prugram</form> <xr>= <sc>PRUGRÁMA</sc>, <i>n1, v1.</i></xr>

<p><form>prugráma</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>program</tr> of entertainment or ceremony. <number>2</number> program listing the details of an entertainment. <i>Naimprinta na ang prugráma,</i> The program has been printed. <number>3</number> <tr>plans</tr>. <i>Ang <corr sic="prugrama">prugráma</corr> sa gubyirnu sa panguma,</i> The government&apos;s agricultural program. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> have a program. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> make out a written program. <i>Magprugráma pa ku sa tulumanun sa pista,</i> I&apos;ll make out the program of the events during the fiesta.

<p><form>prugrisista</form> <pos>n</pos> a short-lived third party of the nineteen sixties, the Progressive Party of the Philippines, or a member thereof. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a PPP member.

<p><form>prugrísu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>improvement</tr> from a state, condition, or station. <i>Way prugrísu ang átung lungsud kay naghítak ang pamulitiku,</i> The town never makes progress because everything is politics.

<p><form>pruhibir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>prohibit</tr> s.o. from doing s.t. <i>Dì ku mupruhibir ug unsay ímung buhátun,</i> I won&apos;t stop you from doing what you want.

<p><form>pruklamar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>announce</tr> s.t. officially. <i>Ang mayur mauy mupruklamar sa rayna,</i> The mayor will proclaim the beauty queen. <i>Wà ipruklamar nga pista upisiyal ugmà,</i> Tomorrow hasn&apos;t been proclaimed a public holiday. <form>pruklamasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>proclamation</tr>, s.t. announced officially. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> hold a program to proclaim s.t. <i>Magpruklamasiyun sa rayna rung gabíi,</i> The queen will be proclaimed in a program tonight.

<p><form>prumininti</form> <pos>a</pos> of high standing in society. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be, become of <tr>prominent</tr> social standing. <i>Naprumininti sila tungud sa ílang pagkasapían,</i> They become prominent because of their wealth.

<p><form>prumísa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>promise</tr> relating to s.t. important, not trivial. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make a solemn promise. <i>Iprumísa nákù Ginúu ug buháyun ku nímu,</i> I promise, Lord, if you prolong my life....

<p><form>prumusyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>promotion</tr> to a higher position. <i>Wà nà siya maapil sa prumusyun,</i> He was passed over for promotion. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b8]</itype> <tr>promote</tr> s.o. to a higher position.

<p><form>prumusyun síl, prumusyunal síl</form> <pos>n</pos> special <tr>sale</tr> to promote products. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c6]</itype> hold such a sale.

<p><form>prumut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>promote</tr> to a higher position in a job or grade. <i>Kinsa guy nagprumut ánang buluk?</i> Who promoted that stupid child? <form>-id(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a3]</itype> be promoted to a higher grade or position. <i>Maprumútid (maprumut) ka pagkapurman,</i> You will get promoted to foreman.

<p><form>prumútir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>boxing</tr> <tr>promoter</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a2]</itype> be a boxing promoter.

<p><form>prunáwuns</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>pronounce</tr> s.t. articulately. <i>Dílì siya makaprunáwuns ug ip,</i> She can&apos;t pronounce an <ix>f.</ix>

<p><form>prunsit, pruntsit</form> <pos>n</pos> front <tr>seat</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; c6P]</itype> sit, put in the front seat. <i>Dì ku mupruntsit (mupapruntsit) ug lingkud sa trák,</i> I won&apos;t sit in the front seat of the bus. <i>Ipruntsit (ipaprunsit) pagsakay ang bátà,</i> Let the child sit on the front seat. <form>bísag maulahi basta &mdash;</form> don&apos;t mind being the last (to get on) as long as I get the front seat&mdash;said of an old maid that gets married late but makes a good marriage or a person that eats last but gets the best.

<p><form>pruntu</form> <pos>a</pos> on time, <tr>punctual</tr>. <i>Pruntu kanúnay ang ámung swildu,</i> Our salary is always on time. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> do s.t. on time, promptly. <i>Kasab-an ka giyug dì ka mupruntu pagtambung sa upisína,</i> They&apos;ll surely call your attention to it if you don&apos;t report to the office on time.

<p><form>pruntun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fronton</tr> for jai alai.

<p><form>prunumbri</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pronoun</tr>.

<p><form>prup</form> <pos>n</pos> galley <tr>proof</tr> or proof of photos. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> make proofs. <i>Prúpi ang ritrátu arun mi makapílì,</i> Make proofs of the pictures so that we can make a choice.

<p><form>prupidad</form> <xr>= <sc>PRUPYIDAD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>prupaganda</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>propaganda</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>advertisement</tr> over the radio or in the form of leaflets or billboards. <i>Prupaganda sa sini,</i> <tr>Leaflets</tr> advertising the movie. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> spread propaganda. <pb n=786><number>2</number> <tr>advertise</tr>. <i>Dì ta makaprupaganda sa radiyu ug way báyad,</i> We can&apos;t advertise free over the radio. <i>Ayaw ug iprupaganda ang ímung pagkaignuranti,</i> Don&apos;t advertise your ignorance. <form>prupagandista</form> <pos>n</pos> one who disseminates propaganda or advertisements. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be, become a <tr>propagandist</tr>.

<p><form>prupagar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c6]</itype> display, show off for all the world to see. <i>Nagprupagar sila sa ílang kaadunáhan,</i> They are showing off their wealth. <i>Kun mau nay ímung buhátun magprupagar ka lang sa ímung kaignuy,</i> If you do that, you will just be displaying your ignorance.

<p><form>prupisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>profession</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> <tr>study</tr> s.t. as a profession. <form>-al</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> one who is trained for a profession. <i>Prupisyunal na ang ákung mga anak,</i> My children are all trained for a profession. <number>2</number> <tr>professional</tr> in some field. <i>Prupisyunal nga kantúra,</i> Professional singer. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> become a professional s.t. or a person who has been trained for a profession.

<p><form>prupisur</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>teacher</tr> at an institution of higher learning. <number>2</number> music or art teacher. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; c1]</itype> become a college, music, or art teacher.

<p><form>prupisúra</form> <xr>= <sc>PRUPISUR</sc> (female).</xr>

<p><form>prupíta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prophet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be, become a prophet.

<p><form>prupitaryu</form> <pos>n</pos> one who owns a landed <tr>estate</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be an estate <tr>owner</tr>. <i>Ug magprupitaryu ka, dakù na pud ang buhis,</i> If you are a landowner, you also have a big tax.

<p><form>prupursiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>well-proportioned</tr>. <i>Prupursiyun kaáyu ang ímung láwas,</i> You have a well-proportioned body. <number>2</number> <tr>mixture</tr>, <tr>ratio</tr> of constituent ingredients. <i>Pilay prupursiyun sa balas ug simintu?</i> What is the ratio of sand to cement? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> become well-proportioned.

<p><form>prupusisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>proposition</tr>, <tr>proposal</tr>. <i>Ang prupusisiyun nga bahínun ang Sibu ángay tun-an,</i> They should study the proposal to divide Cebu.

<p><form>prupyidad</form> <pos>n</pos> real and personal <tr>property</tr>.

<p><form>prúsa</form> <pos>n</pos> prose.

<p><form>prusikusiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>prosecution</tr> in a criminal case. <i>Pruyba nga gipakítà sa prusikusiyun,</i> Evidence offered by the prosecution.

<p><form>prusisiyun, prusisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> religious <tr>procession</tr>. <i>Bísag unsa kataas sa prusisyun, mupaúlì giyud sa simbahan,</i> No matter how long the procession, it always winds up back at the church,&mdash;i.e. no matter how far the husband wanders, he returns home. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> hold a procession. <number>2</number> go s.w. in a long line, as if in a procession.

<p><form>pruspik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prospective</tr> <tr>customer</tr> or <tr>candidate</tr>. <i>Gilista sa ahinti ang gituúhan níyang pruspik,</i> The agent listed his prospective customers. <i>Gwápa ang íyang pruspik,</i> He is eyeing a beautiful girl. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>prospect</tr> for minerals. <i>Nagpruspik silag buláwan,</i> They are prospecting for gold. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> get as a prospect, make a prospect out of s.o. <i>Básig makapruspik ta níla sa pagpalit ug insiyúrans,</i> We might get them as prospective customers for insurance.

<p><form>pruspiktus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prospectus</tr> of a school.

<p><form>pruspirar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>prosper</tr>. <i>Wà mupruspirar ang ílang láraw,</i> Their plans did not prosper.

<p><form>prusúsu</form> <xr>= <sc>*PURSÚSU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>prutagunista</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>protagonist</tr> in a story. <number>2</number> <tr>opponents</tr> in an election. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B156; c1]</itype> be, become a protagonist. <number>2</number> <itype>[C]</itype> be opponents in an election. <i>Nagprutagunista ang duha ka magsúun pagkamayur,</i> The two brothers were opponents in the race for mayor.

<p><form>prútas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fruit</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> eat, have fruits.

<p><form>prutihir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>protect</tr>. <i>Átung prutihian ang átung katungud,</i> We will protect our rights. <form>prutihídu</form> <pos>a</pos> s.o. or s.t. <tr>protected</tr>. <i>Ang mga táwu prutihídu sa batakang baláud,</i> The people are protected by the Constitution. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> be protected by. <i>Ang mga ismaglir giprutihidúan sa mga pulitiku,</i> Smugglers are protected by politicians.

<p><form>prutiksiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>protection</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> give protection. <i>Prutiksiyuni ang ímung mata sa sulaw sa adlaw,</i> <tr>Protect</tr> your eyes from the glare of the sun.

<p><form>prutína</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>protein</tr>. <i>Tugub sa prutína ang karni sa báka,</i> Beef is rich in protein.

<p><form>prutíra</form> <pos>n</pos> fruit <tr>bowl</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> use, place s.t. on the fruit tray.

<p><form>prutista</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3c]</itype> <tr>protest</tr> against, make an objection to s.t. <i>Ang mga Libiral miprutista sa iliksiyun,</i> The Liberals protested the election results. <i>Wà kuy ikaprutista sa bag-ung riglamintu,</i> I have no objections to make against the new regulation. <pos>n</pos> action of protesting. <i>Prutista sa hukum,</i> Protest against the decision.

<p><form>prutistanti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Protestant</tr> church or a member thereof. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; a12]</itype> be, become a protestant.

<p><form>prut kik</form> <pos>n</pos> fruit <tr>cake</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, have fruit cake.

<p><form>prúwa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prow</tr>, the forward part of a ship or boat. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a prow of the ship. <number>2</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> put at the prow. <i>Iprúwa pagbutang ang mga karga,</i> Put the cargoes at the prow.

<p><form>pruyba</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>proof</tr> tending to establish the truth of s.t. <number>2</number> galley proof or proof of a photo. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>prove</tr> s.t. true, use s.t. as proof. <i>Pruybáhun ku nà arun ka maprísu,</i> <pb n=787>I&apos;ll prove it to get you put in jail. <i>Kining sundánga ipruyba sa pagbunù,</i> Show this bolo as proof of the murder. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make galley proofs or proofs for photographs. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>proofread</tr>. <i>Magpruyba pa ku sa katapúsang pahina,</i> I still have to proofread the last page.

<p><form>pruyiktu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>project</tr>, a <tr>proposal</tr> to do s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a project. <i>Nagpruyiktu sila pagpanindut sa plása,</i> They have a project to <corr sic=beautiful>beautify</corr> the plaza.

<p><form>P.S.</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>PÍIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>P.S.K.</form> abbreviation for <ix>pahúlay sa kalínaw</ix> &lsquo;rest in peace&rsquo;, engraved on tombstones.

<p><form>p&umacracu;</form> <xr>= <sc>PÚLU<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pû</form> <xr>= <sc>PULÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>p&umacrcir;</form> <xr>= <sc>PÚLÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púan</form> <xr>= <sc>PUL-AN</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PÚLU<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puángud</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>compassion</tr>, tender <tr>regards</tr>. <i>Tungud sa puángud sa Mahal nga Birhin,</i> Through the compassion of the Blessed Virgin. <i>Pirmi siya nga gidagmálan sa íyang walay puángud nga inaína,</i> She was constantly maltreated by her merciless stepmother. <form>mapuangúrun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>compassionate</tr>, <tr>tender</tr>. <i>Mapuangúrung kasingkásing,</i> Compassionate heart. <number>2</number> patient, bearing with others&apos; faults. <i>Mapuangúrung kalabaw,</i> The patient water buffalo.

<p><form>púas walay &mdash;</form> there&apos;s no end or stopping. <i>Walay púas ug ági ang mga trák tibuuk gabíi,</i> The trucks kept coming by without end, the whole night through.

<p><form>puása</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fasting</tr>. <number>1a</number> <tr>abstinence</tr> from anything. <number>2</number> a day or period of fasting. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>fast</tr>. <i>Magpuása ku sa Simána Santa,</i> I&apos;ll fast during Holy Week. <number>1a</number> <tr>abstain</tr> from anything. <i>Mupuása únà ku sa paghilabut sa ákung asáwa,</i> I&apos;ll abstain from having relations with my wife. <form>ting-</form> <pos>n</pos> day or period of fasting.

<p><form>púay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B6; b5]</itype> <tr>spill over</tr>, <tr>overflow</tr>. <i>Mipúay ang bínu sa kupíta,</i> The wine spilled over the goblet. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; a1]</itype> <tr>sag</tr>, <tr>droop</tr> listlessly. <i>Nagpúay ang búlak sa pláwir bis kay way túbig,</i> The flowers in the vase drooped for lack of water. <form>puaypuay, puaypúay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN]</itype> filled to <tr>overflowing</tr>; <tr>bursting at the seams</tr>. <i>Namuaypúay ka na sa katambuk,</i> You&apos;re bursting at the seams, you&apos;re so fat. <i>Mga bátà ang nakapuaypúay sa dyíp,</i> The children filled the jeep to its seams.

<p><form>publasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> town proper, the place in a town where there is a concentration of houses. <number>2</number> <tr>town</tr> as a political unit. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into the town proper. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> be, become a <tr>town</tr>. <i>Publasyunun na ang ámung baryu,</i> Our village will be made into a town.

<p><form>publikar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>make known</tr> to the public. <i>Gipublikar sa radiyu ang kadaúgan,</i> The victory was <tr>announced</tr> over the radio. <i>Gipublikar na ang risulta sa bár,</i> The results of the bar examination have been published. <number>2</number> <tr>publish</tr> s.t. <i>Ámung imprinta ang mupublikar sa ílang piryudiku,</i> Our printing press will publish their newspaper. <form>publikadur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>publisher</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be a publisher. <form>publikasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>publication</tr>.

<p><form>publiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>public</tr>. <i>Makiglantúgì ku nímu sa publiku,</i> I want to debate you in public. <number>1a</number> public, not private. <i>Salakyanan nga (sa) publiku,</i> <tr>Public transportation</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>audience</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256; c1]</itype> be, become s.t. for public use. <i>Napubliku na ang ílang bumba tungud sa kadaghang mugámit,</i> Their water pump has become public property since so many <form>people</form> use it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> have an audience; be an audience. <i>Nakapubliku siyag ubay-*ubay,</i> She drew a large audience.

<p><form>publisidad</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>publicity</tr>. <i>Kinahanglan ang publisidad sa dráma,</i> We need publicity for the play.

<p><form>pubri</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>poor</tr>, not having money. <i>Pubri apan ligdung,</i> Poor but honest. <number>2</number> poor, <tr>unfortunate</tr>. <i>Pubring mga ílu,</i> Poor orphans. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB12; a12]</itype> make s.o. poor; become poor. <i>Súgal mauy nagpubri (nagpapubri) námù,</i> Gambling made us poor. <form>mata &mdash;</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>MATA</sc>.</xr> <form>-ng káhuy</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>shrub</tr> with fleshy, green, smooth branches but no leaves: <bio>Euphorbia tirucalli</bio>. <form>pubrihun</form> <pos>a</pos> destined to be poor. <i>Taas nang adlaw, natúlug gihápun. Mau nang táwung pubrihun,</i> He&apos;s still asleep even at this hour. That&apos;s the way it is with people who are destined to be poor. <form>-síta</form> <pos>a</pos> poor little thing (female). <i>Pubrisíta intáwun ang bátà nga gilábay sa gáhung,</i> The poor little thing was thrown into the pit. <i>Kapubrisíta sa mga pisù nga inyung gikúhà,</i> You took the poor little birdlings. <form>-sítu</form> <xr>= <sc>PUBRISÍTA</sc> (male).</xr>

<p><form>pud</form> <xr>= <sc>UPUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>p&umacracu;d</form> <xr>= <sc>PÚLUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puday</form> <xr>= <sc>PURAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púding</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pudding</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, have pudding.

<p><form>pudir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> rights one has over another person to regulate or order him. <i>Ang kumandanti may pudir sa pagdisiplína sa mga kadíti,</i> The commander has the <tr>right</tr> to discipline the cadets. <i>Agálun ku apan wà kuy pudir pagpugung sa íyang kwarta,</i> I am her boss, but I have no right to hold her money back. <number>1a</number> place one has control or rights over. <i>But-an ba ku nímu sa ákung pudir?</i> You dare to order me around in my own house? <i>Kay <pb n=788>miláyas kas ákung pudir, dì ku manggilábut nímu,</i> You left my house so I have nothing more to do with you. <i>Karun kay midaug tas piliay, náa na tas pudir,</i> Now that we won the election, we are in <tr>power</tr>. <form>-úsu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>powerful</tr>, <tr>influential</tr>. <i>Ang mga Duránu pudirúsu kaáyus pulitika,</i> The Duranos are very powerful in politics. <form>túdu -úsu</form> <pos>n</pos> all powerful, <tr>almighty</tr>. <i>Ilikay kami sa kadaútan, Diyus nga túdu pudirúsu,</i> God Almighty, deliver us from evil. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become powerful.

<p><form>pud kuluring</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>food coloring</tr>.

<p><form>pudlung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> destroy plants completely, uprooting everything. <i>Kainginíru ang nagpudlung sa lasang,</i> The slash and burn cultivators destroyed the forest. <i>Pudlunga ang mga balágun nga mikáput sa atup,</i> Get rid of the vines that are growing over the roof.

<p><form>pudlus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>run away</tr> fast from s.t. usually in a temper tantrum. <i>Mipudlus siya pagkakità sa dintista,</i> She fled when she saw the dentist. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for animals that are tied to run about restlessly in excitement. <i>Mupudlus ning ákung túru ug makakitag bayi,</i> The bull that is tied keeps running back and forth when it sees a female.

<p><form>pudlus<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>clothesline</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make a clothesline. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> hang up on the clothesline. <i>Ayaw nà ihayhay sa kural. Ipudlus giyud,</i> Don&apos;t hang it over the fence. Put it over the line.

<p><form>pudlus<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>beat</tr> or <tr>whip</tr> vigorously. <i>Ang táwung nagkastígu sa íyang anak mu rag nagpudlus ug bitin,</i> The man is beating his child as if he were clubbing a snake. <pos>n</pos> s.t. to beat s.o. with.

<p><form>pudngan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>bird</tr>, the yellow-breasted fruit <tr>dove</tr>: <bio>Ptilinopus occipitalis</bio>.

<p><form>pudpud<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB1; a12]</itype> <tr>wear</tr> down or <tr>decay</tr> at the ends or tips, become so. <i>Dulsi ang nagpudpud (nagpapudpud) sa íyang ngípun,</i> Her teeth decayed from all the candy. <i>Nagkapudpud ang halígi sa ulan ug ínit,</i> The post is getting decayed from the rain and the sun. <i>Nagkapudpud na ang íyang bakyà,</i> His wooden slippers are becoming worn out. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> knock the ashes off s.t. burning slowly. <pos>a</pos> <tr>worn</tr> down or <tr>decayed</tr>.

<p><form>*pudpud<sub>2</sub></form> <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> dried <ix>malangsi</ix> fish.

<p><form>púdul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>poodle cut</tr>, hair cut like a poodle. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> give s.o. a poodle cut. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear a poodle cut. <i>Angayan siyang magpúdul,</i> She looks becoming with a poodle cut.

<p><form>pudyut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>pick up</tr> s.t. or <tr>pinch</tr> s.t. <i>Gipudyut níya ang íkug sa ilagà,</i> He carefully picked up the rat by the tail. <i>Kaáyu giyung pudyútun nang ilung mu,</i> How nice it would be to pinch your nose. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> give or take a small quantity of s.t. <i>Syáru dì giyud ka makapudyut nákug dyútayng isdà,</i> Surely you can give me a little <tr>bit</tr> of your fish. <i>Pudyútig asin,</i> Add a <tr>pinch</tr> of salt. <pos>n</pos> small amount, amount which could be grasped in the tips of the fingers. <i>Pipila ka pudyut nga bugas,</i> A few pinches of rice.

<p><form>púg</form> <xr>= <sc>PULUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púga<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b26]</itype> escape from prison. <i>Nakapúga ang bitayúnun,</i> The prisoner escaped from death row. <pos>n</pos> escapee from a prison. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <xr>= <sc>PÚGA</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p><form>púga<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for a woman to be beautiful (slang).

<p><form>pugà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>squeeze</tr> to extract <tr>juice</tr>. <i>Pugaa (pug-a) ug maáyu ang limunsítu,</i> Squeeze the calamondin dry. <number>1a</number> <formx>&mdash; sa útuk</formx> <itype>[A135; a12]</itype> <tr>rack</tr> one&apos;s brains. <i>Nagpugà ku sa ákung útuk ug unsay itubag,</i> I&apos;m racking my brains to think of how to answer. <number>1b</number> <formx>kapug-an ug singut</formx> dripping wet with sweat. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> force s.o. to do s.t. <i>Kinsay nagpugà nímu pagpahátag sa kwarta?</i> Who compelled you to give the money? <i>Dì ka makapugà (makapamugà) nákù pagbutar nímu,</i> You can&apos;t force me to vote for you. <i>Gipugà siya pagpatug-an sa mga pulis,</i> The cops forced him to confess. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. squeezed out.&dagger;

<p><form>púgad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> put fowl away for the night. <i>Si Núnuy nagpúgad sa mga manuk gabíi,</i> Nonoy was the one who put the chickens away for the night last night. <number>2</number> put newly hatched baby chicks down from the nest for the first time. <i>Ug sayung pugárun ang pisù háyang lamigasun,</i> If you take chicks out of the nest too early, the ants are likely to get at them. <pos>n</pos> action of gathering fowl. <form>pugaran</form> <pos>n</pos> chicken&apos;s nest.

<p><form>pugáhan</form> <xr>= <sc>ANÍBUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pugápu</form> <pos>n</pos> general name for <tr>groupers</tr>, except for extremely large ones.

<p><form>pugapúga</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> do s.t. in a <tr>rush</tr>. <i>Nagpugapúga silag pangarga kay lumalarga nag barku,</i> They loaded the cargo as fast as they could because the boat was about to leave. <i>Pugapugáha (pugapugáhi) ninyug hípus ang binulad kay hápit na muulan,</i> Gather the rice quick because it is about to rain.

<p><form>pugas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>plant</tr> grains or seeds in a hole. <i>Akuy nagpugas ánang lísu sa kapáyas dihà,</i> I was the one who planted the papaya seeds there. <i>Íyang gipugsan ug munggus ang usa ka parsíla,</i> He planted one lot to mung beans. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>seed</tr> that has been planted. <i>Giánud ang mga pugas sa bahà,</i> The seeds were washed away in the flood. <number>2</number> the amount of seeds planted to a given area. <i>Pugas ug tulu ka gantang ang ákung baul,</i> I can plant three <pb n=789>gantas of grain in my field. <form>pugaspúgas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> do s.t. with the expectation of a return in the future. <i>Kanang íyang paghátag namugaspúgas nà arun hiayunan sa ginikánan,</i> His gift is actually an investment so that her parents would like him. <form>pugsanan</form> <pos>n</pos> place to be planted. <form>iga-, ig-r-(&larr;), ig-l-(&larr;)</form> <number>1</number> thing to <tr>sow</tr>. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>TING-L-</sc>.</xr> <form>ting-l-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> sowing <tr>season</tr>.

<p><form>pug-aw</form> <xr>= <sc>PUGHAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pugáwù</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small <tr>grouper</tr>, found in shallow waters, with dark spots all over the body.

<p><form>pugdaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125; a12P]</itype> be <tr>burned</tr> to ashes, <tr>burn</tr> oneself out. <i>Ug mapugdaw ang sugnud<corr sic=.>,</corr> hipúsa ang abu ug paglihíya,</i> When the fuel burns itself out, gather the ashes and make lye out of them.

<p><form>pugdaw<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PUKDAW</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pugdul</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>trimmed</tr>, <tr>cut</tr> <tr>short</tr>. <i>Pugdul ang íkug sa irù,</i> The dog has a stubbed tail. <i>Pugdul ang íyang buhuk,</i> She has short hair. <i>Pugdul ang mga tanum sa kadaplínan,</i> The plants along the sides have been trimmed down. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; ab]</itype> <tr>trim</tr> s.t. down. <i>Ang bagyu mauy nakapugdul (nakapapugdul) sa lubi,</i> The typhoon ripped the tops off the coconut trees.

<p><form>pughad</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for root crops to have a fine, <tr>mealy</tr> consistency when cooked. <number>2</number> for a woman to be <tr>good-looking</tr> (slang). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> be <tr>tasty</tr> with this smooth consistency.

<p><form>pughak</form> <pos>n</pos> egg yolk.

<p><form>pughaw</form> <pos>a</pos> for s.t. colored to be <tr>faded</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> get faded. <i>Mupughaw ang sinínà ug ibulad sa ínit,</i> The dress will <tr>fade</tr> if it is dried in the sun.

<p><form>púgi</form> <pos>a</pos> for a boy to be <tr>handsome</tr> (slang). <i>Púgi apan dihin gúli,</i> He may be handsome but he&apos;s dirty. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a1P]</itype> be, become handsome (slang).

<p><form>pugì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> be the <tr>first</tr> to do s.t. to s.t. <i>Akuy mupugig sakay sa ímung kutsi,</i> Let me be the first one to ride in your new car. <i>Akuy mupugì ánang dalagáha,</i> Let me be the one to break that virgin in. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> first use made of s.t. new. <i>Pinugian ning linung-ága sa átung abut humay ning aníha,</i> This is the first rice we cooked from the rice we harvested this season.

<p><form>púgis, pug-is</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; ac]</itype> having too much powder on the skin. <i>Nawung nagpúgis (gipugísan) sa pulbus,</i> A face with face powder <tr>caked</tr> on it. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>faded</tr> to the point of whiteness. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> become faded to the point of whiteness. <i>Mupugis (mapugis) ang sinínà ug isígig ladlad,</i> The dress will turn white if it&apos;s always put in the sun. <form>pugispugis</form> <pos>a</pos> streaks or spots of whitish or grayish substances which form on the skin or may come from external sources. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> for skin to get <ix>pugispugis</ix> on it. <i>Magpugispugis ang pánit sa sabun ug dílì hugásan ug maáyu,</i> The skin will get streaks of soap if you don&apos;t rinse it off.

<p><form>pugnit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>pick</tr>, <tr>pinch</tr> with the tips of the fingers and the thumb. <i>Gipugnit níya ang bugas nga naúsik,</i> He picked up the rice that had spilled.

<p><form>pugpug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>PULPUG</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[BN]</itype> be covered with dust. <i>Namugpug ang ákung tiil sa abug,</i> My feet are covered with dust.

<p><form>pugsak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> <tr>drop</tr> or <tr>dash</tr> s.t. downward so that it lands with force. <i>Ang tuntu mauy nakapugsak sa básu,</i> The fool let the glass crash to the floor. <i>Gipugsakan níyag dakung batu ang hás,</i> He bashed the snake&apos;s head with a huge stone. <i>Napugsak ang baskit ug nangabúak ang itlug sa súd,</i> He put the basket down hard and the eggs in it broke.

<p><form>pugsit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> have loose bowel movements in spurts. <i>Nagpugsit ku kay wà ku kahilísi,</i> I have <tr>diarrhea</tr> because I had indigestion.

<p><form>pugtas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> get <tr>exhausted</tr> from doing s.t. strenuous, get out of breath. <i>Napugtas ang bátà ug dinágan,</i> The child exhausted himself running. <i>Makapugtas ang hilabihang kabusug,</i> Eating too much can get you out of breath. <form>-an, ma-un</form> <pos>a</pos> prone to fainting spells.

<p><form>pugtas<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; ab8]</itype> <tr>snap</tr> or <tr>break</tr> off suddenly. <i>Pagpílì ug alambri nga dílì tayaun arun dílì mapugtas,</i> Choose a wire that&apos;s not rusty so that it will not break easily. <number>2</number> <tr>kill</tr>, cause s.t. or s.o. to die with suddenness and force. <i>Si Dyíma nagpugtas sa íyang kaugalíngun,</i> Gemma killed herself. <i>Ang kasukù dílì ígù makapugtas sa ákung gugma nímu,</i> Anger cannot kill my love for you.

<p><form>pugtud</form> (from <ix>putud</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB26; a]</itype> <tr>break</tr> into separate pieces, esp. things which easily come apart, due to age, wear. <i>Napugtud ang kaptanan sa tása,</i> The handle of the cup broke off. <i>Ákung pugtúrun ning hilúa arun wà nay mugámit niíni,</i> I&apos;ll break this thread into pieces so that no one can use it anymore.

<p><form>púgu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>bird</tr>.

<p><form>púgud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> for a <tr>bud</tr> to form and swell. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> infected <tr>pimple</tr> on the face. <form>pugudpugud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; a4b4]</itype> for the face to get little bumps from infected <tr>acne</tr>. <i>Nawung nga nagpugudpugud (gipugudpugud, gipugudpuguran) sa mga bugas,</i> A face with bumps all over it from acne. <form>pugurun</form> <pos>a</pos> acne infected.

<p><form>pug-uk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> hold s.t. back to prevent <pb n=790>growth or development. <i>Ang maung baláud nagpug-uk sa átung nasudnun nga pag-uswag,</i> Such a law stifles the progress of our nation. <i>Gipug-uk sa Insik ang kámay arun silay magbuut sa prisyu,</i> The Chinese hoarded the sugar so that they could determine the price. <number>2</number> cut a branch too close to the trunk. <i>Ug ímung pug-úkun ang sanga pagputul, madáut ang tanum,</i> If you cut the branch too close to the trunk, it will ruin the plant. <number>3</number> <tr>acquire</tr> s.t. surreptitiously. <i>Nakapug-uk ang lídir ug daghang kwarta,</i> The politician managed to get his hands on a lot of money. <number>4</number> manipulate cards one is dealing. <i>Maáyu kaáyu siyang mupug-uk sa baráha,</i> He is very good in manipulating the cards. <number>5</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> be stung by the truth of what s.o. says. <i>Napug-uk siya sa ákung gisulti kay namatud-an,</i> He was stung by what I said because it was true.

<p><form>púgul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> for s.t. to be <tr>massed</tr> in a small area. <i>Mipúgul ang túbig kay nasap-*ungan ang bangag,</i> There&apos;s a pool of water because the outlet got stopped up. <i>Nagpúgul ang asu sa kwartu,</i> The room is <tr>full</tr> of smoke. <i>Nagpúgul ang mga babáyi sulud sa kwartu,</i> The women were all <tr>huddled</tr> together in the bedroom. <i>Dugung nagpúgul sa inunlan,</i> Placenta <tr>filled</tr> with a big clot of blood. <i>Gipugúlan siya sa kasukù,</i> She is filled with anger.

<p><form>pugun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>range</tr> for cooking, baker&apos;s <tr>oven</tr>, <tr>kiln</tr> or oven for drying s.t. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> use a range in cooking. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain a range. <form>-íru</form> <pos>n</pos> one who operates the baker&apos;s oven or the kiln drier.

<p><form>pugung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> hold or keep in place, <tr>restrain</tr> the movement of. <i>Gitabangan pagpugung ang búang nga gustung mugawas,</i> The people held the lunatic that wanted to escape back. <i>Pugngi ang hagdanan kay musaka ku,</i> Hold the ladder because I&apos;m going up. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> keep s.o. from doing s.t. <i>Dílì ku ikaw pugngan sa ímung buut buhátun,</i> I won&apos;t <tr>prevent</tr> you from doing what you want. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> <tr>control</tr> oneself. <i>Nagpugung lang ku arun way mahitabù,</i> I&apos;m just keeping myself under control so nothing happens. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>clip</tr>, tie the hair in place or clip clothes to the line. <pos>n</pos> clip or <tr>safety pin</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S]</itype> clip, tie one&apos;s own hair in place. <pos>n</pos> s.t. to tie the hair with or clothespins. <form>pinugngan</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>suppressed</tr>. <i>Pinugngang katáwa,</i> Suppressed laughter. <form>mapugngánun</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to be strict, having a restrictive attitude. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be restrictive.

<p><form>pugus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3PN; a1cN]</itype> <tr>compel</tr> s.o. to do s.t. <i>Dì untà ku mupalit, apan mamugus giyud ang ákung asáwa,</i> I didn&apos;t want to buy any, but my wife insisted. <i>Way nagpugus nímu pagpakasalà,</i> No one is forcing you to commit a sin. <number>1a</number> <formx>pugsun ug &mdash;</formx> it cannot be helped that [such-and-such] is the case. <i>Pugsun ug daghang mangulitáwu nákù,</i> Can I <tr>help</tr> it if lots of men fall for me? <i>Pugsun ug nasayup ku,</i> I couldn&apos;t help making a mistake. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>force</tr> s.t. to give way. <i>Ayaw pugsa (ipugus) pagpasulud kay mabúngì,</i> Don&apos;t force it in or you might break it. <i>Mabugtù nà ug pugsun pag-ínat,</i> It will snap if you stretch it too far. <form>pugsunun</form> <pos>a</pos> needing to be urged or told to do s.t. <i>Ang mutsatsang pugsunun maáyung ikurindu,</i> You might as well get rid of a maid that you have to keep telling to get to work. <form>pugsunun ug útuk</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>slow</tr> in comprehension. <i>Intirisádu siya muiskuyla apan pugsunun kaáyug útuk,</i> He likes to study, but he is very slow. <form>mapugsánun, mapinugsánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>insistent</tr> (literary). <i>Usa ka mapugsánung maghahálad,</i> He is a persistent suitor. <form>-u(&larr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> insistent, <tr>demanding</tr> of oneself or others. <i>Pugúsu ka man gud. Ímung pugsun bísag dì mahímù,</i> You are highly demanding. You try to force people to do things they can&apos;t do. <i>Pugúsu nang pliyíra, mulusut bísag blakíngan,</i> He is a persistent player. He forces his way through to the basket even if he is blocked. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become insistent, persistent in doing s.t.

<p><form>pugut</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to trigger <tr>fishes</tr>, esp. species with very small mouths (as opposed to the <ix>pakul</ix>, which have larger mouths). <form>-un ug bàbà</form> having a small mouth.

<p><form>pugwat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A36; a1]</itype> <tr>startle</tr> s.o. that is asleep or so engrossed in s.t. that he is oblivious of his surroundings. <i>Napugwat ang bátà sa pagbutu sa libintadur,</i> The child was startled out of his sleep when the firecracker exploded. <i>Pugwátun ku siya sa íyang paghinuktuk,</i> I&apos;ll startle her out of her deep thought.

<p><form>púhag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>scatter</tr> a large group of s.t. <i>Napúhag ang mga táwu sa plása pag-ulan,</i> The people in the plaza scattered when it started to rain. <number>2</number> <tr>destroy</tr> completely. <i>Napúhag ang syudad sa bumba,</i> The city was destroyed by bombs. <number>3</number> get honey from a bee-*hive (for which one must destroy the hive). <i>Ang mipúhag sa putyúkan wà hipaaki,</i> He got the honey but he was not bitten.

<p><form>puhal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>undersell</tr> s.o. or bid a higher price for s.t. than a rival. <i>Ákù tà tung palitun, apan gipuhalan giyud sa babáyi,</i> I was going to buy it, but a lady came and bought it from under my nose (by offering <pb n=791>a better price). <i>Puhali ang kumpaníya arun kitay makapalit sa awtu,</i> <tr>Outbid</tr> the company so we can buy the car. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> be <tr>outclassed</tr> or <tr>outstripped</tr> in comparison. <i>Hipuhalan ang átung dyíp sa bag-ung awtu sa átung silíngan,</i> Our neighbor&apos;s new car quite outclasses our jeep. <pos>n</pos> higher bid than s.o. else offered or lower than s.o. else asked. <form>-in-ay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>competition</tr> or <tr>rivalry</tr> in selling or bidding. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ANC]</itype> be in competition.

<p><form>puhaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for a color or voice quality to be lacking its full intensity. <i>Puhaw na kaáyu ang ímung sinínà sa tantung linadlad,</i> Your skirt is all <tr>faded</tr> from being put under the sun. <i>Puhaw ang íyang pamánit kay bag-ung naáyu sa sakit,</i> His complexion is <tr>pale</tr> because he has just recently recovered from his illness. <i>Ang puhaw ug tíngug dílì mahímung mag-aawit,</i> One with a <tr>weak</tr> voice cannot become a singer. <number>2</number> become <tr>embarrassed</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> get to lose its full quality. <i>Napuhaw ang buhuk pagkinalígù sa dágat,</i> His hair turned blond from swimming so much. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; ab3(1)]</itype> <tr>embarrass</tr> s.o. <i>Napuhaw siya kay wà tagda sa íyang gikutána,</i> She was embarrassed because the man she asked didn&apos;t pay any attention to her. <form>pamuhawpuhaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> for the face to change colors in embarrassment. <i>Namuhawpuhaw ku dihang giingnan ku níyang wà kuy batásan,</i> My face turned all colors of the rainbow when she told me I had no manners.

<p><form>puhun</form> in the <tr>future</tr>, God willing. <i>Puhun, ug may kinabúhì pa, mulangyaw ku,</i> Someday, God willing, I will go abroad. <i>Mugíkan ku ugmà puhun,</i> I&apos;m leaving tomorrow, God willing. <form>puhunpúhun</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN2; a12]</itype> say that one will do s.t., God willing. <i>Mupuhunpúhun (mamuhunpúhun) ta kay dì ta makasigúru sa ugmà,</i> We should say &lsquo;God willing&rsquo; because we cannot be certain of the future. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> for it only to be a matter of days for s.t. expected to happen to s.o. <i>Puhunpuhúnun na lang ang gilaygay. Dì nà madúgayng mamatay,</i> It&apos;s only a matter of days till the patient dies. He&apos;ll pass away soon.

<p><form>puhúnan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>capital</tr> invested in a business or gambling. <number>2</number> any source of profit. <i>Láway ray ákung puhúnan kay maáyu kung muulug-*úlug,</i> I had no capital other than my gift of gab because I&apos;m good at flattery. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for an investment to <tr>reach</tr> a certain amount. <i>Dílì gamay ang nigusyu nga mupuhúnan ug nuybinta mil,</i> A business that has ninety thousand for capital is not small. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get a certain amount as capital. <i>Nakapuhúnan na ku pára sa súgal,</i> I was given some money for gambling. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put down a certain amount as capital. <i>Pilay ipuhúnan ninyu sa susyu?</i> How much will you <tr>invest</tr> in the partnership? <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> <tr>use</tr> s.t. as an asset or means to accomplish s.t. <i>Ubang babáyi mamuhúnan sa ílang kagwápa sa panghantuk,</i> Some women use their beauty to land a husband. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> <tr>rest</tr> up in anticipation of work or activity. <i>Namuhúnan kug katúlug pára sa pagbilar rung gabíi,</i> I got some extra sleep because I&apos;m going to stay awake all night tonight. <form>mag-r-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> one who capitalizes.

<p><form>puhúun</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PÚU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puk</form> onomatopoetic word for a rapping sound. <i>Bunálan bítaw nákù siya sa &umacracu;, puk, dà tuwad lagi,</i> I struck him on the head, and <ix>puk</ix>, he fell flat.

<p><form>púk</form> <pos>n</pos> a low <tr>foresail</tr> rigged in front of the mast and ahead of the mainsail. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put up, make into this k.o. sail.

<p><form>puka</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>break</tr> s.t. that is attached to s.t. by holding tight to it. <i>Siyay mipuka sa ákung singsing,</i> She broke my ring. <i>Mapuka nang pul-an sa ímung sundang ug ímung ibughà,</i> The handle of your bolo will break if you use it to split firewood. <pos>a</pos> broken and thus loose.

<p><form>pukak</form> <pos>n</pos> child&apos;s word for female genitalia.

<p><form>pukakha</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>fluffed</tr> up, not tamped or packed down. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> be fluffed up, for s.t. in small pieces or powder to be loose and not packed down so that it looks like a large quantity. <i>Diyútay ra apan mu rag daghan kay nagpukakha,</i> It isn&apos;t very much, but it looks like a lot because it is fluffed up.

<p><form>púkan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; ab2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>topple</tr> s.t. tall and erect. <i>Hángin ang mupúkan ánang kahúya,</i> The wind will <tr>uproot</tr> that tree. <number>2</number> bring to a downfall in a struggle. <i>Mga Amirikanhun ang nakapúkan sa ribulusiyun,</i> The American forces crushed the revolutionary movement. <i>Mapúkan ra ang hiwing pamunúan,</i> The crooked administration will some day be brought down. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; ab3(1)]</itype> <tr>dishonor</tr>. <i>Ang íyang ámu ang mipúkan sa íyang kaputlì,</i> Her own master violated her. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> downfall, fall from power or loss of honor. <i>Ang kapukánan sa Impiryu sa Rúma,</i> The fall of the Roman Empire. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> trees that have fallen.

<p><form>pukang</form> <pos>n</pos> child&apos;s word for female genitalia.

<p><form>pukas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB6; c1]</itype> lift up s.t. that covers or hides s.t., become uncovered. <i>Mipukas (napukas) ang tabun sa pagkáun,</i> The cover of the food was blown <tr>open</tr>. <i>Gipukas sa maldítu ang sayal sa mutsatsa,</i> The bad boy pulled up the maid&apos;s dress. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for a <pb n=792>girl&apos;s dress to creep upwards uncovering her legs. <i>Kítà íyang páa kay natúlug nagpukas,</i> You could see her thighs, because her skirt crept up as she slept. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>a</pos> allowing the dress to creep up in one&apos;s sleep, exposing the body in the process.

<p><form>pukat, púkat</form> <xr>= <sc>PUKLAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púkaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; ab2]</itype> <tr>wake</tr> s.o. up. <i>Pukáwa kug sayu,</i> Wake me up early. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> <tr>awaken</tr> an emotion that had become inactive. <i>Pukáwun nátù ang nindut nátung kagahápun,</i> Let&apos;s revive our happy past.&dagger;

<p><form>pukay</form> <pos>n</pos> child&apos;s word for female genitalia.

<p><form>pukdaw, pukgaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fowl <tr>pestilence</tr> that is characterized by drooping of the limbs and head, causes the flesh to turn yellow, and generally kills all the fowl in one place. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a4]</itype> get this pestilence. <form>ting-</form> <pos>n</pos> season when this disease strikes.

<p><form>pukgù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> put the hands around a sack to <tr>clasp</tr> it before tying it firmly. <i>Dì na ku makapukgù sa sáku kay punù na kaáyu,</i> I cannot <tr>gather</tr> and tie the mouth of the sack because it is too full. <i>Pukgúa nang buhuk mu íning lastiku,</i> <tr>Gather</tr> and tie your hair with this rubber band. <i>Gipukgù níya ang tiil sa manuk,</i> He grabbed the chicken by the feet. <number>2</number> <tr>nip</tr> in the bud, cut s.t. short. <i>Ang ákung pagkasakit mauy nakapukgù sa ákung pagtuun,</i> My illness has prevented me from studying. <i>Pukgúa ang íyang pagpanugal sa dì pa siya mahigám,</i> Nip his gambling in the bud before he gets accustomed to doing it.

<p><form>púkì</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> female genital organ (euphemism). <number>2</number> k.o. ornamental <tr>herb</tr>, the leaf and flower of which are reminiscent of the female genitalia: <bio>Rhoeo discolor</bio>.

<p><form>púkir</form> <pos>n</pos> game of <tr>poker</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; a]</itype> play poker.

<p><form>puklat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3B36; c1]</itype> <tr>open</tr> the eyes. <i>Nars mauy nagpuklat sa mata sa babáying mitumar ug islíping tablit,</i> A nurse pried open the eyes of the woman that had taken sleeping tablets. <i>Mipuklat lag kadiyut ang ákung mata apan napilù lang sad dáyun,</i> My eyes opened for a short time but they closed right away. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> <tr>awaken</tr> due to a disturbance. <i>Mipuklat ang bátà sa syágit,</i> The shout woke the baby up. <form>puklatpuklat</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>eyelids</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> start to <tr>wake</tr> up. <i>Wà pa giyud nílay namuklatpuklat pagsubang sa adlaw,</i> Not one of them had begun to wake when the sun rose.

<p><form>puklid, pukling</form> <xr>= <sc>PAKLING</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puklu</form> <pos>n</pos> base of the abdomen just below the <ix>pus-un</ix>, but above the genitalia.

<p><form>puknit</form> <xr>= <sc>PUGNIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pukpuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; ac]</itype> <tr>pound</tr> with the fist or s.t. held in the fist, not necessarily with force. <i>Mipukpuk siya sa lamísa sa kalágut,</i> He pounded on the table in anger. <i>Nagpamukpuk siya sa íyang dughan nga nangadyì,</i> She kept striking her breast while praying. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>masturbate</tr> (slang). <i>Nagpukpuk na sad ka?</i> Have you been beating it again? <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get a good <tr>profit</tr> from the sale of s.t. <i>Nakapukpuk siya sa pamaligyà ug kupras,</i> He made a killing in the sale of copra. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> action of <tr>pounding</tr> or <tr>hammering</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>drumstick</tr>. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>cloth</tr> made from fine abaca fiber that has been pounded after weaving. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> wear, use <ix>pinukpuk</ix> cloth. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make <ix>pinukpuk</ix> cloth.

<p><form>pukpuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> pin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> <tr>fasten</tr> with a <tr>pin</tr>. <i>Ákung pukpúkan ang ákung tahian,</i> I&apos;ll put pins where I&apos;m going to sew.

<p><form>puksì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>tear off</tr> s.t. pasted or attached onto s.t. <i>Kusug nga hángin ang nakapuksì sa mga sín sa ílang atup,</i> A strong wind tore the corrugated iron sheets off their roof. <i>Ayaw puksía ang silyu sa subri,</i> Do not <tr>tear</tr> the stamp off the envelope.

<p><form>pukù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. infectious <tr>yaws</tr> characterized by lesions of the skin which are resistant to any topically applied medicine. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> have this infection.

<p><form>pukù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>basket</tr> coming in various shapes and sizes characterized by a tapering mouth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make this sort of basket.

<p><form>púku mas u mínus</form> <tr>more or less</tr>. <i>Púku mas u mínus mga singkwintahun ka táwu ang mitambung sa parti,</i> Fifty persons more or less attended the party.

<p><form>puk-ung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> sit on one&apos;s haunches. <i>Ayawg puk-úngi ang inudúru,</i> Don&apos;t squat on top of the toilet.

<p><form>pukupúku</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> do s.t. on a small, restrained scale. <i>Ug dì ka mupukupúku sa ímung ínum<corr>,</corr> musamut ang ímung ulsir,</i> If you don&apos;t <tr>control</tr> your drinking, your ulcer will get worse. <i>Pukupukúha ang túbig,</i> Use the water sparingly. <i>Pukupukúha ang ímung kalágut básig mahayblad ka,</i> Take it easy on your anger <corr sic=least>lest</corr> you have a heart attack.

<p><form>púkut</form> <pos>n</pos> general term for fish <tr>nets</tr> put s.w., into which the fish are driven and caught by the gills or which are used in trawling. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> fishing with a <ix>púkut</ix>. <form>salim-, salim-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> rope netted around the edges of the <ix>púkut</ix> to give it strength.

<p><form>pukuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>PULUKUY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pukwang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> turn s.t. over on its side. <i>Ang awtu gipukwang sa mga rayutir,</i> The rioters overturned the car.

<p><form>pukwat</form> <xr>= <sc>PUKLAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pukway</form> <xr>= <sc>BUKWAY</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=793>

<p><form>púl<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pull</tr>, <tr>influence</tr> wielded by a person, usually to obtain favors. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> have pull. <i>Ug dì ka makapúl dì ka makatrabahu,</i> You can&apos;t get a job without pull.

<p><form>púl<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pool</tr>, k.o. pocket <tr>billiards</tr> played with a cue ball and object balls numbered from 1 to 15. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> play pool. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pool hall</tr>.

<p><form>pula</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>red</tr>. <number>1a</number> any color ranging from dark yellow through orange, red, and brown. <number>1b</number> <formx>&mdash; ug sáya</formx> palm <tr>toddy</tr>, esp. inside a transparent glass container where the redness shows (slang). <i>Puwa ug sáya ang ílang giinum,</i> They drank palm toddy. <number>2</number> not true, <tr>lie</tr> (so called from the color of the <ix>butbut<sub>2</sub></ix> which is homonymous with a word meaning lie, <ix>butbut<sub>1</sub></ix>&mdash;colloquial). <i>Anus-a ku mutúu nga pulus man nà pula?</i> Don&apos;t expect me to believe that when it&apos;s all lies. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>DÁGIR, 2</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[ABN; ab7]</itype> become red, cause s.o. to do s.t. <i>Akuy mupula sa ímung sapátus,</i> I&apos;ll make your shoes red. <i>Mipula siya kay gisugs&umacracu;g,</i> She turned red because they teased her. <i>Napula ang íyang kamut sa dyúbus,</i> Her hands got red with dye. <i>Namula ang ákung nawung sa kaúlaw,</i> My face was red with shame. <i>Nagpula ang langit pagsawup sa adlaw,</i> The sky was all red at sunset. <i>Nagkapula ang binágang puthaw,</i> The iron that was heated is turning redder and redder. <i>Pulahun ta nang putì mung sapátus,</i> I&apos;ll make your white shoes red. <i>Gipulahan ku sa ímung sinínà,</i> Your dress looks red to me. <i>Pulahi pa nang ímung ngábil,</i> Put more red on your lips. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> for the voice to <tr>crack</tr> and become discordant. <i>Napula ang íyang tíngug sa kalísang,</i> His voice went off pitch discordantly in fright. <number>3</number> <formx>háin bay na-</formx> expression to show contemptuous disbelief. <i>Ingun siya dúna na siyay awtu, háin bay napuwa?</i> He said he got a car. That will be the day that I believe that! <form>pulapula</form> <pos>n</pos> scattered red spots or dots. <form>puláhan</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the name given to the Filipino fighters for independence against the Spaniards and then the Americans (so called from their red badges). <number>2</number> types of fish with predominantly red hues. <form>puláhay</form> <pos>n</pos> infant. <form>ka-</form> redness. <form>pa-</form> <pos>n</pos> lipstick. <form>pulahun</form> <pos>a</pos> reddish. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>PULÁHAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púlak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>fall</tr> down from a height, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Magpúlak kug mga tambis,</i> I&apos;ll knock some tambis fruits down. <i>Mupúlak (mapúlak) ang prutas ug labihan na sa kahinug,</i> Fruits will fall when they are overripe. <i>Napúlak ang misitíra gíkan sa bintánà,</i> The potted plant fell from the window sill. <number>2</number> fail in an examination or subject. <i>Sa nangúhà sa iksámin usa ray napúlak,</i> Of those that took the exam, only one failed. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a nut, fruit that has fallen. <number>2</number> coconuts that have fallen off the tree. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> gather fallen fruits, esp. coconuts.

<p><form>pulákì</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>odd</tr>, not evenly divisible by a given number. <i>Duhay pulákì. Tulu mi, unyà limay inyung gihátag,</i> There are two left over. There <corr sic=is>are</corr> three of us and you gave five. <number>2</number> be the <tr>leftover</tr> when s.t. is divided. <i>Ang pulákì ámù na lang pikásun,</i> Let&apos;s just divide the one left over. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; c16]</itype> come out not evenly divisible.

<p><form>pulákut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be <tr>lighted</tr> and <tr>burning</tr>. <i>Dì mupulákut ang tinustus kay basà ang tabákù,</i> The cigars won&apos;t burn because the tobacco is wet. <i>Pulakúta (ipulákut) úsà ang káyu úsà sugnúri,</i> Let the fire start burning before you add fuel.

<p><form>pulálak, pulálay</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>PURAY</sc> (humorous euphemism).</xr>

<p><form>pul-an</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>PÚLU<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PUUL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pulána</form> <xr>= <sc>PULÁNU</sc> (female).</xr>

<p><form>pulang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. sharp <tr>machete</tr> with a round or square tip for heavy-duty work. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> make a machete of this type. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> acquire this k.o. machete.

<p><form>púlang<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for a baby to learn to <tr>jump</tr>, bounce up and down when held. <i>Mupúlang na ang bátà,</i> The child is now learning to jump. <i>Dì pa makapúlang si Bíbi,</i> Baby can&apos;t jump yet. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put a child in a <ix>pulangan</ix>. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> chair attached to a spring pole in which a baby is placed so that it can jump up and down.

<p><form>púlang<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>die</tr> from intense cold, feel as cold as if one was about to die. <i>Ang katugnaw mauy mupúlang sa mga háyup,</i> The cold will kill the animals. <i>Gipúlang ku,</i> I&apos;m freezing to death.

<p><form>pulángì</form> <xr>= <sc>PULANGKÌ<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pulangkì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> space under the roof parallel to the ridge pole immediately beneath it. <number>2</number> the space including a platform just below it which forms an attic.

<p><form>pulangkì<sub>2</sub></form> red (humorous). <i>À, kapulangkì nímug sinínà,</i> What a red dress you&apos;ve got on!

<p><form>pulánu</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to a hypothetical male. <i>Bísag si Pulánu pay muimbitar nímu, ayaw pag-uban,</i> Even if it&apos;s Mr. So-and-so that invites you, don&apos;t go with him.

<p><form>pulas, púlas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>remove</tr> s.t. from s.t. that covers or encircles it, or remove the covering thing. <i>Napulas ang kálù paghurus sa hángin,</i> The hat was blown away in the wind. <i>Ug ímung pulasun (ipulas) ang ímung kamut sa púsas, muhugut hinúun kini,</i> If you try to slip your hands out of the hand-*cuffs, <pb n=794>they&apos;ll just tighten. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> remove the tie from the coconut palm bud to stop the toddy flow and allow the bud to develop fruit. <i>Pulasi ang sanggutan arun mamúnga,</i> Untie the coconut bud so it will bear fruit. <number>2</number> allow s.t. to run over the face to remove s.t. <i>Puwasa ang dágat sa ímung nawung,</i> Let the sea water run over your face. <number>3</number> <itype>[B23(1); c1]</itype> for s.t. to wear off, disappear. <i>Mipúlas ang adlaw sa búkid,</i> The sun disappeared behind the mountains. <i>Wà pa makapulas ang ispiritu sa bínu,</i> The effect of the liquor hasn&apos;t worn off yet. <number>4</number> <formx>papulaspúlas</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> rub the hands over the face. <i>Namulaspúlas ku pagpawálà sa katulúgun,</i> I rubbed my hands over my face to get rid of my feeling of sleepiness.

<p><form>pulásik</form> (from <ix>lásik</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S3(1)N; b2c1]</itype> fly apart in various directions because of force. <i>Mipulásik (namulásik) ang lápuk pag-ági sa trák,</i> The mud spattered in all directions when the truck passed by. <i>Pagkahúlug sa búlig, namuwásik ang mga lubi,</i> When the bunch of coconuts fell, the coconuts flew off in all directions.

<p><form>pulaspulas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> do s.t. with hurried motions. <i>Dì ka makapulaspulas ánang ímung líhuk kay dilikádu nang ímung búhat,</i> You can&apos;t do that work hurriedly because it is a delicate piece of work.

<p><form>pulaw, púlaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> stay up very late at night or the whole night through. <i>Nagpulaw ku sa bátà gabíi,</i> I stayed up all night to watch the child last night. <i>Dì ku mupulaw (mamulaw) ug tuun,</i> I won&apos;t stay up late studying. <i>Gipuláwan (gipamuláwan) sa sastri ang ákung sinínà,</i> The seamstress stayed up late finishing my dress. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> keep a fire or lamp going the night through. <i>Magpúlaw ku arun dúna tay káyu kanúnay,</i> I&apos;ll keep a fire burning so that we&apos;ll always have fire. <number>3</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> for a feeling to be kept alive. <i>Ang tingúhà sa pag-adtu sa Amirika nagpúlaw sa íyang dughan sukad sa bátà pa,</i> The desire to go to America has been <corr sic=keep>kept</corr> burning in his breast since his childhood. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>-AN(&rarr;)</sc>.</xr> <form>-an(&rarr;), ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> small lamp that is left lighted throughout the night. <number>2</number> log that is kept burning day and night.

<p><form>pulaw-as</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c6]</itype> sell s.t. at a lower than usual selling price. <i>Namulaw-as ku ug baligyà sa ákung awtu kay daghan kug útang balayran,</i> I had to sell my car cheap to get money to pay off my debt. <pos>n</pos> sold at a sacrifice. <i>Maáyu ni nga pagkapalíta kay pulaw-as nga pagkabaligyáa,</i> This is a good buy because it was sold at a sacrifice.

<p><form>pulay</form> <xr>= <sc>PURAY</sc> (humorous euphemism).</xr>

<p><form>pulaynas</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>leggings</tr> to protect the lower legs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab]</itype> use, make leggings.

<p><form>pulbíra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>powder case</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> use a powder case.

<p><form>pulbu</form> <xr>= <sc>PULBUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pulbura</form> <pos>n</pos> explosive <tr>powder</tr>.

<p><form>pulburun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>candy</tr> made of powdered milk, flour, sugar, and butter and roasted. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, serve <ix>pulburun</ix>.

<p><form>pulbus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>powder</tr>. <i>Patúbung pulbus,</i> Baking powder. (Lit. yeast that is powder). <number>2</number> face powder. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> wear face powder, powder s.t. <i>Nagpulbus kug tablítas nga itambal sa samad,</i> I am pulverizing a tablet to put on the wound. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> put face powder on. <i>Ayaw pamulbus sa kadaghánan,</i> Do not powder your nose in public.

<p><form>puldir</form> <pos>n</pos> file <tr>folder</tr>.

<p><form>pulgáda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>inch</tr>. <i>Duha ka pulgáda,</i> Two inches. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>measure</tr> s.t. by inches. <i>Panday ang mipulgáda sa káhuy,</i> The carpenter measured the piece of wood. <i>Pulgadáha (ipulgáda) pagsukud ang íyang láwas,</i> Measure her body by the inches. <form>pulgadahan</form> <pos>n</pos> a stick or tape graduated in inches. <form>-s</form> <xr>= <sc>PULGÁDA</sc> (plural&mdash;used only with numbers of Spanish origin).</xr> <i>Dus pulgádas,</i> Two inches. <form>pulgadíra</form> <pos>n</pos> carpenter&apos;s measuring <tr>tape</tr> wound in a case or a folding meter stick. <form>pulgadirista</form> <pos>n</pos> in logging, the person who marks the dimensions of the log or lumber to be cut or edged.

<p><form>pulgas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>flea</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infested with fleas. <i>Nagpangilkil ang irù kay gipulgas,</i> The dog is always scratching because he is <tr>infested</tr> with fleas. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>flea-ridden</tr>.

<p><form>pulhawus</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>full</tr> house, full to capacity. <i>Pulhawus pagsalída sa Binhur,</i> There was a full house when they showed Ben Hur. <pos>n</pos> <tr>full house</tr> in poker. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> for there to be a full house, get filled to capacity.

<p><form>pulhù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> shuck off the outer husks of an ear of corn leaving the white inner leaves. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> ears of corn with the outer husks removed.

<p><form>puli</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> chop the bottom of a coconut to make it easy to husk. <i>Pulihi ang lubi únà bunti,</i> Chop the coconut&apos;s bottom before you husk it.

<p><form>púli</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>replacement</tr>, one who spells s.o. <i>Aku ang púli nímu,</i> I am your <tr>substitute</tr>. <form>&mdash; <r>[<ix>noun</ix>]</r></form> vice-. <i>Púli pangúlu,</i> Vice-president. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> take the place of s.t. else. <i>Kinsay mupúli nímug magbakasiyun ka?</i> Who will take your place when you take your vacation? <pb n=795><i>Ang kasadyà gipulíhan sa kaguul,</i> Now his mirth changed to sorrow. <i>Munggus ang ipúli pagtanum sa mais,</i> Plant mung beans after the corn. <number>2</number> (by extension) <tr>replace</tr>. <i>Pulíhan tu nátung pawuntin pin nga nawálà,</i> Let&apos;s replace the fountain pen that got lost. <form>pulipúli</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>take turns</tr> in doing s.t., do s.t. alternately. <i>Gipulipulíhan nílag bantay ang masakitun,</i> They took turns keeping watch over the patient. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> do s.t. to s.o. by turns. <i>Pulipulíhun lang sila nákug kasábà,</i> I&apos;ll give them a scolding alternately. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> substitute or replacement. <form>kapulíhay</form> in the long run. <i>Sa kapulíhay masáyud ra siya,</i> In the long run, he will surely find out the truth.

<p><form>pulída</form> <pos>a</pos> done with craftsmanship, doing good work (female). <i>Pulída kaáyung trabahúa,</i> Well-executed piece of work. <i>Pulída siyang manahì,</i> She sews with skill.

<p><form>pulídu</form> <pos>a</pos> for workmanship to be neat and well-done. <i>Pulídu kaáyu ning íyang baskit,</i> The basket he made is of excellent workmanship. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> for s.t. to come out excellently done. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> do s.t. with good workmanship.

<p><form>pulíkì</form> <pos>a</pos> extremely <tr>busy</tr>. <i>Pulíkì ku run sa báy kay daghan mig bisíta,</i> I&apos;m extremely busy in the house because we have lots of visitors. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B14]</itype> be extremely busy doing s.t. as much as one can. <i>Nagpulíkì kug tubag sa íyang mga pangutána,</i> I had a hard time answering all his questions. <i>Nagkapulíkì siyag sagang sa latigu,</i> He was busy trying to shield himself from the lashes.

<p><form>púling</form> <pos>n</pos> foreign body or matter in the eye or eyes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a3b4]</itype> have a foreign body in the eye. <i>Makapúling ang abug,</i> Dust can get into one&apos;s eyes. <i>Napúling ku, napulíngan ákung mata,</i> I got s.t. in my eyes. <i>Way dakung makapúling,</i> There are some things a small person can do that a big person can not do. (Lit. S.t. big cannot get into the eyes.) <form>&mdash; sa mata</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> offend one&apos;s moral sense. <i>Salídang law-ayng makapúling sa mata,</i> A dirty film offensive to the morals.

<p><form>pulípug</form> <xr>= <sc>PILÍPUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púlir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tweezers</tr> for plucking hair out. <form>hir &mdash;</form> <xr>= <sc>PÚLIR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pulis</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>policeman</tr>. <formx>&mdash; sa bantuk</formx> a two-bit cop (lit. policeman from the uplands). <number>2</number> a wife who checks on her husband (humorous). <number>3</number> <formx>&mdash; klírans</formx> <pos>n</pos> police clearance. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be, become a policeman. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN2; a12]</itype> check up on one&apos;s husband or children like a policeman (humorous). <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C6]</itype> report s.o. to the police. <i>Láyas na kay ug dílì, ipapulis ta ka,</i> Get out of here or I will report you to the police. <form>-íya</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>KAPULISAN</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>PULIS</sc>, <i>n1, v1.</i></xr> <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> occupation of being a policeman. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> police.

<p><form>pulísa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>policy</tr>, written <tr>contract</tr>. <i>Pulísa sa insyúrans,</i> Insurance policy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> issue s.o. a policy.

<p><form>pulitika</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>politics</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. only as a matter of formality. <i>Ákù lang siyang gipulitikahan ug imbitar,</i> I invited him for formality&apos;s sake. <number>2</number> say s.t. in the hopes of obtaining s.t. for it. <i>Pulitikahi lag hangyù si Máma, básig musugut,</i> Try your luck asking Mother because she might agree to it. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> engage in politics or electioneering. <i>Namulitika lang gihápun bísag tápus nang iliksiyun,</i> They are still engaging in politics even though the elections are over. <number>n</number> <tr>politicking</tr>, electioneering. <form>pulitikanhun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>political</tr>. <i>Partídung pulitikanhun,</i> Political party.

<p><form>pulitiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>politician</tr>. <number>2</number> one who promises but accomplishes nothing. <i>Ayawg sálig ánang pulitiku nga musáad ug bísan unsa,</i> He&apos;ll promise just about anything, but don&apos;t count on it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a politician.

<p><form>pulka</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>polka</tr> dance or music.

<p><form>pulkas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>annihilate</tr>, <tr>destroy</tr> utterly. <i>Ang mga girilya nagpulkas sa usa ka trák nga Hapun,</i> The guerrillas annihilated a truckload of Japanese soldiers. <i>Mahinánuk na ku nga napulkasan na sa dughù ang ákung katri,</i> I sleep soundly now that my bed has been rid of bedbugs. <number>2</number> remove a fish corral from the sea. <i>Pulkása nag inyung bungsud kay tinghabagat na,</i> Remove your fish corral now because the windy season is setting in. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> pay off debts. <i>Nakapulkas siya sa útang pagkadaug níya sa swipstik,</i> He managed to pay off his debts when he won the sweepstakes.

<p><form>pulkum</form> <pos>n</pos> acronym for <ix>pulis kumisyunir</ix>, member of the Police Commission.

<p><form>pulmun, pulmunya, pulmuníya</form> <pos>n</pos> diseases of the lungs, esp. <tr>pneumonia</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a4]</itype> get pneumonia or other <tr>pulmonary diseases</tr>.

<p><form>pulpitu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pulpit</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make the pulpit in the church.

<p><form>pulpug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>break</tr> s.t. brittle into tiny pieces. <i>Napulpug ang básung nahagbung,</i> The glass fell and broke into <tr>smithereens</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> tap, knock off fine particles. <i>Akuy mupulpug sa ágiw sa ákung sigarilyu,</i> I&apos;ll knock off the ashes of my cigarette. <i>Ákung gipulpúgan ug sulpanilamáyid ang ákung samad,</i> I tapped sulfanilamide powder onto my wound. <form>-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> cave under a river bank <pb n=796>where crocodiles make their abode (and bring their prey to destroy them).

<p><form>pulpul</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> not bright. <i>Pulpul kaáyu nang batáa sa klási,</i> That child is very <tr>dull</tr> in class. <number>1a</number> <tr>unskillful</tr> in doing or executing things. <i>Pulpul kaáyung mikaniku kay wà kaáyu sa dyíp,</i> The mechanic was no good. He could not repair the jeep. <number>2</number> for vehicles or animals to be slow in running speed. <i>Pulpul kaáyung mudágan nang kabayúa,</i> That horse runs very slow. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become mentally slow, unskilled, slow in movement.

<p><form>pulríra</form> <xr>= <sc>PLURÍRA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pulsíras</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bracelet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> wear a bracelet. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> get a bracelet.

<p><form>pulsu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pulse</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>wrist</tr>. <form>maáyu ug &mdash;</form> <pos>a</pos> having steady hands. <i>Hantir kaáyu nang tawhána kay maáyu man kaáyug pulsu,</i> That man is a sharpshooter because he has steady hands. <form>pugung sa &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. to stave off hunger (lit. hold back the pulse). <number>2</number> s.t. done temporarily in the absence of s.t. better. <i>Náay íyang trabáhu apan pugung lang nà sa pulsu kay wà may láin,</i> He has a job but it is just temporary because he doesn&apos;t have anything else. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; c]</itype> <number>1</number> stave off hunger. <i>Mupugung (mupapugung) sa pulsu ang kindi,</i> Candies will stave off hunger. <number>2</number> <tr>make do</tr> with s.t. <i>Ígù pang makapugung sa pulsu ning diyútayng gasulína sa gasulinahan,</i> This little gasoline is enough to get us to the gas station. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> take s.o.&apos;s pulse. <i>Ang duktur ang muhimulsu (manghimulsu) nímu,</i> The doctor will feel your pulse. <form>rilu di-</form> <pos>n</pos> wrist <tr>watch</tr>.&dagger;

<p><form>pulta</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>door</tr>, <tr>doorway</tr>. <formx>&mdash; mayur</formx> main door. <number>2</number> admission fee. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>PWIRTU<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> pay admission. <i>Akuy mupulta nímu sa sini,</i> I&apos;ll pay your way to the show. <form>pultahan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> doorway. <number>2</number> store space used as a retail establishment. <i>Duha ka náyung pultahan ang ílang giabángan,</i> They rented two adjacent store spaces. <form>pultíra</form> <xr>= <sc>PULTÍRU</sc> (female).</xr> <form>pultíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>doorkeeper</tr>, <tr>usher</tr> who collects admission tickets. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; bc1]</itype> be a ticket collector.

<p><form>pultri</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> one&apos;s fowls and the equipment to maintain them. <i>Nasúnug ámung pultri gabíi,</i> Our chicken coop burnt down last night. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> operate a poultry business. <i>Magpultri ku arun ku makabaligyag mga itlug,</i> I want to raise poultry so that I can sell eggs. <number>2</number> set up a poultry house. <i>Magpultri kug kabutangan sa mga manuk,</i> I&apos;ll make a coop to shelter the chickens.

<p><form>púlu<sub>1</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> short-sleeved sport <tr>shirt</tr>. <form>&mdash; barung, barung &mdash;</form> short-sleeved <ix>barung</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> get, make into a <ix>púlu</ix>. <form>puluhun</form> <pos>n</pos> material to make into a <ix>púlu</ix>.

<p><form>púlu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>handle</tr> of bladed instruments. <number>2</number> <tr>butt</tr> of a pistol or a revolver. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make, supply the handle of a bladed instrument. <i>Íya nang gipulúan (gipul-ánan) ang ímung sundang,</i> He has made a handle for your bolo. <form>puluan, pul-an</form> <xr>= <sc>PÚLU</sc>, <i>n, v.</i></xr> <form>mag-/nagdáyig ug pul-an ug guna</form> extolling the virtues of one&apos;s own possessions. <i>Ang amahan nga nagdáyig sa kagwápa sa íyang kaugalíngung anak mu rag nagdáyig ug puluan ug guna,</i> A father who praises his own daughter&apos;s beauty is like a man who praises a bolo handle he made himself.

<p><form>pulù</form> <pos>n</pos> island. <form>ka-an, kapupud-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>archipelago</tr>. <i>Ang kapupud-an sa Pilipínas,</i> The Philippine Islands.

<p><form>púlù</form> <ix>numeral</ix> ten. <pos>v</pos> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PITU</sc>.</xr> <pos>n</pos> ten-peso bill. <form>ika-</form> <pos>a</pos> the tenth. <form>ka-, maka-</form> ten times. <form>na-</form> <xr>= <sc>PÚLÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pulud, púlud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>cut down</tr> plants, esp. large and tall ones. <i>Magpulud mig usa ka púnù nga lubi,</i> We&apos;ll cut down a coconut tree. <pos>n</pos> trunk of a plant that has been cut down. <i>Usa ka púlud nga káhuy,</i> A <tr>log</tr>.

<p><form>pulug</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dye</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>color</tr>. <i>Musíga na ang pulug nga pula sa sugà sa trapiku,</i> The traffic light is red. <number>3</number> <tr>power</tr> or <tr>strength</tr> to do s.t. or produce an effect. <i>Pila ra may pulug sa linúgaw nga ipanihápun?</i> There is nothing to a dinner of mere rice porridge. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> dye, color s.t. with a dye. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> give s.t. its appearance by its very presence. <i>Mga púlung nga gipulug sa pagmáhay,</i> Words that were fashioned by her deep remorse. <i>Ang tibuuk palíbut gipulug sa langitnung katahum,</i> Heavenly beauty that bathed the surroundings. <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> picture, describe s.t. in words. <i>Dì mapulug ang ílang gibátì,</i> What they felt was beyond description. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> consider s.t. carefully in the mind. <i>May mga púlung nga manlugwà sa bàbà nga dì pulugun sa hunàhúnà,</i> Words that come out of the mouth without having been carefully thought over in the mind.

<p><form>pulúhu</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lazy</tr>, not eager or willing to work or exert oneself. <number>2</number> mentally <tr>slow</tr>. <i>Pulúhu kaáyu nang batáa sa klási,</i> That boy is very weak in class. <number>3</number> not knowing how to do anything. <i>Pulúhu nang bayhána. Dì gánì kahibáwung mulung-ag,</i> That woman has no skills. She doesn&apos;t even know how to cook rice. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become lazy. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> become slow in learning. <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> done in a lazy, indolent way. <i>Pinuluhu man nang ímung linaktan!</i> Hurry up! You are walking so lazily. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> do s.t. in a lazy and indolent manner.

<pb n=797>

<p><form>pulukuy</form> child&apos;s word for male genitalia.

<p><form>púlun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>wind</tr> a string or rope into a ball.

<p><form>púlung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>word</tr>. <i>Maáyu ka lang sa púlung,</i> You are only good in talking. <number>1a</number> Word, as used in theology. <i>Sa sinugdánan mau ang Púlung,</i> In the beginning was the Word. <number>2</number> <tr>statement</tr> or <tr>message</tr>. <i>Unsay íyang púlung?</i> What did he say? <form>&mdash; <r>[<ix>gen.</ix>]</r></form> [gen.] <tr>said</tr>. <i>&lsquo;Asa ka?&rsquo; púlung níya,</i> &lsquo;Where are you going?&rsquo; said he. <number>3</number> word received as a point of honor. <i>Bakákun ka kay wà kay púlung,</i> You&apos;re a liar because you didn&apos;t keep your word. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12C; c]</itype> have a <tr>dialogue</tr>, <tr>conference</tr>. <i>Nagpúlung ang mga tinugyánan sa duha ka násud,</i> The representatives of the two nations had a conference. <i>Gipulúngan námù ang ímung suliran,</i> We discussed your problem in a conference. <form>pulungpúlung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; bc]</itype> engage in a conversation. <i>Wà siyay ikapulungpúlung sukad mabálu,</i> He had no one to talk to after his wife died. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> deliver a speech, say s.t. before an audience. <i>Siya ang únang namúlung,</i> He was the first one to speak to the group. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> say s.t. about s.t. <i>Unsay ímung ikapamúlung niánà<corr sic=",">?</corr></i> What can you say about that? <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> speak to the parents asking for their daughter&apos;s hand. <i>Nakapamúlung na siya sa ginikánan sa babáyi,</i> He has already asked the parents for the girl&apos;s hand. <pos>n</pos> celebration held in asking a girl&apos;s hand from her parents. <form>tigpaN-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>speaker</tr> in a program. <number>2</number> one who speaks for others. <form>-in-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>language</tr>, way of speech. <number>2</number> word of honor. <form>maN-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> speaker, <tr>orator</tr>. <form>pakig-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>speech</tr>. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>saying</tr>. <i>Dúnay pulungun nga nag-ingun, ang nagputak mauy nangitlug,</i> There is a saying that goes, the one who cackles laid the egg (i.e. whoever complains the loudest must be the culprit).

<p><form>pul-ung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>lop</tr> off with one or two strokes. <i>Nagpul-ung ang hardiníru sa mga balasbas,</i> The gardener is trimming the hedge. <i>Gipul-úngan sa líug si Karlus Únu,</i> Charles I was beheaded. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pruned</tr> or <tr>trimmed</tr>.

<p><form>pulúris</form> <xr>= <sc>PLÚRIS</sc>, 2.</xr> <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> attend a flowers of May celebration.

<p><form>pulus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b8]</itype> <tr>be of use</tr>, do. <i>Kining kahúya dílì magpulus sa halígi,</i> This piece of wood will not do for a post. <i>Láing táwu ang makapulus sa kwarta,</i> S.o. else can make use of the money. <i>Kining likì nga tadyaw dì na kapuslan,</i> This jar is of no use any more because it is cracked. <form>walay &mdash;</form> there is no use, benefit. <i>Wà na nay pús<corr sic=",">.</corr> Ilábay nà,</i> That is no good any more. Throw it away. <form>pahiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make <tr>use</tr> of. <i>Pahimusli (pahimudsi) ang mga taknà sa pagbása,</i> Make use of the hours by reading. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> take <tr>advantage</tr> of. <i>Dílì ku mupahimulus sa kahúyang sa uban,</i> I will not take advantage of others&apos; weaknesses. <i>Pahimudsi ang tanyag,</i> Take advantage of the offer. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> take advantage of a woman sexually. <i>Gipahimuslan ang íyang pagkababáyi samtang gikuyapan siya,</i> She was molested while she was unconscious. <form>puslan (pudsan) man</form> inasmuch as [so-and-so] has happened, [such-and-such] might just as well happen, too. <i>Puslan (pudsan) man nga nahumud ku maáyu pa ug malígù,</i> Now that I got wet, I might as well go in all the way (i.e., since I started it, I might as well go the whole hog). <form>kapuslánan</form> <pos>n</pos> use or <tr>benefit</tr> that can be gotten from s.t. <i>Unsa may kapuslánan ánang ímung paglakwatsa?</i> What good is it for you to roam about? <form>mahimuslánun, mapahimuslánun</form> <pos>a</pos> inclined to avail oneself of any opportunity that comes one&apos;s way. <form>mapuslánun, mapudsánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>useful</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be useful. <i>Ihátag nà nákù kay magmapuslánun (magmapudsánun) ra gihápun nà,</i> Give it to me because it is still of use.

<p><form>pulus<sub>2</sub>, púlus<sub>1</sub></form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) be all s.t. <i>Pulus babáyi mi dinhi,</i> We are all women here. <i>Pulus ka lang balíbad dà,</i> You always say no. <i>Pulus dáan ang ákung libru,</i> My books are all old. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; c16]</itype> be <tr>covered</tr> all over with, be all full of s.t. of one kind. <i>Napulus patik ang buktun sa prísu,</i> The prisoner&apos;s arms are all covered with tattoos.

<p><form>pulut</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <xr>= KAPULUT.</xr>

<p><form>púlut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1b6]</itype> <tr>pick up</tr> s.t. with the hand(s). <i>Mipúlut kug batu pagdúul sa irù,</i> I picked up a rock when the dog came toward me. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> <tr>come across</tr> s.t. by accident. <i>Íyang giúlì ang pitáka nga íyang hipulutan,</i> She returned the wallet that she had found. <form>paN-</form> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>gather</tr> by picking up. <i>Mamúlut kug dalag sa lumbuy pára líkin,</i> I will gather yellowed lumbuy leaves for cigars.

<p><form>pulyitu, pulyítus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>leaflet</tr>, <tr>handbill</tr>.

<p><form>pulyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>polio</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> get polio.

<p><form>pumáda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pomade</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make into, apply pomade. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> put pomade on oneself.

<p><form>pumpung</form> <xr>= <sc>PALUNGPUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púna</form> <xr>= <sc>PÚLUNG NÍYA</sc>.</xr> <xr>see <sc>PÚLUNG</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr>

<p><form>púnà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> replant spaces in a field where a seed or plant failed to grow. <i>Íya nang gipunáan ang dapit nga wà tugki,</i> She has already replanted the places where nothing sprouted. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> repair a fishnet. <i>Gipunáan <pb n=798>pa ang púkut,</i> They&apos;re still mending the net.

<p><form>púnà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> dye and strengthen a fishline or net by rubbing it with the scrapings from the bark of a k.o. mangrove (<ix>tabígì</ix>). <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> bark scrapings from mangrove for fishlines.

<p><form>púnas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>wash</tr> the face and limbs with a soapy washcloth. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> wash oneself off with a washcloth. <i>Mamúnas lang ku kay diyútay ra ang túbig,</i> I&apos;ll just wipe myself off with a washcloth because there isn&apos;t very much water. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having no pubic hair. <number>2</number> in the game of <ix>balinsay</ix>, failure to catch s.t. on the back of the hand. <i>Kurug man gud kaáyu ang ákung kamut mau nga kanúnay lang punas inigbalinsay nákù,</i> My hands are shaky. That&apos;s why I always catch nothing at the back of my palm (get a bald head) when I play <ix>balinsay</ix>.

<p><form>punaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible <tr>clam</tr> about 1&frac12;&Prime; in diameter. It is a dark reddish-brown color.

<p><form>púnaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126; a4b4]</itype> feel <tr>faint</tr>. <i>Gipúnaw (gipunáwan) ku sa kabúhì,</i> I felt faint from my stomach pain. <number>2</number> <itype>[b4(1)]</itype> be overcome by a strong emotion. <i>Napunáwan siya sa hilabihang kasubù,</i> She was overcome with grief. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> be overcome by shame. <i>Mu rag napúnaw ku sa íyang tinutukan,</i> The way he stared at me, I wanted to sink into a crack in the floor. <form>punawpúnaw paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> go far away from s.o. to the horizon or upper spaces where the image is blurred. <i>Namunawpúnaw ang langgam sa kahitas-an,</i> The bird soared up to the highest reaches of the sky. <form>kapunawpunáwan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> horizon, upper reaches of heaven. <number>2</number> deepest recesses of one&apos;s consciousness (literary). <i>Ang íyang tíngug mikulíkut sa kapunawpunáwan sa ákung katúlug,</i> Her voice pierced into the depths of my slumber.

<p><form>punay, púnay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; ab36c]</itype> do s.t. always, keep on doing s.t. <i>Ngánung nagpúnay ka mag tan-aw níya<corr sic=",">?</corr></i> Why are you always looking at (keep on looking at) her? <i>Unsay ímung gipunáyan ug hílak<corr sic=",">?</corr></i> What are you always crying about? <i>Ayaw ipúnayg kalígù sa dágat ang ímung hubag,</i> Don&apos;t keep going swimming in the ocean with that boil of yours.

<p><form>púnay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. bird, the pink-necked green <tr>pigeon</tr>: <bio>Treron vernans</bio>.

<p><form>punda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pillow case</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put on, use, make into a pillow case.

<p><form>pundadur</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. imported <tr>liquor</tr>.

<p><form>pundahan</form> <pos>n</pos> small variety <tr>store</tr> that also sells food and drinks.

<p><form>pund&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>found</tr> or set up an organization. <i>Nagpund&acaron;r sila ug kaugalíngun nílang iskuylahan,</i> They founded their own school.

<p><form>pundasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>foundation</tr>, supporting material. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> apply a foundation before putting cosmetics on. <i>Nahámis ang íyang náwung kay nagpundasiyun man,</i> Her face is smooth because she is using a foundation. <number>2</number> make a foundation for a structure. <i>Malig-un ang balay ug pundasiyunan,</i> The house will be strong if it has a foundation.

<p><form>pundídu</form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>PUNDIR<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.

<p><form>pundilyu</form> <xr>= <sc>PUNDÍYU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pundir<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>melt</tr> and <tr>cast</tr> metal. <i>Pundíhun ni námung brunsig kampána,</i> We will cast this bronze slab into a bell. <form>pundihan, pundihánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>foundry</tr>. <form>pundídu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cast iron</tr>. <i>Ang gigáwì sa paghímù sa kaláhà pundídu kay muagwanta ug ínit,</i> They use cast iron for frying pans because it can take heat.

<p><form>pundir<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; ab4(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>burn out</tr> a bulb, <tr>use up</tr> a battery, machine; become burnt out or used up. <i>Ilísi ang bumbilyang napundir,</i> Replace the bulb that burnt out. <i>Nagkapundir ang mga makina kay dáan na man,</i> The engines are going out of commission one after another because they are so old. <number>2</number> knock s.o. out of commission. <i>Uy, makapundir sa láwas ning álak,</i> This liquor can put you out of commission. <pos>a</pos> <tr>burnt out</tr> of commission. <form>pundídu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get burnt out.

<p><form>pundíyu</form> <pos>n</pos> length in pants from the waist along the fly to the crotch. <form>pundiyúhan</form> <xr>= <sc>PUNDÍYU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pundu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>anchor</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>deposit</tr>, amount paid to guarantee the return of s.t. <number>2a</number> <tr>funds</tr>, <tr>money</tr> set aside for s.t. <number>2b</number> <tr>stock</tr>, amount of s.t. set aside. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> make an <tr>anchor</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> drop <tr>anchor</tr>. <i>Mupundu ta dinhi,</i> Let&apos;s drop anchor here. <i>Gipundúhan na ang sakayan,</i> The boat dropped anchor. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> stay s.w. for a while. <i>Mupundu ta sa landung kadiyut,</i> Let&apos;s rest in the shade for a while. <number>2b</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>settle down</tr>, stop doing s.t. <i>Nagpundu na ang íyang pagtambuk,</i> He has stopped putting on weight. <number>2c</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put animals away for the night. <i>Gipundúhan na ba nímu ang kabáyù?</i> Have you put the horse away for the night? <number>3a</number> lay a vehicle or machinery aside. <i>Ámung gipundu ang ámung kutsi samtang nagbakasiyun mi,</i> We stored our car while we were on vacation. <number>3b</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> deposit s.t. as guarantee. <i>Ang butilya gipundúhan ug diyis,</i> They deposited ten cents for the bottle. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> fund a project. <i>Usa ka miliyun ang gipundu álang sa ubras,</i> A million pesos have been funded for public works. <number>4a</number> set aside stock for s.t. <i>Bangà ang gipundúhan sa túbig,</i> They stored <pb n=799>the water in a jar. <form>punduhánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> anchoring place. <number>2</number> place one stays for a while, animals are put away for the night. <number>3</number> place s.t. is stored, deposited.

<p><form>punduk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; b6]</itype> <tr>gather</tr>, <tr>assemble</tr> together in a group. <i>Dì kita makapunduk sa pasilyu,</i> We can&apos;t gather in the passageway. <i>Plása ang ílang gipundúkan,</i> They gathered in the town square. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> gather s.t. <i>Pundúka (ipunduk) ang mga sagbut arun daúban,</i> Pile the trash up to burn it. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>group</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>pile</tr>. <number>3</number> <tr>political party</tr>. <i>Mubali ku sa punduk Libiral,</i> I&apos;ll cross to the Liberal party. <form>pundukpunduk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> social <tr>gathering</tr>. <i>Sa pundukpunduk dì pud siya mapiri,</i> She would not be out of place in social gatherings. <number>2</number> k.o. small cerith shells (<ix>daludalu</ix>), so called because they are found gathered in bunches.

<p><form>pundul</form> <xr>= <sc>PUNGDUL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pundyi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pongee</tr>, a k.o. thin cloth of raw silk.

<p><form>pung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> onomatopoetic word for an exploding sound, used in children&apos;s games. <i>Pung, patay ka na!</i> Bang, you&apos;re dead!

<p><form>pung<sub>2</sub>, púng<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> in mahjong, the making of a set of three like pieces (<ix>tríyu</ix>) by adding a discarded piece to one&apos;s hand (<ix>káun, 3a</ix>). <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>TRÍYU</sc>.</xr> <form>túdu &mdash;</form> a hand consisting of all <ix><corr sic="tríyu&apos;s">tríyus</corr></ix> and an <ix>ay<sub>4</sub></ix> (and thus wins). <form>túdu &mdash; plásis</form> a <ix>plásis</ix> hand which also is a <ix>túdu pung.</ix> <form>túdu &mdash; ul-ap</form> a <ix>túdu pung</ix> hand where no <ix>tríyu</ix> has been laid open on the table. <form>túdu &mdash; uldáwun</form> <pos>n</pos> a <ix>túdu pung</ix> hand where the <ix>tríyus</ix> have all been laid open on the table. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b2c1]</itype> <number>1</number> make a set of three like pieces. <number>2</number> make a <ix>tríyu</ix> hand in card games.

<p><form>púng<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PÚLUNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>punga<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>operculum</tr>, a shelly plate attached to the foot of gastropod mollusks which covers the mouth part of the shell when the animal retracts its foot.

<p><form>punga<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PUNGÁNGU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púnga</form> <pos>a</pos> experiencing difficulty in breathing from having too full a stomach or being pregnant. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b4]</itype> experience difficulty in breathing from these causes. <i>Mupúnga (mapúnga) ang pagginháwa ug malabian ug káun,</i> You will experience difficulty in breathing if you overeat. <i>Hala palabiig káun arun pungáhan ka,</i> Go ahead. Eat too much so you&apos;ll have difficulty in breathing.

<p><form>pungag, púngag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>break off</tr> a projection, usually s.t. hard, but said also of the part of the water buffalo&apos;s nose where the rope is passed or a person&apos;s nose. <i>Napúngag ang ákung tangung nasukmagan,</i> My teeth got knocked out when s.o. hit me. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> having s.t. broken off. <i>Pungag ang básu,</i> The glass is <tr>chipped</tr>. <i>Dì na magámit ang kábaw nga pungag,</i> You can&apos;t use a carabao any longer if his nose has been ripped open.

<p><form>púngal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a]</itype> <tr>break off</tr> s.t. from its place of attachment, usually s.t. firmly attached. <i>Binúkal túbig ang nakapúngal (nakapapúngal) sa kuku sa báka,</i> We got the hoofs off the cow&apos;s feet with boiling water. <i>Pungála lang ang ruska ug dì na maibut,</i> Break the screw off if you can&apos;t get it out.

<p><form>pungángu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pedicel</tr> or <tr>peduncle</tr> of flowers and fruits, the stalk which attaches the fruit or flower to the larger peduncle or to the branch. <i>Lig-un ug pungángu ang nangkà,</i> The jackfruit is attached to the branch with a strong stem. <form>punganguhan</form> <pos>n</pos> place where the pedicel attaches to the branch or peduncle.

<p><form>pungàpungà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>gasp</tr> for breath in drowning or in a heavy wind or onrush of water. <i>Nagpungàpungà ang bátà nga gipaatubang sa bintiladur,</i> The baby was gasping for breath because it had been placed in front of an electric fan. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> having difficulty eluding a flurry of punches or strokes. <i>Nagpungàpungà ang buksidur sa kúmù ni Ilurdi,</i> The boxer had his hands full dodging Elorde&apos;s blows. <form>ka-</form> <xr>= <sc>PUNGÀPUNGÀ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pungasì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be coming in fast and in rapid succession. <i>Nagpungasì ang mga bala sa masinggan,</i> The machine gun bullets are coming in rapid succession. <i>Nagpungasì ang ulan,</i> The rain is coming down <tr>relentlessly</tr>. <i>Nagpungasing kaínit,</i> The <tr>relentless</tr> heat.

<p><form>pungdul</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>blunt-ended</tr>. <i>Lisud itahì ang dágum nga pungdul,</i> It is difficult to sew with a <tr>blunt</tr> needle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB1; b5]</itype> be, become blunt-ended. <i>Gipungdul (gipungdúlan) ku ang mga tumuy sa kural arun way matúsuk,</i> I cut the sharp ends off of the fence posts so no one could get hurt on them.

<p><form>pungga</form> <pos>n</pos> game of shooting pebbles into holes using a stone to knock the opponent&apos;s stones (<ix>pangának</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; b6]</itype> play this game.

<p><form>punggak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1b7]</itype> knock s.t. down by breaking it off at its base or from its attachment. <i>Makapunggak ka ba ánang manggag pusil gamítun?</i> Can you knock that mango down with a gun? <i>Punggakun (punggákun) ta nang balay sa lapínig,</i> Let&apos;s knock the beehive down. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> for the seat of the pants to be worn out. <i>Nagkapunggak na ang lubut sa ákung karsúnis,</i> The seat of my trousers is gradually wearing out. <pos>a</pos> worn-out at the seat.

<p><form>punggit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1b2]</itype> <number>1</number> hit s.t. with a missile <pb n=800>to knock it down or off. <i>Wà siya makapunggit sa iruplánu sa kaáway,</i> He was not able to shoot down the enemy plane. <i>Batu ray ákung ipunggit ánang bayábas,</i> I&apos;ll knock that guava down with a stone. <number>2</number> <tr>hit</tr> s.t. directly. <i>Punggíta ang úlu sa manuk,</i> Hit the chicken in the head. <number>3</number> break, cut s.t. off. <i>Ang hitabù nakapunggit sa íyang ambisiyun,</i> The event cut down his soaring ambition. <number>4</number> <tr>mark</tr> s.o. for s.t. bad. <i>Ug mapildi ang Libiral punggítun siya sa ubus nga pwistu,</i> He&apos;s marked for demotion to a low position if the Liberal Party loses.

<p><form>punggud</form> <xr>= <sc>PUGUD</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PÚGUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>punggut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> <tr>behead</tr>. <i>Ayaw punggúta ang líug sa inusinti,</i> Don&apos;t cut off the head of an innocent man.

<p><form>púngì, púngil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>detach</tr> or <tr>break off</tr> s.t. from an attachment or joint, esp. s.t. delicate or breakable. <i>Akuy nagpúngil sa lugpit sa pawuntin pin,</i> I broke the clip off the fountain pen. <i>Ayaw pungíla ang mga gihay sa mga búlak,</i> Don&apos;t <tr>pluck</tr> the petals off the flowers.

<p><form>pungíngi</form> <xr>= <sc>BUNGÍNGI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pungkay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>summit</tr>. <i>Naabut na ang pungkay sa Mawunt Ibirist,</i> They have reached the <tr>top</tr> of Mount Everest. <number>2</number> highest degree of s.t. <i>Ang pungkay sa kalampúsan,</i> The highest point of success. <form>kina-an(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>topmost</tr> part, as of a summit, highest degree of s.t. <i>Kinapungkayan sa lamì,</i> At the highest point of ecstasy.

<p><form>pungkay<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> child&apos;s word for female genitalia.

<p><form>pungkù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>squat</tr>. <i>Nag-alírung silang nagpungkù nga nagtan-aw sa hantak,</i> They were squatting in a circle watching the tossing of the coins. <number>2</number> <tr>sit down</tr>. <i>Mahugnù ang lamísag inyung pungkúan,</i> The table will collapse if you <tr>sit</tr> on it. <number>3</number> sit idly doing nothing. <i>Ang ímu dihang gipungkù ug gihinayhínay pa nímug trabáhu may ági ka na,</i> The time you wasted sitting around, if you had used it to start work little by little, you would have had s.t. to show for it by now. <number>4</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> <formx>&mdash; sa bilangguan</formx> be willing to go to prison just so s.t. is accomplished. <i>Pungkúan lang nákù ang Bilíbid, basta lang mapatay siya,</i> I&apos;m willing to go to Bilibid prison as long as he dies.&dagger;

<p><form>pungkul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> lacking a limb. <i>Ang pungkul makasulat gihápun,</i> The <tr>amputee</tr> can still write. <form>ságing &mdash;</form> k.o. short and thick banana growing closely packed in large bunches, eaten when ripe: <bio>Musa sapientum var. humilis</bio>. <number>2</number> <tr>short pants</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126; b4]</itype> get <tr>amputated</tr>. <i>Gipungkúlan (napungkul) ang kamut sa kawatan,</i> The hand of the thief was cut off. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> wear, make short pants.

<p><form>pungkuy</form> <pos>n</pos> child&apos;s word for the penis.

<p><form>pungli</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>aspiration</tr> to become a certain sort of person, reach a high degree of virtue in s.t. <i>Adúna siyay pungli sa pagkasantus,</i> He has the aspiration to become a saint.

<p><form>pungpung</form> <xr>= <sc>PALUNGPUNG<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pungpungáya</form> <pos>n</pos> game played with a baby where one takes the hands and the feet, bunches them saying a rhyme and letting them go: <ix>pungpungáya, pungpungáya, bukhad iláwum, Pungpungáya,</ix> open underneath. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> play <ix>pungpungáya</ix> with a baby.

<p><form>pungpung lálung</form> <xr>= <sc>PUNGPUNG PYÁNGAW</sc>, <i>n, v.</i></xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12C2]</itype> <tr>have sexual intercourse</tr> (humorous). <i>Bag-u tingáling nakapungpung lálung kay gipaningut man,</i> He probably played <ix>pungpung pyángaw</ix> because he is perspiring.

<p><form>pungpung pyángaw</form> <pos>n</pos> a game of the hands played by children wherein the players put their fists one on top of the other. A child not participating is the leader (<ix>abat</ix>) and recites a verse after which the fist at the bottom opens; the verse is repeated and the next fist opens, and so forth, until everybody has opened his fist. Then the leader inserts his index finger into the pile of hands letting the players guess in turn if his finger have touched bottom. The verse recited goes: <i>Pungpung pyángaw, Bukadbukad iláwum, Kulítug kulítug, Lagbas na ba? Pungpung pyángaw,</i> Open up the lowest hand, Thrust the finger in, Has it reached the bottom? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> play <ix>pungpung pyángaw</ix>.

<p><form>pungtud</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>hill</tr>, a natural raised part of the earth&apos;s surface often rounded, smaller than a mountain. <number>2</number> <tr>anthill</tr>. <number>3</number> <tr>shoal</tr> or <tr>sandbar</tr>, an island-like formation in shallow seas, visible during low tide. <i>Manginhas ku sa pungtud inighunas,</i> I&apos;ll gather shells at the shoal during low tide. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be formed into a hill. <form>kapungtúran</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hills</tr>. <form>kinapungturan</form> <pos>n</pos> topmost part of the hill.

<p><form>pung-ul</form> <xr>= <sc>PUL-UNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pungun</form> <pos>n</pos> sharp object (<tr>spine</tr>, <tr>thorn</tr>, and the like) that has pricked and is lodged into the body. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a3b4]</itype> <tr>prick</tr> and be lodged in the body. <i>Mupungun gayud ang mga tunuk sa tuyum,</i> The spines of the sea urchins will surely be lodged in the skin if they prick you. <number>2</number> <itype>[b]</itype> for a woman to be had for sexual intercourse (humorous). <i>Kay natúlug siya uban sa íyang trátu, sigúru giyud ku nga gipungnan siya,</i> Because she slept with her lover, I&apos;m sure she had sexual intercourse <pb n=801>with him.

<p><form>púngus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>gather</tr> the hair and tie it in a knot. <i>Mupúngus ku sa buhuk ug inítan ku,</i> I&apos;ll knot my hair when I feel warm. <number>2</number> tie up the hair with a ribbon or wig, wiglet. <i>Magpúngus lang ku arun mapangkù ning ákung buhuk,</i> I&apos;ll use a wig so that I can wear my hair in a chignon. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wig</tr> or a piece of cloth worn with the hair knotted or swept up.

<p><form>pungut</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>irritating</tr>, <tr>maddening</tr>. <i>Pungut bayà kaáyu nímu nga mukatáwa lag kasab-an,</i> It&apos;s maddening the way you simply laugh when you are scolded. <form>pila ray &mdash;</form> how badly did [so-and-so] want to eat it, when he only eats very little (said of things s.o. wanted to eat very much and then when it was served, he didn&apos;t eat a great quantity). <i>Manganduy tag inasal apan kun náa na, pila ra giyuy pungut,</i> One yearns for roasted pig, but when it&apos;s there, you can only eat so much. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a2b3]</itype> be, become <tr>angry</tr>, highly <tr>irritated</tr>. <i>Kanang sayúpa ang nakapungut (nakapapungut) nákù nímu,</i> That mistake made me mad at you. <i>Unsa may ímung napungtan nákù?</i> What made you mad at me? <i>Gipungtan ku ning trabahúa,</i> I hated this k.o. work. <form>pungutpungut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456; a12]</itype> be in an irritable mood. <i>Nagkapungutpungut ku run sa ákung trabáhung wà magkadimáu,</i> I am in a bad mood now because I didn&apos;t do my work properly. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> fly into a <tr>rage</tr>, <tr>fury</tr>. <i>Namungut ang buksidur dihang nagdugù ang íyang ilung,</i> The boxer flew into a rage when his nose was bloodied. <pos>n</pos> fit of rage, fury. <form>pahiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>vent</tr> one&apos;s anger on. <i>Aku lay íyang gipahimungtan sa áway sa íyang trátu,</i> He took his anger at his girl friend out on me. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>anger</tr>. <form>pungtánun, pulungtánun, mapungtánun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>irritable</tr>, easily getting angry.

<p><form>púngut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>join</tr> things together by tying or pasting them. <i>Magpúngut kug písì nga hayháyan,</i> I&apos;ll join together pieces of rope for a clothesline. <number>2</number> <itype>[C; c1]</itype> for two people to have a claim on part of a piece of money for lack of loose change. <i>Ang ímung singkwinta nagpúngut sa písus nga gibáyad nákù,</i> Your payment is included in the peso bill which he paid me. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for a thicket to form with intertwining weeds. <pos>n</pos> thick cluster of intertwining shrubs and grasses. <i>Ságad ang buntug mulukluk sa púngut,</i> Usually the quail hides in the <tr>underbrush</tr>. <form>-ay(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> have intercourse (coarse, but not very much so). <form>kapupungtan, kinapungtan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the endmost part of s.t. long where it joins to s.t. else. <i>Putla ang tinái dihà sa íyang kapupungtan sa túngul,</i> Cut the intestines at the place where they join the stomach. <number>2</number> the <tr>endmost</tr> part of anything very long or high. <i>Didtu níla hiapsi ang kawatan sa kapupungtan sa sapà, nag-inum,</i> They came across the thief at the head of the river, drinking. <i>Ang payag túa gitúkud sa kinapungtan sa búkid,</i> The shack was built at the top of the mountain.

<p><form>pungyut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> for an area of s.t. to sag so as to hang unevenly or make a <tr>bulge</tr>. <i>Nalibang tingálig bátà kay nagpungyut ang panti,</i> The child must have dirtied his pants because they are bulging. <i>Ayawg pungyúta (ipungyut) ang ímung bulsa sa húlin,</i> Don&apos;t let your pocket sag with marbles.

<p><form>puni</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tablecloth</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b6(1)]</itype> cover with a tablecloth. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a tablecloth.

<p><form>púni</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>replant</tr> a part of a field where seeds failed to sprout or where plants are damaged. <i>Ákù nang gipuníhan ang mga mais nga gikaun sa kábaw,</i> I replaced the corn plants that the water buffalo ate.

<p><form>punirarya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>funeral parlor</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> make, put up a funeral parlor.

<p><form>punit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>pick up</tr> with the hands. <i>Punita nang ímung duláan sa salug,</i> Pick your toys up from the floor. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> <tr>find</tr> s.t. <i>Nakapunit kug daghang kwarta,</i> I found a large sum of money. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> pick up a lesson, take s.t. and <tr>steal</tr> it. <i>Makapunit kag daghang pagtulun-an niíning sugilambúnga,</i> You can pick up a lot of lessons from this novel. <number>2b</number> choose a girl. <i>Kinsa guy mupunit nákung laksut man ku?</i> Who would ever choose me when I&apos;m so ugly? <number>n</number> action of picking s.t. up. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; b3(1)4(1)c1]</itype> <tr>abort</tr>, <tr>miscarry</tr>. <i>Ang midisína nga íyang giinum mauy nakapúnit (nakapapúnit) sa íyang gisabak,</i> The medicine that she took caused her to abort her child. <i>Napunítan siya kay nang&amacracu; unyà wà matúman,</i> She lost her baby because she didn&apos;t get the things she craved. -in- <pos>n</pos> s.t. picked up. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. found. <i>Gisagup sa rayna ang bátang pinunitan,</i> The queen adopted the child that s.o. found.

<p><form>punitil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ponytail</tr> style of tying the hair up and letting it hang down loose. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do one&apos;s hair in this style.

<p><form>puniyal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dagger</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> stab s.o. or s.t. with a dagger. <i>Ang táwung gipuniyal sa kasingkásing namatay dáyun,</i> The man who was stabbed in the heart died immediately. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> make into a dagger.

<p><form>punlas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b1]</itype> rinse washed clothes with citrus juice and water, esp. pineapple fiber <pb n=802>cloth to stiffen it. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> apply aromatic leaves, citrus and the like, to the hair after bathing. <i>Mupunlas kug suwà sa ákung buhuk,</i> I rinse my hair with lemon.

<p><form>punpal</form> <pos>n</pos> person whom one calls up regularly to talk to on the phone, but whom one does not know in person. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C1; a12]</itype> be, become a phone pal. <i>Ug makigpunpal ka ayaw gawía ring ákù,</i> If you are calling just to make friends with s.o., don&apos;t use my phone.

<p><form>punpun</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>gather</tr> powder, grains into a heap by scooping them together with the hands. <i>Punpúna ang ímung giníuk humay sa taliw&amacrgra; sa banig,</i> <tr>Pile</tr> the rice you threshed in the center of the mat. <number>2</number> [A3 ; a12] <tr>compile</tr>, <tr>collect</tr>. <i>Gipunpun ang tanang mananáug nga sugilánun sa usa ka bulyum,</i> All the winning entries of stories were compiled in one volume. <number>2a</number> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> <tr>accumulate</tr>, <tr>pile</tr> up. <i>Ug sa matag adlaw nga milabay láing kahásul ang mipunpun dihà sa íyang kaisípan,</i> And each day that passed another worry accumulated in her mind. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> in weeding, knock off the soil and heap up the weeds for disposal. <i>Mamunpun (mupunpun) ku sa ímung ginúna,</i> I will knock the soil off the weeds you pulled up and heap them at the side. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> pile of s.t. powdered or in grains. <number>2</number> compilation. <number>3</number> accumulation.

<p><form>punsi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> mix an alcoholic beverage with another drink (but not water). <i>Tubà nga gipunsíhag pitsi,</i> Toddy mixed with pepsi. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make punch. <i>Punsíhun nákù ning diyútay nga bínu ug ang limunsitu,</i> I&apos;ll make a punch of this little bit of wine and calamondin juice. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> beverage used as a <tr>mixer</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>punch</tr>.

<p><form>punsísuk</form> <pos>a</pos> for vertical things to be situated packed very closely and tightly. <i>Punsísuk ang púsù sa bukag,</i> The ears of corn were <tr>crammed</tr> into the basket. <pos>n</pos> crowded mass of s.t. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> crowd closely around s.t. or in s.t. <i>Nagpunsísuk (nagpunsisuk) ang mga táwu sa sini,</i> The people <tr>packed</tr> the movie house. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>pack</tr> things close together tightly.

<p><form>punsiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> social function: gathering, reception, banquet. <i>Makabuhung nga punsiyun ang gidálit níla,</i> They served a most satisfactory banquet. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13N; b]</itype> wear s.t. decorative in one&apos;s hair. <i>Babáyi nga nagpunsiyun (namunsiyun) ug rúsas sa íyang buhuk,</i> A girl wearing a rose in her hair.

<p><form>punsiyunaryu</form> <pos>n</pos> high-ranking government official.

<p><form>Punsiyu Pilátu</form> <pos>n</pos> Pontius Pilate. <pos>a</pos> wicked. <i>Bísag pakan-un pa nas pád, punsiyu pilátu giyud nang dakù,</i> You might feed him from the palm of your hand, but he&apos;s a <tr>wicked</tr> beast.

<p><form>punsu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>poncho</tr>, usually a rubberized one against rain. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> wear, use, make into a poncho.

<p><form>punsu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>PUNSUN</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> the dent mark made by a prick punch.

<p><form>punsun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a long piece for hammering a bolt or bar. <number>2</number> various kinds of punches: <number>2a</number> center <tr>punch</tr> for making holes in sheet metal. <number>2b</number> nail set. <number>2c</number> prick punch. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> use a punch on s.t.

<p><form>punta<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>head</tr> towards a place. <i>Diin siya punta,</i> Where was he <tr>headed</tr>? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> head s.t. s.w. <i>Kanang kahúya mauy puntáhun,</i> Head toward that tree. <i>Ipunta ang sakayan ngadtu,</i> Head the boat in that direction. <number>3</number> <itype>[B12356]</itype> end up with a certain husband or wife. <i>Namílì siyag dátù, nahipunta núug buguy,</i> She tried to get a rich husband but wound up with a tramp. <form>hi-/ha-</form> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <tr>end up</tr> s.w. <i>Nahapunta siya sa bilangguan,</i> He ended up in jail. <form>-da</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>destination</tr>. <i>Basta mag-ispúting, nasáyud na kug ása ang puntáda,</i> I can readily tell where you are headed for when you are dressed up like that.

<p><form>punta<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>pointed</tr>: <number>1</number> <tr>fluke</tr> of anchor. <number>2</number> the pointed end, <tr>tip</tr> of s.t. <i>Nadasmag siya sa punta sa utáwan,</i> He bumped into the pointed end of the ironing board. <number>3</number> <tr>plow-</tr>*share. <number>4</number> <tr>cape</tr>, pointed piece of land that projects into the sea. <number>5</number> <formx>&mdash; pitsu</formx> <pos>n</pos> <tr>brisket</tr> of beef. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> attach or put a plow-*share s.w. <number>2</number> <itype>[APB26]</itype> turn into a cape, cause a place to do so. <form>kinapuntahan</form> <pos>n</pos> the tip of pointed or tapering things.

<p><form>punta blangku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shooting competition</tr> or <tr>target practice</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1C; a2]</itype> hold a shooting competition or target practice.

<p><form>puntaríya</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. at which one aims. <i>Wà kuy puntaríya nga naglakaw,</i> I walked with no fixed direction. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>aim</tr> s.t. or head towards s.t. <i>Kinsa nang nagpuntaríya sa íyang pusil ngari?</i> Who is that fellow aiming his gun this way? <i>Dílì ta makapuntaríya sa píliw,</i> We can not go towards the shore. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> direct one&apos;s remarks at s.o. <i>Dílì ku mupuntaríyag táwu kay ang kasábà páras tanan,</i> I am not referring to anyone in particular because the scolding is for everyone.

<p><form>puntik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>spot</tr>, <tr>dot</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> get tiny spots on s.t. <i>Siyay nagpuntik ug pintal sa salug,</i> He was the one who splattered paint on the floor. <form>puntikpuntik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b6c1]</itype> be covered with dots, spots. <i>Nagpuntikpuntik (gipuntikpuntíkan) <pb n=803>sa mga búlak nga lainláin ug kulur ang lagúna,</i> The meadow was dotted with flowers of all colors. <form>-in-an</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. that is dotted or spotted. <form>-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dotted</tr> or <tr>spotted</tr>.

<p><form>puntil</form> <pos>n</pos> small <tr>bag</tr> of cloth, paper. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> put into a bag. <i>Ipuntil ang mga sinsilyu,</i> Put the change into a pouch. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a bag.

<p><form>punting</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> hit a target. <i>Ákung puntíngun nang langgam nga nagbatug sa sanga,</i> I&apos;ll shoot the bird that&apos;s perching atop the branch. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>aim</tr> at s.t. <i>Didtu níya ipunting ang íyang panan-aw sa gwápang dalága,</i> He directed his eyes towards the beautiful woman. <number>2a</number> <tr>direct</tr> one&apos;s remarks at s.o. <i>Siyay gipunting sa maung biaybíay,</i> She is the one alluded to in the ridicule. <pos>n</pos> in games, action of hitting s.o.&apos;s piece. <i>Ákung punting run kay human na mu,</i> It&apos;s my throw now because all of you have finished.

<p><form>puntinpin</form> <xr>= <sc>PAWUNTIN</sc>, <i>n2, v2.</i></xr>

<p><form>puntiríya</form> <xr>= <sc>PUNTARÍYA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puntíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pointer</tr> which indicates the reading on clock, meter, and the like. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> attach a pointer or <tr>indicator</tr> on s.t. <i>Ákung puntirúhan ug luminus ning ákung rilu,</i> I&apos;ll have a luminous dial attached to my watch. <form>puntiruhan</form> <xr>= <sc>PUNTÍRU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puntíyas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lace</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> edge s.t. with a lace.

<p><form>puntu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>point</tr>, the important or main idea. <i>Klarúha ang puntu sa buut mung ipasabut,</i> Clarify the point that you want to make. <form>&mdash; dibista</form> <tr>point of view</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>period</tr> in writing. <number>2a</number> <formx>&mdash; ikúma</formx> semicolon. <number>2a1</number> speaking slowly. <i>Puntu ikúma kaáyug sinultihan,</i> Speaking slowly and tediously. <number>3</number> <tr>accent</tr>, <tr>pronunciation</tr>. <i>Puntu sa Dalagit ang íyang sinultihan,</i> She talks with a Dalaguete accent. <number>3a</number> <tr>tune</tr> of a musical piece. <i>Dì nà mau ang puntu,</i> That&apos;s not the tune. <number>3b</number> <tr>timing</tr>, <tr>rhythm</tr>. <i>Maáyug puntu ang íyang sinayawan,</i> She dances in a good rhythm. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fitting</tr>, mixed to the right proportion, done at the right time, <tr>right</tr> for the purpose for which it is meant. <i>Puntu kaáyu ang timpla sa sabaw,</i> The soup is perfectly seasoned. <i>Puntu nang aníhun ang humay,</i> Now is just the time to harvest the rice. <i>Dílì puntu ang midisína nga nadápat sa duktur,</i> The doctor did not administer the right medicine. <i>Dílì puntu ang ímung tubag,</i> Your answer is not exactly to the point. <number>2</number> doing s.t. <tr>regularly</tr>. <i>Dílì puntu ang ílang pagpangáun,</i> They don&apos;t eat regularly. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>punctuate</tr> with a period. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2B16; c1]</itype> sing with the correct tune and rhythm. <i>Kamau ming mupuntu ug náay musúgud,</i> We know how to get the correct tune if s.o. starts. <i>Ipuntu (puntúha) ang ímung sinayawan sa sunáta,</i> Dance in time to the music. <number>2a</number> <itype>[C; ac]</itype> in <tr>harmony</tr>. <i>Nagkapuntu ang ílang tíngug,</i> They sang in harmony. <number>2b</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> in pounding rice, when s.o. wants to join in pounding together with s.o. else, to tap the side of the mortar each time the other person&apos;s pestle is out in order to get the rhythm prior to pounding, so that when the two are pounding together the pestles will not collide. <i>Puntúhi úsà antis ka muásud,</i> Tap your pestle on the mortar to get the rhythm before you enter in. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> add <tr>seasoning</tr> in the right consistency. <i>Lamì ang sálad ug puntúhun (ipuntu) ang asin, súkà, ug asúkar,</i> The salad will come out nice if the salt, vinegar, and sugar are added in the right proportions. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> do s.t. at the right time or in the right way. <i>Mipuntu giyud síyag adtu arun dílì sila magkabaíwas,</i> He went just at the right time so they wouldn&apos;t miss each other. <number>3b</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> make a point in an argument, answer to the point. <i>Mipuntu siya niadtung tubága,</i> He hit the point with that answer. <number>3c</number> <itype>[A2N; b(1)]</itype> <tr>score</tr> a <tr>point</tr>. <i>Siyay mamuntu sa baskit kay hingígù,</i> He makes a lot of baskets because he is a crack player. <number>4</number> <itype>[C1]</itype> do s.t. on a regular schedule. <number>5</number> <itype>[c]</itype> <formx>&mdash; ikúma</formx> speak slowly. <form>panghiN-</form> <xr>= <sc>PUNTU</sc>, <i>v2b.</i></xr> <form>di-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>short pants</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> wear short pants. <form>puntíru</form> <pos>n</pos> one who blends the sugar being refined. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> regional pronunciation.

<p><form>puntud</form> <xr>= <sc>PUNGTUD</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puntun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pontoon</tr>. <i>Ang ílang pantalan hinímus puntun,</i> Their wharf is made of pontoons.

<p><form>puntus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>points</tr> in a game. <number>1a</number> <tr>blow</tr> in boxing as reckoned as a criteria for winning a game. <number>2</number> <tr>mahjong</tr> player. <i>Dì sila makadúlà ug madyung ug kúlang ang puntus,</i> They can&apos;t play mahjong if there are not enough players. <number>2a</number> regular <tr>player</tr> at a certain gambling joint. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>superior</tr> in any way (slang). <i>Usa ray ákung uyab piru puntus man sab,</i> I have only one girl but she really is s.t. <i>Ang puntus nga mga bisíta ispisyal giyud nga pagkatagad,</i> <tr>Important</tr> visitors should be given special treatment. <number>2</number> for a statement or opinion to be loaded with bright ideas. <i>Diyútay ra siyag sulti, piru ug mutíngug, puntus pud,</i> He doesn&apos;t have much to say, but when he speaks, it is to the point. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> score. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A2N; b2]</itype> land a good blow at s.o. <i>Bísag gamay si Tiryu nakapuntus sab sa íyang kuntra,</i> Though Terry is small he managed to land a blow on his opponent. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> have a player or players for a mahjong game. <pb n=804><form>-ay(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> game played for points. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> play for points.

<p><form>púnu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>phonograph</tr> or <tr>radio-phono</tr>.

<p><form>punù</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>filled</tr>, <tr>full</tr>. <i>Punù ang ímung úlu sa binúang,</i> Your head is filled with all sorts of foolishness. <number>2</number> <tr>covered</tr> with s.t. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB56; a2]</itype> <tr>fill</tr> up a container or space. <i>Siyay nagpunù sa baldi ug balas,</i> He filled up the pail (with sand). <i>Ang lawak napunù sa mga táwu,</i> The room was filled with people. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1246; a12]</itype> be full of s.t., all covered with. <i>Napunù sa kawras ang íyang mga bitíis,</i> Her legs are all covered with scratches. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>add</tr> s.t. to. <i>Íyang gipun-an ang ámung swildu ug tagdiyis písus,</i> He added ten pesos each to our salary. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A23; c]</itype> say s.t. further in a conversation. <i>Wà na kuy ikapunù sa ákung gisulti sa úna,</i> I have nothing further to add to what I said before. <number>3b</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> [so-and-so] is true on top of s.t. else. <i>Gipun-an pa sa íyang pagkadátù ang íyang pagkabrayit,</i> He is rich and also smart. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>amount added</tr> or thrown into a bargain. <i>Pila may ímung punù sa pagbugtì sa ímung báka sa íyang kabáyù?</i> How much money did you <tr>throw in</tr> when you bartered your cow for his horse? <number>2</number> things said in addition to. <i>&lsquo;Kaáyu untang ipuyù dinhi,&rsquo; punù níya nga nanghupaw,</i> &lsquo;How nice would it be to live here,&rsquo; he added, sighing. <form>maka-</form> <pos>n</pos> a variety of coconut, filled with meat which remains soft even when mature. <form>pulun-an, pulun-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> amount to add. <form>pun-unun, pulun-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>container</tr> to be filled up.

<p><form>púnù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>trunk</tr> of a tree, main stem or body of a tree, apart from the limbs and roots. <form>-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>PÚNÙ</sc>.</xr> <number>1a</number> the <tr>tree</tr> as a unit for numeration. <i>Tulu ka punúang mangga,</i> Three mango trees. <number>2</number> <tr>base</tr>, <tr>lowest part</tr> of s.t. <i>Balay nga náa sa punúan sa bungtud,</i> A house at the foot of the hill. <i>Punúan sa hagdan,</i> Foot of the stairs. <number>2a</number> <tr>point of attachment</tr> of a part of the body. <i>Gihubagan ku sa may punúan sa ákung páa,</i> I have a boil right at the base of my thigh. <i>Punúan sa buhuk,</i> The roots of the hair. <number>3</number> <tr>officials</tr> in charge of an office. <i>Punúan sa lungsud,</i> The town officials. <number>4</number> main <tr>office</tr> of a company. <form>paN-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>president</tr>, <tr>governor</tr>. <form>paN- lalawígan</form> <tr>governor</tr> of the province. <form>paN- násud</form> <tr>president</tr> of the nation. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> be the president. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get as one&apos;s president. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>govern</tr>. <i>Gibutáan tas mga Katsílà sa dihang silay mipamúnù (namúnù),</i> The Spaniards blinded us when they governed us. <form>paN-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> administration of a certain regime. <number>2</number> way of administering. <form>paN-an nga kumpaníya</form> head office, mother company. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> govern. <i>Ug ikay mamunúan, wà kay mahímù,</i> If you are in power, you won&apos;t be able to do anything. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get a certain regime as one&apos;s government.

<p><form>púnù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ulcerated scalp infection. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b5]</itype> get this infection.

<p><form>punugrapu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>phonograph</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC12; b6]</itype> have a phonograph to supply music. <i>Magpunugrapu ta sa átung parti,</i> We&apos;ll have a phonograph for our party.

<p><form>punuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bruise</tr>, a <tr>discoloration</tr> of the body resulting from a contusion. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b(1)]</itype> for the blood to <tr>congeal</tr> under the skin in a contusion. <i>Mipúnuk ang dugù sa íyang tudlù nga nadukdukan sa martilyu,</i> He hit his finger with a hammer, and the blood congealed.

<p><form>púnung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fishpond</tr> for raising fish to eat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make, dig a fishpond. <form>ka-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>organization</tr> or <tr>association</tr> of people. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> organize people into an association.

<p><form>punyal</form> <xr>= <sc>PUNIYAL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>punyímas</form> euphemism for <ix>punyíta</ix>: an expression of anger or discomfort. <i>Punyímas! Ngánung ímu mang gisilihan ang súkà?</i> <tr>Darn</tr>! Why did you put hot peppers in the vinegar?

<p><form>punyíta<sub>1</sub></form> light curse expressing sudden anger. <i>Punyíta! Ímung gipatay ang makina ínay pakusgan,</i> <tr>Darn</tr>. You killed the motor instead of making it run faster. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a2b2]</itype> shout <ix>punyíta</ix> to s.o. <i>Gipunyíta (napunyitahan) ku sa ákung ámu kay nakapildi kug istanti,</i> My boss shouted &lsquo;darn&rsquo; at me because I broke a display case.

<p><form>punyíta<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PUNYÍTI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>punyíti</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> strike s.o. with the fist in the face. <i>Kaáyu giyung punyitíhan ánang bugasun mung nawung,</i> How I&apos;d love to smash your pimply face in.

<p><form>punyitíra</form> <xr>= <sc>PUNYITÍRU</sc> (female).</xr>

<p><form>punyitíru</form> light curse expressing anger, addressed to a male. <i>Punyitíru ning tawhána, ngánung ímung gikuháan sa tabun ang pagkáun?</i> <tr>Darn</tr> this man. Why did you uncover the food? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> call s.o. <ix>punyitíru</ix>. <form>-s</form> <xr>= <sc>PUNYITÍRU</sc> (plural).</xr> <i>Mga punyitírus! Ihúnung na ang inyung pagsyagitsyágit,</i> Stop that shouting, you punks!

<p><form>punyu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>reduce</tr> the intensity, amount of what one does. <i>Makapunyu ka ba sa ímung gastu?</i> Can you reduce your expenditures? <i>Punyúhi ang pagkáun sa tambuk,</i> Reduce your intake of fat. <i>Gipunyúhan ni Bín ang andar sa makina,</i> Ben reduced the speed of the engine. <pos>a</pos> doing s.t., but in <tr>restricted</tr> quantities. <i>Káun nga way punyu,</i> Eating without restraint. <form>&mdash; siráwu</form> <pos>a</pos> doing s.t. on any extremely restricted scale.

<pb n=805>

<p><form>punyus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cuffs</tr> of the sleeves. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make, attach the cuffs of the sleeves.

<p><form>púpa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>stern</tr> of boats. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>APÚPA</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> go toward the stern. <i>Mipúpa ang hángin,</i> The boat sailed into the wind. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make or build a stern for a boat. <form>pa-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> head the stern of a boat s.w. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> go near. <i>Mipapúpa man gud ka sa nag-áway, naapil ka hinúun,</i> You went near the persons quarreling, so you got involved.

<p><form>pupanda</form> <pos>n</pos> rectangular piece of cloth worn by women around the shoulders as a <tr>shawl</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> wear a shawl. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> make s.t. into a shawl.

<p><form>puphu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; a]</itype> <tr>scoop</tr> up with the hands. <i>Siyay mipuphu (namuphu) sa bugas nga naúsik,</i> She scooped up the rice that spilled. <i>Magpuphu ku sa mga sagbut nga ákung sinilhig,</i> I&apos;ll <tr>pick up</tr> the trash that I swept. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> <tr>gather</tr> information, earnings. <i>Nakapuphu ang pulis ug dúgang kasayúran báhin sa túlis,</i> The police have gathered additional information on the robbery. <i>Íyang napuphu ang íyang minilyun gíkan sa íyang patigáyun sa trúsu,</i> He earned his millions from his logging business. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>annihilate</tr>, wipe out of existence en masse. <i>Sakit mauy mipuphu sa tanang pumupúyù,</i> Pestilence wiped out the whole population. <form>puphuay</form> <xr>= <sc>BÙBUAY</sc>,</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>BÙBÙ</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see also</ix> <sc>PALUPHU</sc>.</xr>&dagger;

<p><form>púpù</form> <pos>n</pos> title or address to <tr>grandparents</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> call s.o. <i>púpù.</i>

<p><form>pùpù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>pick</tr> fruits, leaves, flowers from a tree by breaking off the peduncle. <i>Pùpúun ku tung hinug nangkà,</i> I&apos;ll pick that ripe jackfruit. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> <tr>gather</tr>, <tr>obtain</tr> s.t. from one&apos;s efforts. <i>Nakapùpù kug mga kasayúran báhin sa íyang kagahápun,</i> I have gathered information about his past. <i>Wà kay mapùpù sa pagsúruy,</i> There&apos;s nothing you can get out of roaming about. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> yield fruits as produce. <i>Usa ka punúang mangga mupùpù ug usa ka líbu ka búnga,</i> A mango tree yields a thousand fruits. <number>4</number> <itype>[B12; b8]</itype> <formx>&mdash; ang púsud</formx> for the umbilical cord to break off (shortly after birth). <i>Sa ikaupat ka adlaw magkapùpù na ang púsud,</i> On the fourth day the umbilical cord begins to fall off. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. <tr>picked</tr> or <tr>excerpted</tr>. <i>Basáha kining mga pinùpù sa Baláang Kasulátan,</i> Read these <tr>excerpts</tr> from the Holy Bible.

<p><form>púpug</form> <xr>= <sc>PULPUG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pupular</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>popular</tr>, <tr>beloved</tr> of the people. <i>Pupular kaáyu si Núra Awnur,</i> Nora Aunor is very popular. <i>Pupular nga sáyaw,</i> Popular dance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become popular.

<p><form>pupulasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>population</tr>, number of people s.w.

<p><form>púpus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> coming to its <tr>end</tr>. <i>Napúpus ang tugut sa íyang tabánug,</i> The string of his kite is giving out. <i>Napúpus na ang pabílu sa ákung paílub,</i> My patience is running out. <i>Sa nagkapúpus na ang íyang gininháwa, nisulti siya sa tinúud,</i> When he was about to breathe his last, he told the truth. <form>ka-an, ka-un(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> coming to an end. <i>Kaguul nga way kapupusun (kapupúsan),</i> Sorrows without end.

<p><form>púpuy</form> <xr>= <sc>PÚPÙ</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pupúyu</form> <xr>= <sc>BARTUNÍKU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pur</form> <ix>word used in reckoning dimensions:</ix> &lsquo;<tr>by</tr>&rsquo;. <i>Dus pur kwatru nga káhuy,</i> Piece of wood two by four. <i>Kwatrung diyis pur katursi piyis,</i> A room ten by fourteen feet.

<p><form>pur-</form> <number>1</number> <tr>per</tr>, by the. <formx>-díya</formx> <tr>by the day</tr>. <i>Purdíya ámung swildu,</i> We are paid by the day. <i>Utsu písus purdíya,</i> Eight pesos a day. <formx>-úra</formx> <tr>by the hour</tr>. <number>2</number> prefix for exclamations. <formx>-bída</formx> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>bída</bx> <pos>a</pos> exclamation of surprise. <i>Purbídang lisúra,</i> <tr>My God</tr>! How difficult it is. <i>Purbídang gwapáha,</i> <tr>Jesus</tr>! How beautiful she is. <number>b</number> exclamation chiding. <i>Purbída sab ka! Wà ka makapakáun sa bátà?</i> <tr>Heavens</tr>! You mean you didn&apos;t feed the baby? <form>-pabur</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>PABUR</sc>.</xr> <form>-diyus</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>PURDIYUS</sc>.</xr> <ix>in other phrases:</ix> <form>pur-abir</form> <number>a1</number> <tr>testing</tr> s.t. out, not necessarily in earnest. <i>Wà kuy disíyu nga mupalit íning awtúha. Pur-abir lang tung ákù ug itúgut ba sa ákung hangyù,</i> I did not intend to buy this automobile. I was just trying to see if it could be gotten for the price I offered. <number>a2</number> trying s.t. on a long gamble where there is nothing to lose. <i>Pur-abir ning pagpaupira sa kansir, kay ug dílì upirahan, sigurádu man giyung patay,</i> The cancer operation is just a gamble. If you don&apos;t operate, the man will die anyway. <number>b</number> <formx>-ihimplu</formx> <tr>for example</tr>. <number>c</number> <formx>-ingkásu</formx> <xr>= <sc>INGKÁSU</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see also</ix> <sc>PUR-ÍSU, PURLUMÍNUS, PURMIDYU, *PURSIKÁSU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>purà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a]</itype> <tr>indulge</tr> in s.t. to the point of satiety, where one does not desire any more. <i>Nagpurà mig káun sa usa ka batúang mangga,</i> We indulged ourselves eating a large basket of mangoes. <i>Gipurà námù ang ámung mata sa makaiíbug nga talan-awun,</i> We feasted our eyes on the lovely landscape. <i>Napurà na kug babáyi,</i> I&apos;ve had women until I am sick of them.

<p><form>púrang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> cut fish into halves neatly along the vertebrae and bone structure, usually for drying. <i>Purángun únà ang isdà nga igbubúwad,</i> The fish to be dried should first be cut in two.

<p><form>púras</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> policeman&apos;s <tr>billy</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>penis</tr> (humorous). <pb n=806><pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>beat</tr> with a billy or the like. <i>Túbu ákung ipúras níya,</i> I&apos;ll bludgeon him with a pipe. <number>2</number> make into a club.

<p><form>purawundir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>boxer</tr> who fights in four-round bouts preliminary to the main event.

<p><form>puray</form> <pos>n</pos> woman&apos;s <tr>genitalia</tr> (euphemism). <form>panghiN-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B236]</itype> <tr>bloom</tr> into full womanhood. <i>Nanghimúray na ang íyang anak nga dalagíta,</i> His adolescent daughter is now blooming into full womanhood.

<p><form>purba</form> <xr>= <sc>PRUBAR</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p><form>purbída</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>PUR-</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>purbinggay, purbingguy, purbisgut, purbista</form> euphemism for <xr><sc>PURBÍDA</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PUR-</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>purbitsu</form> <xr>= <sc>PRUBITSU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>purdiyus</form> expression of utter discomfiture, disgust, or disagreement with s.t. over which one has no control. <i>Purdiyus, ngánu gud nga mau niy gidangátan ku,</i> <tr>Heavens</tr>! Why, of all things, did this have to happen to me! <pos>a</pos> making things difficult, giving s.o. a hard time. <i>Purdiyus kaáyu nang tigulángang hangyúag kwarta,</i> That old man gives you a hard time if you ask him for money. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> give s.o. a hard time. <i>Gipurdiyus ku nímu pagpangítà nímu,</i> You gave me a hard time looking for you. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> have a hard time doing s.t. <i>Magpurdiyus giyud tang maghungit íning batáa kay magdagandágang pakan-un,</i> It&apos;s an ordeal to feed this child because he runs about when you&apos;re trying to feed him. <form>Culu-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> make an honest appeal, plead. <i>Nagpulupurdíyus ang inahan sa bitayun ngadtu sa prisidinti,</i> The mother of the condemned man pleaded to the president for her son&apos;s life. <form>&mdash; ipursantu</form> <tr>exclamation</tr> over s.t. overwhelmingly surprising or causing intense discomfiture. <i>Purdiyus ipursantu, ngánung gibúhat mu man tu?</i> <tr>For God&apos;s sake</tr>, why did you do that?

<p><form>purga</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>purgative</tr>. <i>Purga sa bítuk,</i> Purgative for intestinal worms. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> administer a purgative. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A]</itype> take a purgative. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> eat s.t. which is unpalatable because it has been served so often. <i>Háy. Ginamus gayud ang sud-an nátù adlaw-adlaw ug magpurga na sad sa tangkung,</i> All we have to eat is fish paste every day, and <ix>kangkong</ix> vegetable as a purgative. <number>2a</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> have so much of s.t. one is sick of it. <i>Dalùdalù mag mangga. Pasagdahan bítaw nákug pagkáun, napurga lagi,</i> He just loved mangoes, so I let him have as many as he wanted and he got sick of them. <form>-nti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>purgative</tr>.

<p><form>purgáda</form> <xr>= <sc>PULGÁDA</sc>.</xr> <form>-s</form> <xr>= <sc>PULGÁDAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>purgas</form> <xr>= <sc>PULGAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>purgaturyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>purgatory</tr>. <number>2</number> place of hardship like purgatory. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be in purgatory.

<p><form>purhan</form> <pos>n</pos> forehand <tr>stroke</tr> in tennis or ping-*pong.

<p><form>purhisyu, purhwisyu</form> <xr>= <sc>PIRHWISYU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>purigit</form> <pos>a</pos> watery bowel movements. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P]</itype> have loose bowel movements. <i>Mupurigit ka giyud ug ímung sagulsagúlun ang ímung kan-un,</i> You&apos;ll get <tr>diarrhea</tr> if you eat all different kinds of food at once. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for bowel movements to get watery. <i>Nagkapurigit ang tái sa bátà nga giilísan ug litsi,</i> The child is getting loose bowel movements because they tried a new brand of milk on him.

<p><form>purikit</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. small <tr>banana</tr> about 3 by 6 cm., orange in color when not ripe and darker orange when ripe: eaten boiled or raw.

<p><form>puríku</form> <pos>n</pos> packaged <tr>lard</tr> (so called from the brand name Purico). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> use packaged lard.

<p><form>púril</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab7]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>cut down</tr> plants to exterminate them. <i>Ákung purílun ang mga kawáyan kay magtanum kug ságing,</i> I&apos;ll cut down the bamboos to replace them with bananas. <number>2</number> <tr>fell</tr> trees. <number>3</number> <itype>[A3P; a12]</itype> <tr>destroy</tr>, <tr>kill</tr> en masse. <i>Dángan ang mipúril (nagpúril) sa mga tanum,</i> The pest wiped out the plants. <i>Ang dinamíta makapúril (makapapúril) sa mga isdà,</i> Dynamite will wipe out the fishes.

<p><form>purin</form> term of address used only in the expression <ix>manyána ka</ix>. <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>*MANYÁNA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puririt</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> for soft, watery feces to be discharged in a spurt. <i>Wà pa gánì siya makalingkud sa bangkíyu, nagpuririt na ang tái,</i> Before he could even get seated on the toilet, the feces spurted out.

<p><form>púris rindyir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>forest ranger</tr>.

<p><form>purísu, pur-ísu</form> <number>1</number> <tr>therefore</tr>, in that case, <tr>then</tr> ... <i>Pur-ísu magtuun ka arun ka makapasar,</i> Therefore, you must study if you want to pass. <i>Wà ka magtuun. Purísu nahagbung ka,</i> You did not study. Therefore, you failed. <number>2</number> that&apos;s exactly what must happen (said in a context where the interlocutor has said, &lsquo;If [so-and-so] does not happen, [such-and-such] a bad outcome will follow&rsquo;). <i>&lsquo;Midalì siyag báyad arun dílì maimbargu&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Purísu.&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;He paid right away to avoid having it repossessed.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Exactly. That&apos;s what he had to do.&rsquo;

<p><form>purk an bins</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>baked beans</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> have baked beans.

<p><form>*purki</form> <form>ang &mdash;</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> the only thing wrong. <i>Ang nakapurki ning tawhána kay dì mamínaw ug tambag,</i> The only thing wrong with this fellow is that he won&apos;t heed advice.

<pb n=807>

<p><form>purk tsap</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pork chops</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; bc]</itype> have pork chops. <number>2</number> <itype>[a13]</itype> make it pork chops.

<p><form>purlumínus</form> <number>1</number> at the very least. <i>Purlumínus misangpit tà giyud ka nákù,</i> The <tr>least</tr> you could have done was call me. <i>Ug dì ku kaadtu purlumínus magpadá kug kwarta,</i> If I can&apos;t go at least I&apos;ll send some money.

<p><form>purlun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hearse</tr> to convey the dead to the grave. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; c16]</itype> transport in a hearse.

<p><form>purma</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>form</tr>, <tr>outline</tr>: the way s.t. looks. <number>1a</number> wooden structure used to hold wet cement in place. <number>2</number> a printed document to fill in. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2; c1]</itype> take <tr>form</tr>, <tr>shape</tr>; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Ígù lang kung mupurma sa balay,</i> I&apos;ll just form the framework of the house. <i>Mupurma (mapurma) ug maáyu ang ímung dughan ánang brá nga ímung gigámit,</i> Your breasts will get a nice shape with the bra you are wearing.

<p><form>purmal</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> behaving properly according to one&apos;s station. <i>Purmal kaáyu siyang manglihuklihuk,</i> She is very <tr>formal</tr> in her ways. <number>2</number> formal, according to ceremony. <i>Purmal kaáyu ang ílang kasal,</i> Their wedding was a very formal one. <number>3</number> formal clothing. <number>4</number> done formally, not off the record. <i>Ang purmal nga pagtiman-anay,</i> Formal signing ceremonies. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B3(1); c1]</itype> be, behaved properly according to one&apos;s station. <i>Magpurmal ka. Dì ka magpabuyag,</i> Act properly. Don&apos;t misbehave. <i>Dì ku makapurmal uban sa ákung mga gang,</i> I can&apos;t behave <tr>prim</tr> and <tr>proper</tr> when I&apos;m with my gang. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> make s.t. formal. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear formal attire. <number>3a</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> make it a party with formal attire. <number>4</number> <itype>[c16]</itype> do s.t. formally, not off the record. <form>-idad(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>formality</tr>, as a matter of form. <i>Purmalidad lang nang íyang pagpangimbitar kanátù. Dì giyud kinasingkásing,</i> He invited us only for formality&apos;s sake. He didn&apos;t really want us to go.

<p><form>purmalin, purmalína</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>formalin</tr>, k.o. <tr>disinfectant</tr> solution. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> preserve with formalin solution.

<p><form>purman</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>foreman</tr> of a group of workers. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B3(1)6]</itype> be a foreman. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> make s.o., have a foreman. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12; b(1)]</itype> have as a foreman.

<p><form>*purmidiyu</form> <form>&mdash; sa</form> <tr>by</tr> [such-and-such] means. <i>Nidilantu sila purmidiyu sa ílang kakúgi,</i> They prospered by working hard.

<p><form>purmula</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>formula</tr> for the composition of s.t. <number>2</number> formula in mathematics. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> compose s.t. by means of a formula. <i>Dì na mistil purmulahan ang paghímù sa gátas sa bátà,</i> You needn&apos;t use a formula to prepare the baby&apos;s milk. <number>2</number> solve a problem by using a formula.

<p><form>purpulyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>portfolio</tr>, a flat portable <tr>case</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> use, put in a portfolio. <i>Ipurpulyu (purpulyúha) pagdá ang mga papílis,</i> Carry the papers in a portfolio.

<p><form>pursigir</form> <xr>= <sc>PIRSIGIR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>*pursiakásu, pursikásu</form> <form>&mdash; ug, kun</form> <tr>just in case</tr>. <i>Mag-andam lang ta kay pursikásu ug muanhi siya dúna tay tagána,</i> Let&apos;s prepare extra food so that just in case he comes, we have s.t. ready.

<p><form>pursilána</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>enamelware</tr> dishes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> use enamelware dishes.

<p><form>pursilína</form> <xr>= <sc>PURSILÁNA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pursintu</form> <xr>= <sc>PURSIYINTU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pursip</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>forceps</tr> or <tr>tongs</tr> to hold s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> use forceps or tongs, get out with forceps. <i>Magpursip ku iniglimpiyu sa íyang samad,</i> I&apos;ll use tongs to clean his wound.

<p><form>pursir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>purser</tr> on a boat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> be, become a purser.

<p><form>pursíras</form> <xr>= <sc>PULSÍRAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pursisyun</form> <xr>= <sc>PRUSISIYUN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pursiyintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>per cent</tr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> give a rate of interest. <i>Pursiyintúhan ku ang íyang kwartag diyis ang búlan,</i> I&apos;ll pay him (or I will charge him) ten <tr>percent</tr> interest a month. <number>2</number> get or give a percentage commission. <i>Mupursiyintu mig singku káda hálin,</i> We get (or give) five percent commission on each sale. <number>3</number> give or get a <tr>percentage</tr> of the winnings to the owner of gambling equipment. <i>Mupursiyintu silag gamay káda daug,</i> They get (or give) a small percentage of the winning as a fee to the owner of the house. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> borrow money with interest. <i>Mamursiyintu lang ku kay wà kuy láing karimidiyúhan,</i> I&apos;ll borrow money because I have no other place to get money from.

<p><form>*pursúsu</form> <form>&mdash; nga anak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>legitimate</tr> child. <i>Tuluy ákung pursúsung anak ug upat sa gawas,</i> I have three legitimate children and four illegitimate ones.

<p><form>pursyut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fighter plane</tr>.

<p><form>purtáda</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. in the front: <tr>front</tr> of a house, <tr>cover</tr> of a magazine, front row of people, or the like. <i>Namungíngi ang purtáda sa balay sa mga bumbilyang dikulur,</i> The front of the house was covered with colored lights. <form>bálak, sugilánun nga &mdash;</form> <tr>feature</tr> poem, story. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> use as feature story, put on the cover. <i>Mupurtáda sila ning sugilanúna?</i> Will they publish this as their feature story? <i>Nagpurtáda silag babáying naghúbù,</i> They used a picture of a nude woman as cover.

<p><form>purtamunída</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>portfolio</tr>, <tr>attach</tr>é case. <number>2</number> purse. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> put, make into a portfolio.

<p><form>purtintúsu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>portending</tr> a major event. <i>Purtintúsu <pb n=808>kunu kining kumíta. Basta musubang, mugíra kunu,</i> They say that this is a portentous comet. Whenever it appears, there&apos;s going to be war.

<p><form>purtipayib</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>forty-five</tr> r.p.m. <tr>record</tr> or record player. <number>2</number> forty-five caliber <tr>pistol</tr> or revolver. <form>&mdash; arpíim</form> <xr>= <sc>PURTIPAYIB</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p><form>purtíru</form> <xr>= <sc>PULTÍRU</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>PULTA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>purtis</form> <xr>= <sc>PRUTISTANTI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>purtúna</form> it is a good thing; it is a <tr>fortunate</tr> occurrence. <i>Purtúna nga miabut ka kay gikinahanglan ta ka,</i> It is a good thing you came because I need you. <pos>n</pos> <tr>fortune</tr>, <tr>fate</tr>. <i>Ang purtúna sa táwu dílì matag-an,</i> A man&apos;s fate cannot be foretold. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> have the luck to have a certain k.o. spouse. <i>Nakapurtúna siyag dátù,</i> She had the fortune to marry a rich man.

<p><form>púru<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pure</tr>, free from adulterants or impurities. <i>Púru giyud ning tabliyáha,</i> This chocolate is pure. <number>2</number> pure of breed. <i>Púrung halsi,</i> Pure Halsey (cock). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6(1)]</itype> be pure, devoid of adulterants or all of the same kind. <i>Ug mapúru bastus ang ímung baráha,</i> If your hand is all clubs.

<p><form>púru<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PULUS<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puruhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>probability</tr> that s.t. will happen. <i>Dakù kag puruhan nga mudaug ning iliksiyúna,</i> There&apos;s a great likelihood that you&apos;ll win in this election.

<p><form>púruk</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>district</tr>, a geographical or political division made for a specific purpose.

<p><form>purúkù</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>stocky</tr> and <tr>short</tr>. <i>Purúkù na kaáyu siya sa katambuk,</i> He is very short and thickset because he is so fat. <number>2</number> s.t. low and short like a short person. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become short and thickset.

<p><form>purul</form> <pos>n</pos> short <tr>pants</tr> or <tr>drawers</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> wear, use short pants or <tr>underpants</tr>. <i>Magpurul run ang mga babáyi,</i> Women wear short pants nowadays. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make into short pants.

<p><form>purung, púrung</form> <pos>n</pos> cloth wrapped around the head like a <tr>turban</tr> or <tr>bandana</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> wear s.t. wrapped around the head. <i>Ságad sa mga sabungíru magpurung ug panyù,</i> Cockfighters usually wrap a <tr>handkerchief</tr> around their heads. <form>purungpúrung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>crown</tr> s.o. <i>Ang mayur ang nagpurungpúrung sa rayna,</i> The mayor crowned the beauty queen. <i>Si Hisus gipurungpurúngan sa mga maidlut nga mga tunuk,</i> Jesus was <tr>crowned</tr> with sharp thorns. <pos>n</pos> s.t. worn around the head like a crown. <i>Purungpúrung sa mga dáhun,</i> A wreath of leaves worn as a crown.

<p><form>purus, púrus</form> <xr>= <sc>PULUS<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puruspurus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>hurry</tr> up doing s.t. or s.o. into accomplishing s.t. <i>Anam-anamun nátù ni arun dílì ta magpuruspurus sa katapúsan,</i> If we do it little at a time, we won&apos;t be rushed at the end.

<p><form>purward<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>forward</tr> in games where there are players positioned toward the front. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); c1]</itype> play the position of forward.

<p><form>purward<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>forward</tr> to a new address. <i>Wà níla ipurward ang ákung sulat,</i> They didn&apos;t forward my letter.

<p><form>purya</form> <xr>= <sc>PUYRA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puryut</form> <xr>= <sc>PUDYUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pús<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PULUS<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pús<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> strike a <tr>pose</tr> for a picture. <i>Nagpús na bayà siya nga wà pa ang mangungúdak,</i> My, you are posing even if there is no cameraman around.

<p><form>pusà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>crush</tr> or <tr>squash</tr> s.t. soft. <i>Sabaw nga gipus-ag síli,</i> Soup into which crushed chili was added. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>break</tr> s.t. fragile. <i>Akuy mipusà sa plátu,</i> I broke the plate. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6c1]</itype> <tr>hatch</tr> an egg. <i>Ang himungáan mauy mipusà sa mga itlug sa bíbi,</i> The hen hatched the duck&apos;s eggs. <number>3a</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> for eggs to break in the hen&apos;s womb. <i>Napus-an (hipus-an) nang manuk nga nagbasà ang lubut,</i> That hen that has a wet bottom had an egg break in its womb. <pos>a</pos> <tr>broken</tr>, esp. eggs.

<p><form>pusak, púsak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; a]</itype> <tr>break</tr> s.t. hard. <i>Ikaw bay nagpusak sa pinggan<corr sic=",">?</corr></i> Were you the one who broke the plate into pieces? <i>Másu ang ipusak sa simintung salug,</i> Use a hammer to break up the cement flooring. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APN]</itype> <number>1</number> come in <tr>abundance</tr>. <i>Muhimúsak (muhimusak) na gánì ang ulan, malígù ku,</i> If the rain falls in torrents I&apos;ll bathe in it. <i>Naghimusak ang búnga sa mga mangga run,</i> Mangoes are <tr>plentiful</tr> now. <number>2</number> for flowers or young fruit to come out. <i>Ígù lang nakahimusak ang púsù sa mais dihang gidagsángan sa mga dúlun,</i> No sooner had ears of corn <tr>developed</tr>, when the locusts descended on them. <pos>a</pos> being <tr>crowded</tr>, <tr>numerous</tr>. <i>Himusak sa táwu ang lungsud sa baryu,</i> The town has more people in it than the village.

<p><form>pusamánu</form> <xr>= <sc>PASAMÁNU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púsas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>handcuffs</tr>, <tr>shackles</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>handcuff</tr> or <tr>shackle</tr>. <i>Gipusásan sa pulis ang mga binilanggù,</i> The policeman put handcuffs (shackles) on the prisoners.

<p><form>pusaw</form> <pos>n</pos> bud of a coconut tree from which the cluster develops. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; cN]</itype> for coconuts to develop. <i>Mipusaw (namusaw, gipusawan) na ang lubi,</i> The coconut tree is developing buds now. <i>Ang primírung ipusaw (ipamusaw) ánang lubíha way búngang mahímù,</i> The first bud that coconut tree will bring forth will not develop fruit.

<pb n=809>

<p><form>pus-aw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> for a color to <tr>fade</tr>. <i>Mipus-aw (napus-aw) ang sinínà sa dúgay nga uran,</i> The dress faded after long use. <number>2</number> for liquids to become <tr>clear</tr>, less murky. <i>Mupus-aw ang túbig kun papundúhun,</i> Water will become clear if you let the mud settle. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>faded</tr> in color. <number>2</number> <tr>light-colored</tr>. <i>Angayan ka sa pus-aw ug kulur nga sinínà,</i> You look becoming in a light-colored dress.

<p><form>pusbútun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>push button</tr>, done by push <tr>button</tr>. <i>Pusbútun na ang pagpalákaw íning pabrikáha,</i> Everything is done in this factory with push buttons.

<p><form>pusdak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> let s.t. fall with a crash either by slamming it down or just dropping it if it is heavy. <i>Ákung gipusdákan ug dakung batu ang úlu sa hálas,</i> I bashed the head of the snake with a big stone. <i>Ayaw ipusdak nang usa ka sákung kamúti,</i> Don&apos;t slam that sack of sweet potatoes down. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>stamp</tr> one&apos;s feet. <i>Mamusdak na gánì nà, sukù na nà,</i> If she stamps her feet, that means she is angry.

<p><form>pusdù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; c6]</itype> put s.t. down with considerable force. <i>Ayaw ug ipusdù ang sag-ub arun dì mabuak,</i> Do not put the bamboo water container down hard or it will break. <number>2</number> <itype>[bc]</itype> <tr>invest</tr> all of a sum on s.t. <i>Gipusdù ni Tátay ang íyang ritayirmint ug yútà,</i> Father invested all of his retirement pay on a piece of land.

<p><form>pusgay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3PB12; c16]</itype> <tr>break</tr> into many pieces, <tr>shatter</tr>. <i>Napusgay ang búlig paghiantug sa yútà,</i> The coconuts broke off the stem when the whole bunch hit the ground. <i>Mapusgay na gánì ang kristal, dì na maúlì,</i> Once the glass is shattered, it can&apos;t be repaired. <i>Nagkapusgay na ang mga simintu sa dáyik,</i> The cement on the dike is slowly crumbling. <number>1a</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> for liquid to <tr>splatter</tr> against s.t. <i>Napusgay ang mga balud sa kabatuan,</i> The waves broke on the rocks. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> <tr>ruin</tr> one&apos;s reputation, good name. <i>Tabì nga makapusgay sa kadunggánan,</i> Gossip that can ruin one&apos;s reputation.

<p><form>pusgù</form> <pos>a</pos> for sacks to be filled up to the neck so that only a small bit can be gathered at the top to tie. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2; c16]</itype> for sacks to be filled up with a little part left for tying. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>hit the jackpot</tr> in business, fishing, or any endeavor. <i>Ug mupusgù ning ákung bungsud rung tingbungsud mupalit kug dikarga,</i> I&apos;ll buy a cargo truck if I hit the jackpot with my fish corral. <i>Nikalit nag kasapíang tawhána kay nakapusgù nà siya sa ismagling,</i> He got rich suddenly because he made a killing in smuggling.

<p><form>pusibilidad</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>possibility</tr>. <i>Dakù ang pusibilidad nga mahagbung ku,</i> There is a great possibility that I will fail.

<p><form>pusibli</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>possibly</tr> happening. <i>Pusibli kaáyu nga mitan-aw tu sa sini,</i> It&apos;s very <tr>possible</tr> that she went to the show. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> may possibly happen. <i>Mapusibli nga milakaw sila,</i> It may be possible that they went out. <i>Pusiblíhan ku nga siya mauy mikúhà sa kwarta,</i> To me it&apos;s possible that she stole the money.

<p><form>pusil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>firearm</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>shoot</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23; a1c]</itype> shoot a question or an answer in a classroom (colloquial). <i>Ug pusilun si Nílu ug pangutána mupusil man sag bawus,</i> If a question is fired at Nilo, he fires back an answer. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>masturbate</tr> (slang). <form>(&larr;)</form> <itype>[A1]</itype> have a question and answer session in a class (colloquial). <i>Magpúsil run, unyà wà ra ba ku katuun,</i> There will be a question and answer session in class now, and I have not studied my lesson. <pos>n</pos> question and answer session in class. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2C12; b6(1)]</itype> go <tr>hunting</tr> with firearms. <i>Makigpamusil siya nákug langgam,</i> He wants me to go hunting birds with him. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>shoot</tr> as a character trait. <i>Ayawg pangingkwintru níya kay mamusil,</i> Don&apos;t tangle with him because he shoots. <form>pusilpúsil, Culu-</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> toy <tr>gun</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>spear</tr>, powered by a rubber sling, the general form of which resembles a rifle. <number>3</number> anything shaped like a rifle. <i>Pulupúsil (pusilpúsil) nga laytir,</i> A pistol-shaped lighter. <form>di-</form> <pos>n</pos> armed with a gun. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> a cut in men&apos;s trousers which is tight on the legs (like a rifle). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> wear, make trousers in this style.

<p><form>púsing</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> strike a <tr>pose</tr>, pose to have one&apos;s picture taken. <i>Mupúsing giyud nang bayhána ug náay láking mutan-aw,</i> That woman will strike a pose whenever there&apos;s a man looking at her. <pos>n</pos> action of striking a pose.

<p><form>pusísit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S]</itype> for watery feces to jet out in a thin stream continuously. <i>Mupusísit ang tái basta mag-ígit,</i> If one has loose bowel movements, his feces jet out in a thin, continuous stream.

<p><form>pusisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>position</tr>, the manner in which s.t. is placed. <i>Hiwì ang pusisiyun sa ritrátu,</i> The photograph has been pasted in crooked. <number>2</number> <tr>position</tr> in which one is employed. <i>Taas siyag pusisiyun ánang kumpanyáha,</i> He has a high <tr>position</tr> in that company. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> move into position. <i>Magpusisiyun na gánì ang mga bátà sa ílang sáyaw, isúgud dáyun ang sunáta,</i> When the children are in position for their dance, start the music. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get a position in a firm.

<pb n=810>

<p><form>pusit</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small <tr>squid</tr>.

<p><form>pusitib</form> <xr>= <sc>PASITIB</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pusitíbu</form> <pos>n</pos> positive <tr>pole</tr> of batteries.

<p><form>pusiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fusion</tr> of two political groups. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> for two political groups to form a fusion.

<p><form>puskay</form> <xr>= <sc>PUSGAY</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pusmastir</form> <xr>= <sc>PUSTMASTIR</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pusngà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P]</itype> <tr>gasp</tr> for breath. <i>Mipusngà siya sa dihang naigù sa kutukutu,</i> She gasped for breath when she was hit in the pit of the stomach. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>squirt</tr> liquid out through a small opening. <i>Pagbantay mu kay mupusngà (mamusngà) nà rung núkus ug átà,</i> Watch out! The squid will squirt ink at you. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> <tr>gasp</tr> for breath frantically.

<p><form>puspas</form> <pos>n</pos> dish composed of rice porridge together with chicken and optionally other ingredients. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> have, make <ix>puspas</ix>.

<p><form>puspun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> <tr>postpone</tr>, <tr>put off</tr> until later. <i>Ayaw na ipuspun (puspúna) ang kasal,</i> Don&apos;t postpone the wedding further.

<p><form>puspuru</form> <pos>n</pos> box of <tr>matches</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> use, make matches. <form>bilug, bílug, gúngì, palítu sa &mdash;</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>matchstick</tr>.

<p><form>puspus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; b(1)]</itype> <tr>strike</tr> hard with s.t. stiff and long. <i>Puspúsan ku siyag alhu,</i> I&apos;ll beat him with a pestle. <number>2</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> be dashed onto s.t. <i>Giísa ang sakayan sa balud ug napuspus sa batu,</i> The boat was lifted by a wave and <tr>dashed</tr> onto the rocks. <number>2a</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <tr>fall</tr> heavily. <i>Nadalispang siyas pálut ságing ug napuspus sa asíras,</i> He slipped on a banana peel and fell to the sidewalk with all his force. <number>3</number> <itype>[ABN; a12]</itype> for leaves to be violently <tr>torn</tr> to shreds; cause them to be so. <i>Mipuspus (namuspus) ang mga dáhun human sa bagyu,</i> The leaves were torn to shreds after the typhoon. <number>4</number> <itype>[B2N]</itype> for leaves to <tr>wither</tr> and fall, leaving only the stalk or trunk. <i>Mupuspus (mamuspus) ang dáhun sa gábi basta magúlang na,</i> The leaves of taro wither when the plant matures. <pos>n</pos> club, staff, stick, and the like.

<p><form>puspuygu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>match</tr> (word play on <ix>puspuru</ix> and <ix>puygu</ix>&mdash;humorous).

<p><form>pusta</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bet</tr>, <tr>wager</tr>. <i>Pilay ímung pusta?</i> How much do you bet? <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; ku sa</formx> think [so-and-so] is likely to happen. <i>Pusta ku sa muulan,</i> I bet it&apos;s going to rain. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> <tr>bet</tr>. <i>Kabáyung ákung gipustáan (gipustáhan),</i> The horse I betted on. <i>Pilay ímung ipusta?</i> How much will you bet? <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> think s.t. is likely to happen. <form>&mdash; dirikta</form> direct bet. <form>-da</form> <xr>= <sc>PUSTA</sc>.</xr> <form>ig-r-, ig-l-</form> <pos>n</pos> money to bet.

<p><form>pustal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>postal</tr>. <form>&mdash; aydi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>identification</tr> card for a post office. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> issue a postal ID. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get a postal ID. <form>&mdash; kard</form> <tr>post card</tr>. <form>híru <corr sic="->">&mdash;?</corr></form> <tr>money order</tr>.

<p><form>pusti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>post</tr>. <i>Pusti sa iliktrisidad,</i> Electric light post. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put up, make into, use a post.

<p><form>pustir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>poster</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> make, put up posters.

<p><form>pustísu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>false teeth</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make false teeth. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> fit with false teeth. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126; c16]</itype> be false teeth. <i>Ug mapustísu gánì ang ímung ngípun, lisud nang ikáun,</i> It is hard to eat with false teeth.

<p><form>pustmastir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>postmaster</tr>, person in charge of a post office. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> become postmaster.

<p><form>pustri<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. served for <tr>dessert</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> have, make s.t. for dessert.

<p><form>pustri<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>electric light</tr>, <tr>telephone post</tr>.

<p><form>pust-úpis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>post office</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make, install a post office.

<p><form>pustúra</form> <pos>n</pos> the way s.o. looks all <tr>dressed up</tr>. <i>Nindut tag pustúra run. Mamisíta ka?</i> You are all dressed up. Going s.w.? <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> get all dressed up. <i>Mamustúra ka gánì, magwápa kag samut,</i> If you <tr>dress up</tr>, you&apos;ll look more beautiful. <pos>n</pos> way of carrying oneself. <i>Mu ra sa inahan ang pamustúra ánang bayhána,</i> That girl has her mother&apos;s <tr>bearing</tr>. <form>-wu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>chic</tr> and smart-looking. <i>Pusturáwu kaáyu ka sa ímung hirdu,</i> You look very chic with your hairdo. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> look <tr>smart</tr>, chic. <i>Mamusturáwu ang balayg pintálan,</i> The house will look <tr>nice</tr> when it is all painted.

<p><form>púsu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>artesian well</tr>, naturally flowing or operated with a pump. <number>2</number> hand <tr>pump</tr> used to draw water from under the ground. &mdash; <form>artisyánu</form> <xr>= <sc>PÚSU</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> construct an artesian well.

<p><form>púsù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>banana blossom</tr> including the petals. <number>2</number> <tr>ear of corn</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2N; b(1)]</itype> for corn to have ears or bananas to develop their blossoms. <i>Daling mamúsù (mupúsù) ang mais nga masurku,</i> Corn will quickly bear ears if the soil around it has been dug up. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> rice cooked in woven coconut leaves formed like a banana blossom. <number>2</number> woman&apos;s <tr>breast</tr> (euphemism). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make, have rice of this type. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> gather, get banana blossoms for food. <form>pusùpúsù sa bitíis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>biceps</tr> or the <tr>muscles</tr> of the lower legs. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> by the ears. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c16]</itype> count, share corn by the ears. <form>-in-(&rarr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> large ears of corn. <i>Ipanglain ang mga pinusù sa mga buging,</i> Separate the large ears of corn from the small ears.

<p><form>púsud</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>navel</tr>. <number>2</number> center point of s.t. <i>Púsud <pb n=811>sa syudad,</i> The center of the city. <number>3</number> the filament-like structure found at the tip of bananas. <form>hiN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> cut the umbilical cord. <pos>n</pos> instrument for cutting the umbilical cord. <form>kinapusuran</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>centermost</tr> portion. <i>Didtu siya dágan sa kinapusuran sa lasang,</i> She ran deep into the <tr>innermost</tr> part of the forest. <number>2</number> s.t. at the very <tr>heart</tr>. <number>3</number> <tr>core</tr>, <tr>innermost</tr>; <tr>heart</tr> of the thing. <i>Abtun giyud íning tambála ang kinapusuran sa sakit,</i> This medicine will reach down to the heart of the pain.

<p><form>pus-un</form> <pos>n</pos> the outside region of the body in the front, just below the stomach, and by extension, the part underneath. <i>Musakit ang pus-un ug dúgay tang walà kaihì,</i> Your lower stomach hurts if you go long without urinating. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> have a prominent belly. <form>pus-únun</form> <pos>a</pos> having a prominent belly. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to have a prominent belly.

<p><form>púsung</form> <pos>a</pos> a person who is good in putting up a front of innocence when committing mischief, so called from the character <ix>Huwan Púsung</ix> of folk tales who is always getting the better of people in high places. <i>Púsung kaáyu siya ug hitsúra mu rag dílì mauy nagtágù sa ákung sapátus,</i> He looks innocent, as if he did not hide my shoes. <form>papusungpúsung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> pretend to be innocent. <i>Nagpapusungpúsung siya, mu ra ug walà ku makakità sa íyang gibúhat,</i> He is pretending to be innocent as though I had not seen what he did.

<p><form>pus-úpis</form> <xr>= <sc>PUST-ÚPIS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pusut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b26]</itype> for liquid to <tr>spurt</tr> out. <i>Mipusut ang dugù sa ákung tudlù nga naputul,</i> Blood spurted out from the cut in my finger. <form>(&larr;), pusutpusut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; c16]</itype> come in rapid succession, come thick and fast. <i>Mipusutpusut ang mga pangutána sa abugádu,</i> The lawyer fired off his questions in rapid succession. <i>Nagpusutpusut lang ang íyang anak,</i> Her children came one after another in rapid succession.

<p><form>put</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bribe</tr> (slang). <i>Dílì sila mutrabáhu sa mga lún kun walay put,</i> They won&apos;t act on the loan application unless they are given a bribe. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; c]</itype> <tr>bribe</tr>.

<p><form>pút</form> <xr>= <sc>PÚLUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púta<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>whore</tr> (coarse). <number>2</number> <tr>curse</tr> word to express anger, disgust. <i>Púta, ngánung aku pa ang nadisgrasya,</i> <tr>Damn</tr>! Why did it have to be me that had the accident! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become a whore, <tr>prostitute</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b6]</itype> engage in prostitution. <form>íhu di-</form> <tr>son of a bitch</tr>; reference to s.o. whom one wishes to curse or a curse expressing anger (coarse).

<p><form>púta<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> <tr>shatter</tr>, <tr>crush</tr> s.t. to bits. <i>Krásir ray makapúta niánang mga dagkung batu,</i> Only a stone crusher can crush those large rocks. <i>Way mapunit sa butilya kay napúta giyug maáyu,</i> No one can pick up that bottle because it was smashed to smithereens.

<p><form>*putablis</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>AGWAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pútad</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>squat</tr> because of short legs. <i>Ang pútad níyang payag,</i> His shack, elevated only slightly above the ground. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be squat. <i>Ngánu kahang napútad man ang anak nga tag-as man ang ginikánan?</i> I wonder why the child is squat when the parents are tall.

<p><form>putáhi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a dish consisting of <tr>meat</tr> as a main ingredient. <number>2</number> especial <tr>treat</tr>, anything that gives great or unusual pleasure. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> have, eat a meat dish.

<p><form>putak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> <number>1</number> for chickens to keep squawking, as when laying eggs. <i>Ayaw ug pakurati ang mungáan kay muputak,</i> Don&apos;t frighten the hen because it will <tr>squawk</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>complain</tr>, talk, or <tr>protest</tr> loudly. <i>Muputak dáyun siya basta maalkansi sa báhin,</i> She complains loudly right away if she doesn&apos;t get her share. <number>3</number> <tr>nag</tr>, <tr>scold</tr> by babbling. <i>Milakaw dáyun ang bána dihang giputakan na siya sa íyang asáwa,</i> The husband went out immediately when his wife started to nag him. <number>4</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> talk or <tr>butt in</tr> in a conversation which is not one&apos;s business. <i>Muputak ka man lang bísag wà kay lábut,</i> Why do you butt in when I&apos;m not talking to you?

<p><form>putaputa</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> be easily torn or <tr>tattered</tr> from age or decay. <i>Naputaputa na ang mga papílis sa kaban,</i> The papers in the trunk are all <tr>brittle</tr> with age. <number>2</number> <itype>[c16]</itype> <tr>tear</tr> paper or cloth into pieces.

<p><form>putbul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>soccer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> kick s.o. out. <i>Putbúlun ka dinhi ug magtinapulan ka,</i> You will be kicked out if you are lazy in your work.

<p><form>puthaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>iron</tr>, <tr>steel</tr>. <i>Taytáyang puthaw,</i> A steel bridge. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c16]</itype> make s.t. of iron or steel.

<p><form>púti</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>break off</tr>, but not with a snap. <i>Kinsay nagpúti sa gítung sa sundang?</i> Who broke the tongue of the knife? <i>Napúti ang dágum sa makina,</i> The needle of the sewing machine broke. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB126; ab4]</itype> <tr>abort</tr> a fetus. <i>Arun dì mainahan ílang putíhun ang ílang giburus,</i> To escape mother-*hood they abort the life they are carrying in the womb. <i>Bag-u nà siyang naputíhan,</i> She just had a <tr>miscarriage</tr>. <pos>n</pos> aborted fetus. <i>Gilábay sa basúra ang púti,</i> They threw the fetus into the garbage.

<p><form>putì</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>white</tr>. <number>1a</number> in plant description, green varieties of plants that have green varieties <pb n=812>and red or brown varieties. <i>Síling putì,</i> Green peppers. <i>Mandalúsang putì,</i> The <ix>mandalúsa</ix> with green leaves (as opposed to the species with red leaves). <number>2</number> white race. <i>Ságad sa mga putì taas ug ilung,</i> Most white people have long noses. <form>&mdash; pay agipu, lubut sa kúlun, urasiyun</form> dark skinned (lit. a firebrand, the bottom of a kettle, the evening prayers [said after dark] are whiter). <i>Putì pay agipu ning bána mu,</i> Your husband is darker than the tip of a firebrand. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> white vaginal discharge. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>ISPÍHU</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB; b6]</itype> be, become white, cause s.t. to become so. <i>Klúruks ang muputì (mupaputì) sa ímung sinínà,</i> Chlorox will make your dress white. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> wear s.t. white. <i>Magputì ang mga nars,</i> Nurses wear white. <number>3</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> tell s.o. frankly of his anger or hurt feelings toward him. <i>Giputian (gipaputian) ku siyag sulti nga naglágut ku sa íyang gibúhat,</i> I had it out with her because I was angry at what she did. <form>&mdash; ug itlug, lisik</form> <pos>a</pos> cowardly. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2456]</itype> <tr>chicken out</tr>. <i>Miputì ang itlug ni Krustsib dihang naninuud si Kinidi,</i> Khrushchev chickened out when Kennedy showed that he meant business. <form>&mdash; ang kiting, tiil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B246]</itype> <tr>run away</tr> in fright. <i>Miputì ang íyang tiil pagkakità níya sa íyang kuntra,</i> He turned tail when he saw his adversary. <form>&mdash; nga tábil</form> <tr>movies</tr>. <i>Bitúun sa puting tábil,</i> Movie star (lit. star of the white screen). <form>-anay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c3]</itype> have it out with s.o. <form>-an(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> variety of <tr>coconut</tr> and <tr>pineapple</tr> more orange in color than the ordinary. <form>-in-(&larr;)</form> long, slender, sharp <tr>sword</tr>. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>whiteness</tr>. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>whitish</tr>, <tr>fair-skinned</tr>.

<p><form>putik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rectum</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c16]</itype> put, insert s.t. into the rectum. <i>Putika (iputik) ang tirmumitru pagbutang,</i> Insert the thermometer into the rectum.

<p><form>putikar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>mortgage</tr> one&apos;s property as security, usually to a bank. <i>Miputikar mig yútà sa bangku nga gipalit ug láing yútà,</i> We mortgaged a piece of land to the bank to buy another lot. <form>putikádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>mortgaged</tr>, esp. to a bank.

<p><form>púting</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>footing</tr>, the cement base in which a post is set. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make the footing of a post.

<p><form>pútis</form> <xr>= <sc>PULAYNAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>putítu tri</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>potato tree</tr>, an ornamental shade tree bearing violet inflorescences with yellow centers: <bio>Solanum macranthum</bio>.

<p><form>putlì</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pure</tr>, free from sin or guilt. <i>Putlì kaáyug kasingkásing ning bayhána,</i> This woman is pure-hearted. <number>2</number> <tr>immaculate</tr>, <tr>chaste</tr>. <form>ka-</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>purity</tr>, <tr>virginity</tr>. <i>Íyang gimahal ang íyang kaputlì,</i> She treasures her chastity.

<p><form>putput<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> piece of <tr>wood</tr> or <tr>stick</tr> which has been cut from a larger piece. <number>2</number> person of no consequence in society (just as a <ix>putput</ix> is a piece of wood not good for anything except fuel). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>cut</tr> into pieces, esp. for firewood. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> be a person of no consequence. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> <tr>hit</tr> with a stick. <i>Putputun tikaw run,</i> I&apos;ll hit you with a stick.

<p><form>putput<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PALUTPUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>putput<sub>3</sub></form> euphemism for <sc>PÚTA<sub>1</sub></sc>.

<p><form>putris</form> mild cuss word, euphemism for <ix>púta<sub>1</sub></ix>. <i>Ay, putris! Nasayup na sad ku,</i> Darn! I made a mistake again.

<p><form>putru</form> <pos>n</pos> adolescent <tr>colt</tr>. <i>Muúlag na ning kabayúa ánang bayi kay putru na,</i> This horse will cover that female because it is an adolescent now.&dagger;

<p><form>putsíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> dish of stewed beef and vegetables. <number>2</number> the fleshy part of the leg between the knee and the ankle of a cow. <i>Linat-ang putsíru ang sud-an nátù karun,</i> We have stewed beef shanks for dinner today. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> prepare putsíru.

<p><form>pútu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cake</tr> made of steamed starches, coconut, and other optional ingredients. <form>&mdash; nga balanghuy</form> <ix>pútu</ix> made from shredded cassava. <form>&mdash; nga binangkung</form> <ix>pútu</ix> made from cassava flour. <form>&mdash; kutsinta</form> <ix>pútu</ix> made from ground rice mixed with brown sugar. <form>&mdash; máya</form> <ix>pútu</ix> made from <ix>pilit</ix> rice and coconut extract. <form>&mdash; nga pinalutaw</form> steamed rice cake. <form>&mdash; sulut</form> <ix>pútu</ix> made from cassava flour with water or milk and fried. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make <ix>pútu</ix>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> engage in the business of selling <ix>pútu</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> go s.w. to eat <ix>pútu</ix>. <pos>n</pos> business of selling <ix>pútu</ix>.

<p><form>pútu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bankrupt</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> be, become bankrupt. <i>Putúhun man ta ánang ímung bisyu,</i> Your vices will send us to the poor-*house.

<p><form>pútù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>break</tr>, <tr>cut</tr> into lengths. <i>Putúun ku ning káhuy pára sa halígi,</i> I&apos;ll cut this timber into lengths for the posts. <pos>n</pos> a <tr>length</tr> of s.t. cut from a bigger or longer piece.

<p><form>putud</form> <xr>= <sc>PUTUL</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>putugrapiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>photographer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; c16]</itype> be, become a photographer.

<p><form>putugrapu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>photograph</tr>.

<p><form>putuk</form> <pos>n</pos> small arms, esp. a handgun (slang).

<p><form>pútuk</form> <xr>= <sc>TÚTUK<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>put-uk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b8]</itype> swallow air or jump involuntarily from surprise. <i>Naput-uk ang ákung buut sa íyang gisulti,</i> I was dumb-*founded with what she said. <i>Hiput-ukan (himut-ukan) ang maistra sa kalit nga pagbisíta sa supirbisur,</i> The teacher was taken aback <pb n=813>by the unexpected visit of her supervisor. <i>Nahimut-ukan aku sa íyang pirsunal nga pangutána,</i> I was <tr>dumbstruck</tr> by his personal question.

<p><form>putukputuk</form> <pos>n</pos> rapid beating or <tr>throbbing</tr> of the heart. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B456]</itype> for the heart to throb. <i>Nagputukputuk ang íyang dughan sa kalípay,</i> Her heart was throbbing with joy.

<p><form>putul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>sever</tr> with a bladed instrument or by snapping. <i>Dì makaputul ang ákung ngípun sa hílu,</i> My teeth can&apos;t break the thread. <i>Putlag kaduha arun matulu ka pútù,</i> Cut it twice to make three pieces. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> cut down. <i>Kinsay nagputul sa mangga?</i> Who cut the mango tree down? <number>1b</number> <itype>[A; b7]</itype> <tr>cut</tr> s.t. out of s.t. <i>Ákung giputlan ang pálu kay taas ra,</i> I cut a length from the mast because it was too long. <number>1c</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cut s.t. out of s.t. <i>Giputul sa sinsur ang mga báhing law-ay,</i> The censors cut out the lewd parts. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>break</tr> a connection. <i>Giputlan mig sugà,</i> Our electricity was cut off. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12; a]</itype> <tr>cut</tr> s.t. short. <i>Naputul ang ámung isturya pag-abut sa mga bisíta,</i> Our conversation was cut short by the arrival of the visitors. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A12; a1]</itype> <tr>put an end to</tr> s.t. <i>Putlun ku ang ímung ngil-ad nga batásan,</i> I&apos;ll <tr>put a stop to</tr> your bad manners. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. cut off from s.t. or s.t. which had s.t. cut off of it. <i>Putul ug íkug ang irù,</i> The dog has a <tr>stubbed</tr> tail. <number>2</number> the other one of two things which had been cut from one piece. <i>Háin man ang putul ári?</i> Where is the other piece of this stick that had been cut in two? <form>&mdash; sa adlaw</form> half a day. <form>&mdash; sa píkas</form> a <tr>quarter</tr>. <number>3</number> s.t. said in cutting in. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c16]</itype> <tr>divide</tr> s.t. into, between two. <i>Magpútul ta ánang isdà,</i> Let us divide that fish between us. <pos>n</pos> <form>&mdash; ug tinái</form> <tr>sibling</tr>. <i>Pútul mu ug tinái, búsà ayaw mu pag-áway,</i> You are sisters, so don&apos;t quarrel. <form>putulputul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>cut</tr> into small pieces. <form>putulpútul</form> <corr><pos>v</pos> </corr><itype>[B16]</itype> be intermittently discontinuous. <pos>a</pos> <tr>intermittent</tr>, <tr>discontinuous</tr>. <i>Putulpútul man tung salída nga sikan ran,</i> The second-run movie kept being interrupted. <form>ig-(&larr;) ug tinái</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>relative</tr>. <i>Igpútul ku siya ug tinái,</i> She is my relative. <form>ka-, ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>n</pos> the other half of a piece cut off.

<p><form>putung</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>quick-tempered</tr>, immediately resorting to violence when provoked. <number>2</number> <formx><r>[<ix>verb</ix>]</r> lang ug &mdash;</formx> do s.t. in a rage without the slightest thought of changing one&apos;s mind. <i>Kun mulagiw ka, kágiw lámang ug putung, kay kun mubálik ka patyun ta ka,</i> If you run away, run away and don&apos;t ever think of coming back, for if you do, I will kill you.

<p><form>pútung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> tie s.t. around the head. <i>Nagpútung ug tualya ang draybir,</i> The driver tied a towel around his head. <i>Gipútung sa babáyi ang íyang buhuk,</i> The woman knotted her hair at the top of her head. <form>(&rarr;)</form> s.t. worn wrapped around the head. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make s.t. into a <tr>headband</tr>, <tr>bandana</tr>, or the like. <form>-in-</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. tied around the head.

<p><form>put-ung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> <tr>pile</tr> things up. <i>Put-únga ang mga mangga sigun sa ílang gidak-un,</i> Pile the mangoes into heaps according to their size. <number>2</number> <itype>[C; b6]</itype> <tr>gather</tr> together in a group. <i>Dì ta makaput-ung dinhi sa daplin sa dálan kay abug kaáyu,</i> We can&apos;t gather here at the side of the road because it is too dusty.

<p><form>putuputu</form> <pos>n</pos> the smallest pieces of <tr>banana</tr> located at the tip of the bunch, usually the last two or three hands. <pos>a</pos> persons that are short in height and small in build (humorous colloquial).

<p><form>putus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>wrapper</tr>. <number>1a</number> membranous <tr>covering</tr> of organs or parts of organs in the body of animals. <number>2</number> small <tr>bundle</tr>, <tr>package</tr>. <number>3</number> male genitalia (humorous). <i>Mihulma nang putus mu ánang hugut nímung karsúnis,</i> Your pants are so tight they show your genitals. <number>4</number> an infant born wrapped inside a thin membranous covering which must be pinched open to save the infant from suffocating. A baby born in this manner is said to be likely to grow into a strong and quick-tempered adult. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>wrap</tr> s.t. <i>Unsa may ímung gipustan (giputus) sa kík?</i> What did you use to wrap the cake? <number>2</number> <itype>[B1245; c1]</itype> be full of or <tr>covered</tr> with. <i>Naputus ang bátà sa núka,</i> The child is covered with sores. <i>Pustun tikag haluk,</i> I will <tr>smother</tr> you with kisses. <form>paN-</form> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>pack</tr> up for a journey. <i>Mamutus na ku pára sa byáhi,</i> I&apos;ll pack up for the trip.

<p><form>putust&acaron;t</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>photostat</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make a photostatic copy.

<p><form>putut</form> <pos>a</pos> full-grown person that is <tr>short</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become a short person. <i>Naputut ku kay putut man ang ákung nánay,</i> I am short because my mother was short. <form>(&larr;), ka-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be short (said in derision).

<p><form>pútut<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a small <tr>coconut</tr>. <i>Maáyu pay maglána kag pútut,</i> It is about as easy as extracting coconut oil from the small fruit (i.e. impossible). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2N; b(1)]</itype> bearing forth small coconuts. <i>Mipútut (namútut) na ang lubi. Dì na madúgay may butung,</i> The coconut tree has nuts. We&apos;ll have young coconut to eat soon. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for flowers to form <tr>buds</tr>. <i>Musúgud nag pangalimyun ug mupútut (mamútut) na ang búwak,</i> A flower begins to smell sweet when it begins to form buds. <pb n=814><form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> young, inexperienced, and uninitiated (literary). <i>Sa putútung salabútan,</i> In the young, innocent mind.

<p><form>pútut<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>BANTUT</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr> <form>-un</form> <xr>= <sc>BANTUTUN</sc>, <i>a1.</i></xr>

<p><form>putyúkan</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. <tr>bee</tr> forming hives hanging from the branches of trees, fiercer than the ligwan. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>slim-waisted</tr> like a wasp.

<p><form>púu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>exterminate</tr> all things of a certain kind. <i>Ang iring ray nagpúu sa mga ilagà ning baláya,</i> It was the cat that annihilated the rats in this house. <i>Nagkapuu na ang tamaraw,</i> The tamaraw is becoming <tr>extinct</tr>. <i>Puúhan ang syudad sa mga buguy,</i> They will <tr>get rid of</tr> the thugs in the city. <number>2</number> get rid of completely. <i>Ngil-ad nga batásan nga ángay puhúun (puúhun),</i> Bad manners that should be gotten rid of. <number>3</number> <tr>ruin</tr> a business. <i>Ang ímung pagkasugarul mau ray makapúu sa ímung nigusyu,</i> Your gambling is enough to ruin your business. <form>puuhun nga apilyídu</form> a family name that is disappearing (because of lack of males).

<p><form>púuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; c16]</itype> <tr>cut</tr> s.t. short close to the base. <i>Ang mga úlud nagpúuk ug putul sa mga turuk nga pugas mais,</i> The worms cut the corn sprouts right down to the ground. <number>2</number> <itype>[AP2B2SN; c1P]</itype> drive s.t. so deep that the end is level. <i>Akuy mupúuk (mupapúuk) ánang lansánga,</i> I&apos;ll <tr>drive</tr> that nail all the way in. <i>Lisud pag-ibut sa nagpuuk nga lansang,</i> It is difficult to pull out a nail that is <tr>driven</tr> all the way in. <i>Ákung puúkun (papuúkun, ipapúuk, ipúuk) ang gasulinadur arun kusug ang dágan,</i> I&apos;ll push the gas pedal to the floor to go full speed. <number>3</number> <itype>[BN]</itype> for the nits to be right at the roots of the hair. <pos>a</pos> <tr>cut</tr> close to the base, <tr>driven</tr> down even with the base. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>PÚUK</sc>, <i>a</i>.</xr> <number>2</number> for nits to be located right in the scalp at the base of the hair. <i>Wà ka katli nga puuk man kaáyu ning ímung mga lusà?</i> Isn&apos;t it itchy? Your nits are right in your scalp. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>tie</tr>, hold a tethered animal close to the attachment. <i>Nagpuuk ku sa kábaw sa káhuy arun dì siya makaabut pagkáun sa mga gagmayng lubi,</i> I&apos;m tying the carabao close to the tree so that it can&apos;t reach the small coconut plants. <i>Ákung puk-an ang irù inig súd ninyu,</i> I&apos;ll hold the dog close to me when you enter the house.

<p><form>puul</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>boring</tr>, <tr>wearying</tr> by being <tr>dull</tr> and <tr>uninteresting</tr>. <i>Puul kaáyu ning kinabúhì ug wà kay lingawlingaw,</i> Life is very boring if you have no leisure. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12C3; b4(1)]</itype> be, become boring. <i>Nagkapuul na man ning trabahúa,</i> This work is becoming boring. <i>Nagpúul na sila kay nag-áway na man,</i> They must be sick of each other because they are already quarrelling. <i>Wà siya pul-i ug tan-aw sa íyang katahum,</i> He never got <tr>tired</tr> looking at her beauty. <form>pul-ánun</form> <pos>a</pos> easily <tr>bored</tr>.

<p><form>púung</form> <xr>= <sc>PUL-UNG</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>airless</tr>, lacking fresh air. <i>Púut ning kwartúha kay usa ray bintánà,</i> This room lacks air because it has only one window. <number>2</number> for gases or some other congesting thing to be s.w. or for a place to be <tr>congested</tr> with s.t. pent up in it. <i>Púut kaáyu ang asu sa kusína (or Púut sa asu ang kusína),</i> The kitchen is full of smoke. <i>Púut kaáyu ning ákung ilung sa sip-un,</i> My nose is congested with mucus. <number>3</number> for an emotion to be <tr>pent up</tr> s.w. or for the breast to have an emotion pent up in it. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B3]</itype> be, become <tr>airless</tr> or having s.t. <tr>pent up</tr> in it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; c16]</itype> be, become pent up. <i>Kaguul nga nagpúut sa ákung dughan,</i> Sorrows pent up in my breast. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> put a dog&apos;s nose into a container filled with burning feathers in order to make it come to hate the smell of chickens. <i>Puútun ku ning irúa arun dì na manukub ug manuk,</i> I will asphyxiate this dog with burning chicken feathers so it won&apos;t prey on chickens.

<p><form>puwa-</form> <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>PULA-</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puwak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tonsure</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> tonsure s.o.

<p><form>puwi</form> sound used to represent spitting, said as a gesture of scorn. <i>Puwi, nagpauluininglis pa nákù ag dakug bàbà arun mahibalu ang uban nga antígu siya,</i> Phooey, the big mouth has to go speaking English just to show everybody that he knows how.

<p><form>puwi-</form> <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>PWI-</sc></xr> <ix>and</ix> <xr><sc>PUY-</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púwin, púwint</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>point</tr> in a score. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23P; a2]</itype> score a point in a game. <i>Matabla silag mupúwint ang nagpawul syát,</i> They will be <corr>in </corr>a tie if they make a point with this foul shot. <i>Wà pa makapúwint ang ámung magdudulà,</i> Our players have not scored a point.

<p><form>puwis</form> <xr>= <sc>PWÍS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puwit</form> <xr>= <sc>PUYIT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puwíta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>poet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become a poet.

<p><form>puya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>infant</tr>, esp. a newly born <tr>baby</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>child</tr>, <tr>offspring</tr>. <i>Wà siyay natígum sa íyang kinitáan kay daghan siyag puya nga buhiun,</i> He has not saved anything because he has so many <tr>children</tr>.

<p><form>puyasut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>weak</tr>, <tr>thin</tr>. <i>Puyasut ug tíngug,</i> <tr>Weak-voiced</tr>. <i>Puyasut ug láwas,</i> <tr>Thin-bodied</tr>. <number>2</number> for seeds, fruits to be <tr>stunted</tr> and lacking fullness. <number>2a</number> for a child to be thin and <tr>stunted</tr> in growth from malnutrition. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> <number>1</number> be, become weak and thin. <i>Nagpuyasut man ang ímung mga buktun,</i> Your arms <pb n=815>are mighty thin. <number>2</number> come out thin and stunted. <i>Nagpuyasut ang búnga sa ságing kay walà ulana,</i> The bananas are undersized because they didn&apos;t get enough rain.

<p><form>púyat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a]</itype> <tr>flatten</tr> s.t. soft into a soft mass. <i>Puyátan ta kag kamúti ipakáun sa bátà,</i> I&apos;ll <tr>squash</tr> cooked sweet potatoes for you to feed the child. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> bananas that are <tr>thin</tr> and lacking in flesh from improper development, and by extension, other fruits and vegetables. <i>Puyat ning sagínga kay búnga sa ting-init,</i> These bananas are <tr>fleshless</tr> because they grew in the dry season. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> come out thin and lacking in flesh.

<p><form>puyay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> name given to Japanese <tr>money</tr> during the war. <number>2</number> any fake money. <number>3</number> money that is all wrinkled and dirty. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> look like funny money. <i>Gipuyayan ku sa mga bag-ung kwarta karun,</i> The new type of notes issued recently look funny to me. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> for money to get all crumpled and dirty.

<p><form>puydi</form> <number>1</number> it is <tr>all right</tr> to do. <i>Káun, puydi apan way ínum,</i> It is all right to eat. But no drinking. <number>1a</number> <formx>&mdash; nga</formx> <tr>may</tr> do. <i>Puydi ba nga makagawì ku sa ímung tilipunu?</i> May I use your phone? <number>2</number> be very <tr>possible</tr>. <i>Puydi kaáyung muanhi siya,</i> He may <tr>well</tr> come here. <form>nu-</form> it is not possible. <i>Nupuydi, kay ginadilì ang pagsúgal dinhi,</i> You can&apos;t because gambling is not allowed here. <i>Nupuydi, dílì nà mahitabù,</i> <tr>Never</tr>. That will never happen. <i>Nupuydi katabuk dundi gabahà,</i> You can&apos;t have intercourse when your wife is menstruating. (Lit. You can&apos;t cross a river in flood.)

<p><form>puydut</form> <xr>= <sc>PUDYUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puygu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>matches</tr>. <i>Nangáyù siyag puygu nga iháling,</i> She asked for matches to build the fire. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>*APUNTIN</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puyit</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> first grade child. <number>2</number> being last in line or coming in <tr>last</tr> in a contest. <number>3</number> <tr>anus</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa anay</form> <xr>= <sc>LUBUT SA ANAY</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>LUBUT</sc>.</xr> <number>3a</number> <tr>female genitalia</tr> (euphemism). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B56]</itype> be, become a <tr>first grader</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126N; c1]</itype> come out last in a contest, be last in line. <i>Naúlaw ku kay namuyit ku sa banggà,</i> I was embarrassed because I came out last in the race.

<p><form>puypuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B24N; c16]</itype> for the muscles to become weak from fatigue or nervousness. <i>Mipuypuy (namuypuy) ang ákung mga buktun,</i> My arms grew heavy with <tr>fatigue</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; c16]</itype> <tr>placate</tr>, <tr>calm</tr> s.o. down. <i>Puypúya (ipuypuy) ang ímung kasukù pinaági sa pagsuruysúruy,</i> Let your anger calm down by taking a walk. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23P; c1]</itype> <tr>relieve</tr>, <tr>alleviate</tr> pain. <i>Puypúyun (ipuypuy) sa hílut ang ímung pamául,</i> Massage will relieve your muscle pains. <pos>a</pos> <tr>weak</tr>, lacking strength. <i>Puypuy kaáyu ang ákung mga tiil,</i> My legs are very weak.

<p><form>puyra</form> <pos>n</pos> place <tr>away</tr> from home. <i>Kúlang sa disiplína ang mga anak nga may mga ginikánan nga atúa kanúnay sa puyra,</i> Children lack discipline if their parents are always away from home. in phrases: <number>1</number> <tr>get out</tr>! <i>Puyra! Dì ku gustu nga náay hubug dinhi sa balay!</i> Out! I want no drunks in this house! <number>1a</number> <formx>&mdash; bisíta</formx> <tr>all ashore that&apos;s going ashore</tr>. <number>1a1</number> bell announcing that the visitors must get off the boat. <number>1a2</number> after visiting hours in a hospital. <number>1b</number> [so-and-so] keep away, may [so-and-so] not happen despite the fact that s.t. is being said to make it happen (said in the belief that the mention of s.t. may cause it to happen unless the formula <ix>puyra</ix> [<ix>so-and-so</ix>] is said). <i>Puyra báliw ang duha ka manag-ágaw nagminyù,</i> May lightning not strike them, the cousins married. <i>Puyra búsung, natumban ang kan-un,</i> May you not get divine punishment. You stepped on the rice. <i>Puyra buyag nindut kaáyu kag mata,</i> Evil spirits keep away. You have beautiful eyes. <i>Puyra dámag, hisgútan nátù ang kamatáyun ni Pulánu,</i> Pulanu, keep away. We will talk about your death. <i>Puyra damgu, si Pulánung namatay nagdiwal ang dílà,</i> Pulanu died with his tongue hanging out, may we not dream of him. <i>Puyra gábà,</i> May you not reap divine punishment. <i>Puyra handum (hisgut), labaw pa tu ka grábi ang ákung sakit kay sa ímu karun,</i> Sickness keep away despite our talking about it, I was even sicker that time than you are now. <i>Puyra patrun, pubri kaáyu nang lungsúra,</i> May the patron saint not get angry at us. That is a terribly poor town. <i>Puyra pungag nakabahù kug humut agwa sa taliw&amacrgra; sa lasang,</i> May my nose not be knocked off, I smelled a most delicious odor in the middle of the forest. <number>2</number> <formx>&mdash; sa</formx> <number>2a</number> <tr>aside from</tr>, <tr>in addition to</tr>. <i>Puyra sa panaptun náa pay balayran sa butúnis ug sípir,</i> Aside from the cloth, you still have to pay for the buttons and zipper. <number>2b</number> <tr>excepting</tr>. <i>Púrus mga tapulan puyra sa pipila ka lugas,</i> They&apos;re all lazy <tr>except</tr> for a couple. <number>2b1</number> <formx>&mdash; lus buynus</formx> except for a few good ones. <i>Puyra lus buynus, kábaw ray but-an sa taga Líti,</i> With some exceptions, only the water <corr sic=buffalos>buffaloes</corr> in Leyte have good morals (from the notion that formerly prostitutes in Cebu used to say they were from Leyte). <number>2b2</number> <formx>&mdash; dáyig</formx> modesty aside. <i>Puyra dáyig akuy nangháwud sa ámung klási,</i> Modesty aside I am at the top of my class. <number>2b3</number> <formx>&mdash; uluúlu</formx> <tr>no kidding</tr>. <pb n=816><i>Puyra uluúlu tinúud kang gwápa,</i> No kidding. You&apos;re very beautiful. <number>3</number> <formx>únu &mdash;, dus &mdash;, tris &mdash;, kwatru &mdash;</formx> in tallying by fives, the number in addition to the groups of five. <i>Singku kahúnis, tris puyra. Sa átù pa, bayinti utsu,</i> There are five blocks of five and three extra. In other words, twenty-eight. <form>itsa &mdash;</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ITSA</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>eliminate</tr>, <tr>dismiss</tr>. <i>Huwis ang nagpuyra sa íyang sumbung kay way ígung kamatuúran,</i> The judge dismissed his complaint for lack of evidence. <i>Puyráha (ipuyra) sila sa átung punduk,</i> Eliminate them from our group. <i>Napuyra ang maung tápad kay gamay ra ug pusta ang kuntra,</i> The fight was cancelled because not enough people bet on one of the cocks. <number>2</number> <itype>[AP; c1]</itype> dismiss s.o. from his job. <i>Dì ku mupapuyra (mupuyra) nímu sa ímung trabáhu,</i> I won&apos;t dismiss you from your job.

<p><form>puyrut</form> <xr>= <sc>PUDYUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puyu</form> <xr>= <sc>BARTUNÍKU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>púyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bag</tr>, <tr>sack</tr>, or anything that can be put together at the ends and closed. <number>2</number> <tr>hammock</tr> tied up like a sack to hold a baby. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> make a <ix>púyu</ix>. <number>2</number> put s.t. in a bag or in a hammock. <i>Puyúha (ipúyu) ang bulingun sa hábul,</i> Wrap the dirty clothing in a sheet. <i>Puyúha (ipúyu) ang bátà,</i> Put the baby in its hammock.

<p><form>puyù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> <tr>live</tr>, <tr>reside</tr> s.w. <i>Unsa pay ákung gipuy-an ning kalibutána?</i> What am I in this world for? <i>Balay nga ákung gipuy-an,</i> The house I am staying in. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>stay</tr> s.w. <i>Mupuyù ku sa báy ug dúna kuy trabáhu,</i> I&apos;ll stay home if I have s.t. to do. <number>3</number> <itype>[A]</itype> be, become <tr>still</tr>. <i>Ug dì ka mupuyù, latiguhun ta ka,</i> If you don&apos;t <tr>keep still</tr>, I&apos;ll whip you. <number>4</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> be willing to go to prison just to get s.t. <i>Puy-an ku ang prisuhan basta lang makabalus ku,</i> I am willing to go to prison just so I can get revenge. <form>(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <i>1</i> <itype>[C2; ac4]</itype> live together with s.o. <i>Dílì ku makigpúyù ug táwung palaaway,</i> I don&apos;t want to <tr>live with</tr> a quarrelsome person. <i>Lisud kang igpúyù,</i> You&apos;re a hard person to live with. <number>2</number> <itype>[C; a1c]</itype> <tr>live with</tr> s.o. as husband and wife. <i>Nagpúyù lang mi ug wà lang pakasal,</i> We just lived as husband and wife and we didn&apos;t get married. <form>puyùpúyù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>common-law</tr> husband, common-law wife. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; a1c]</itype> live together as common-law spouses. <form>hiN-/haN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>stay</tr> in a place. <i>Dì ku mahimuyù sa balay kay pul-an ku,</i> I can&apos;t <tr>hang around</tr> the house because I get bored. <number>2</number> <formx>dílì, walà &mdash;</formx> be <tr>restless</tr>. <i>Walà siya mahimuyù kay dúgayng naulì ang íyang anak,</i> She was restless because her daughter stayed out late. <form>paniN-, paniN-(&larr;)</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>reside</tr> and have one&apos;s livelihood in a certain area. <i>Adtu sila sa Mindanaw manimuyù,</i> They are going to Mindanao to <tr>live</tr>. <number>2</number> live in a certain style. <i>Malináwun silang nanimuyù,</i> They live a peaceful life. <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s family life. <i>Ang sugal mauy nakabungkag sa ílang panimuyù,</i> Gambling destroyed their home life. <form>higN-, hagN-, sagN-</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>SAGMUYÙ</sc>.</xr> <form>puy-anan, puluy-ánan, pinuy-anan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>residence</tr>, dwelling place. <form>paN-</form> <xr>= <sc>PANIN-</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <form>pag-</form> <number>1</number> action of staying s.w. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>PANIN-</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <form>maN-r-/l-, -um-r-/l-, mulupyù, lumulupyù, tagpúyù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>residents</tr>, <tr>inhabitants</tr>.

<p><form>púyù</form> <xr>= <sc>PÚYU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>puyuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> get a favor or a favorable reaction by saying the right thing. <i>Gipuyuk nákug kindi ang ákung anak arun magpatupi,</i> I bribed my son with candy so that he would agree to get his hair cut. <i>Hipuyukan ku sa ákung anak maung milugwag ákung diyísun,</i> My son talked me out of a ten-peso bill.

<p><form>púyung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>gather</tr> the ends of a sack or bag to <tr>close</tr> it up or take s.t. flat and fold up the ends to put s.t. inside it. <i>Ákung gipúyung ang mga daplin sa bàbà sa puntil,</i> I closed the sack by gathering the upper edges. <number>2</number> pull one&apos;s hair back, gathering the ends and tying or clipping them. <pos>n</pos> <tr>clip</tr>, <tr>ribbon</tr>, or the like to hold the ends of gathered hair in place.

<p><form>púyus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>carry</tr> s.t. in a piece of cloth or paper by pulling up the edges. <i>Gipúyus níya ang siriguylas sa íyang sayal,</i> She carried the small fruits in the folds of her skirt. <number>2</number> carry a child in the womb (humorous). <i>Nagpúyus na siyag tulu ka búlan pagkasal níya,</i> She was three months <tr>pregnant</tr> when she was married. <number>3</number> harbor emotions, <tr>rain</tr> (literary). <i>Dag-um nga hingbug-atan sa gipúyus nga ulan,</i> Clouds weighted down with the rain they were carrying.

<p><form>puy-us</form> <xr>= <sc>BAYÚUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pwí, pwì</form> <xr>= <sc>PUWI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pwídi</form> <xr>= <sc>PUYDI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pwintsitya</form> <xr>= <sc>PASKUWAS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pwinti<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fountain</tr>. <number>2</number> a short-spanned stone <tr>bridge</tr> with thick stone walls dating from the Spanish era. <number>2a</number> the <tr>bridge</tr> of a boat.

<p><form>pwinti<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. treatment for rheumatism whereby the impurities which are thought to cause it are drained from the afflicted area by making a wound and wrapping it with a banana trunk and other medicinal herbs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>treat</tr> a patient with <ix>pwinti</ix>. <i>Naáyu ang riyúma sa tigúlang human pwintíhi ang bitíis,</i> The old man was cured of <pb n=817>his rheumatism after he was treated with <ix>pwinti</ix>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> get this treatment.

<p><form>pwíra</form> <xr>= <sc>PUYRA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pwirsa</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>strong</tr> in intensity, force. <i>Pwirsa kaáyu ang hángin sa miáging bagyu,</i> The last typhoon brought very strong winds. <number>2</number> <tr>plenty</tr> in quantity. <i>Pwirsang táwu sa plása,</i> There are <tr>lots</tr> of people in the plaza. <form>&mdash; rimidiyu</form> <pos>a</pos> with the utmost effort. <i>Ang pagpaiskuyla ug siyam ka anak pwirsa rimidiyu giyud,</i> Seeing nine children through school takes the utmost effort. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[BN(1); b47]</itype> become strong. <i>Mupwirsa (mapwirsa, mamwirsa) na gánì ang ulan, mubahà giyud,</i> If the rain pours down hard it is likely to flood. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN2; ab]</itype> <tr>force</tr> s.t., do s.t. forcibly. <i>Ayaw pwirsaha pag-abri (pwirsahag abli) kay mabúngì nyà,</i> Don&apos;t force it open because it might break off. <i>Ayaw pwirsaha (ipwirsa) ang pag-ukang sa bindáhi arun dì mudugù ang samad,</i> Don&apos;t take off the bandage <tr>forcibly</tr> so the wound won&apos;t bleed. <number>3</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> be <tr>overworked</tr>. <i>Hipwirsahan siya sa trabáhu mau nga nalúya,</i> She was overworked. That&apos;s why she is fatigued. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>strength</tr>. <i>Way pwirsa ang ákung buktun,</i> My arms have no strength. <number>2</number> <tr>armed force</tr>. <form>&mdash; militar</form> <tr>military force</tr>. <form>&mdash; nabal</form> <tr>naval force</tr>. <form>&mdash; sa kahangínan</form> <tr>air force</tr>. <form>paN-</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> exert effort. <i>Dì ku makapamwirsa kay bag-u pa kung naáyu,</i> I should not <tr>strain</tr> myself because I have just recovered from an illness. <form>-du</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> working, forcing oneself to exert more than proper effort. <i>Daut siya kay pwirsádu siya sa trabáhu,</i> He is skinny because he works harder than he should. <number>2</number> <tr>strong</tr>, possessing great strength.

<p><form>pwirta<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PULTA</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr>

<p><form>pwirta<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>PWIRTU<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pwirti</form> <number>1</number> doing s.t. vigorously, to a great extent, existing in great quantities or being to a great degree. <i>Pwirting hílak sa bátà,</i> The child cried <tr>hard</tr>. <i>Pwirting mukáun ning batáa,</i> The child eats a <tr>lot</tr>. <i>Pwirting mahála sa isdà run,</i> Fish is <tr>terribly</tr> expensive these days. <i>Pwirting pagkadusmúa sa dyíp sa pusti,</i> How hard the jeep smashed into the post! <i>Pwirting ulána gahápun,</i> How it rained yesterday! <number>2</number> do s.t. very <tr>well</tr>. <i>Pwirting mubayli si Pidru ug tanggu,</i> Peter dances the tango very well. <number>2a</number> having s.t. that enhances one&apos;s standing, <tr>terrific</tr>. <i>Sigúrung madáwat si Míli kay pwirti siya ug rikumindasiyun,</i> Millie will surely get the job because she has terrific recommendations. <i>Pwirti siyag tútuy,</i> She has <tr>magnificent</tr> breasts.

<p><form>pwirtu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>port</tr>, <tr>harbor</tr>. <number>1a</number> a city or town that is a port. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> make a place into a port of call, make a port for a place.

<p><form>pwirtu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the opening in the vagina through which the baby passes in childbirth.

<p><form>pwís</form> <tr>so</tr>, <tr>therefore</tr>, for that reason. <i>Pwís, átung buhátun arun mahuman,</i> So, let&apos;s do it so that it will be finished. <i>Kun tinúud kang nahigugma, pwís, dawáta,</i> If it is true you like him, accept him.

<p><form>pwistu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>place</tr>, <tr>position</tr>. <i>Ang mga gwardiya mitultul dáyun sa ílang pwistu,</i> The guards found their posts. <number>2</number> position, <tr>job</tr>. <i>Dúgay na siya ánang pwistúha,</i> He has been employed in that job for a long time. <form>&mdash; sa f.o.b</form>., reckoned at [such-and-such] a price at a certain place. <i>Kanang prisyúha pwistu sa pabrika,</i> That price is what you pay at the factory. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b6]</itype> get a job. <i>Gipwistuhan man gáling kug trabáhu apan túa sa búkid,</i> I was given a job, but in the mountains.

<p><form>pyádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>caretaker</tr> of lands, estates. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB156; a2]</itype> make s.o. the caretaker or overseer, become such.

<p><form>pyahuk, pyáhuk</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>depressed</tr>, <tr>sunken</tr>. <i>Pyahuk ug mata,</i> <tr>Sunken-eyed</tr>. <i>Pyahuk ug hubun,</i> Having a sunken fontanel. <i>Pyahuk ug áping,</i> <tr>Sunken-cheeked</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> get depressed or sunken. <i>Nagpyahuk ang tiyan sa munyíkang hitumban,</i> The doll&apos;s stomach is all <tr>squashed</tr> because s.o. stepped on it. <form>-un</form> <pos>a</pos> having s.t. depressed or sunken.

<p><form>pyáit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>squeal</tr> to the authorities, <tr>betray</tr> a secret about a crime. <i>Mipyáit ang kaúban sa mga tulisan nga hidakpan,</i> The accomplice of the robbers squealed when he was arrested.

<p><form>pyakpak</form> <xr>= <sc>PAYAKPAK</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyamríra</form> <xr>= <sc>TIMBRÍRA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyangà</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>flat-nosed</tr> (humorous). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be flat-nosed. <i>Siya ray napyangà nílang tanan,</i> She is the only one in the whole family that has a flat nose.

<p><form>pyangaw</form> <pos>n</pos> yellowish-green insect about 1&Prime; long, that is a rice pest, preying on the sheaths before the grain develops. They have an unpleasant odor which permeates the rice field. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infested with <ix>pyangaw</ix>.

<p><form>pyangguy</form> <pos>a</pos> tall and thin, <tr>lanky</tr>. <i>Musalir tingáli kas baskit kay pyangguy kaáyu ka,</i> You might do for basketball because you are lanky. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become lanky.

<p><form>pyanghaw</form> <pos>n</pos> a winning hand in mahjong with no flower piece (<ix>búlak, 2a</ix>.). <form>&mdash; mídul kard</form> <pos>n</pos> a <ix>pyanghaw</ix> composed entirely of <ix>mídul kard</ix>&apos;s. <form>búnut &mdash;</form> a <ix>pyanghaw</ix> in which the piece one is waiting for is drawn.

<p><form>pyanguk</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= &dagger;<sc>PUNGAW</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=818>

<p><form>pyangut</form> <pos>a</pos> having a look of <tr>distaste</tr> on the face. <i>Pyangut ang íyang dagway kay gibahuan siya,</i> He has a look of distaste on his face because it stinks here. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> get a look of distaste on the face. <i>Mauy ipyangut ug kasab-an ku,</i> I get a <tr>sour</tr> look on my face if I&apos;m cussed out.

<p><form>pyanista</form> <xr>see <sc>PYÁNU</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyansa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bail</tr>, financial guarantee for a released prisoner. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> put up bail. <number>2</number> guarantee s.o.&apos;s debt. <i>Dílì ku mupyansa nímu kay wà kuy ikabáyad ug mupalya ka,</i> I won&apos;t guarantee your debt because I will not be able to pay if you default. <form>-du</form> <pos>a</pos> be out on bail. <i>Nakasuruysúruy gihápun ang kriminal kay pyansádu man,</i> The criminal still roams around because he is out on bail. <form>-dur(&rarr;)</form> <number>1</number> one who posts bail. <number>2</number> one who guarantees s.o. else&apos;s debts. <i>Ang pyansadur pagadur,</i> The one who guarantees winds up paying the debt.

<p><form>pyánu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>piano</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> play the piano. <form>pyanista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pianist</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> be a pianist.

<p><form>pyanúnu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jelly roll</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make, have jelly rolls.

<p><form>pyapi</form> <pos>a</pos> be <tr>flat</tr> instead of round as it should be. <i>Pyapi ug píkas úlu ang ímung anak,</i> Your son&apos;s head is flat on one side. <form>(&larr;)<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; a]</itype> come out flat, <tr>flatten</tr> s.t. <i>Ang bumba mipyápi sa tibuuk balángay,</i> The bomb levelled the whole village. <i>Napyápi ang bibingka. Wà makatúbù,</i> The rice cakes came out flat.

<p><form>pyápi<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> tree of saltwater swamps: <bio>Avicennia officinalis</bio>.

<p><form>pyásà</form> <xr>= <sc>PYÁSAT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyásat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB16; a]</itype> <tr>smash</tr>, <tr>crush</tr> or <tr>flatten</tr> s.t., be <tr>crushed</tr>, <tr>mashed</tr> or <tr>flattened</tr>. <i>Dì ku makapyásat sa láta,</i> I can&apos;t flatten the can. <i>Íyang pyasátun ang hinug ságing úsà ipakáun sa bátà,</i> She&apos;ll <tr>mash</tr> the ripe bananas before feeding them to the child. <form>(&rarr;)</form> <pos>a</pos> fruit of any plant with a shell or husk that has failed to develop. <i>Pyasat man lagi ning mais. Way unud,</i> This corn is defective. There are no grains.

<p><form>pyasut</form> <xr>= <sc>PUYASUT</sc>, <i>a2, v2.</i></xr>

<p><form>pyaus<sub>1</sub>, pyáus<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>BAYÚUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyaus<sub>2</sub>, pyáus<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for the voice to be <tr>grating</tr> and weak, usually as a result of strain. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S; c1]</itype> for the voice to be <tr>hoarse</tr> in this way. <i>Nagpyaus nag íyang tíngug sa paghinílak,</i> She lost her voice from crying so much.

<p><form>pyí</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>measure</tr>, about a <tr>foot</tr>. <i>Duha ka pyí,</i> Two feet. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6c1]</itype> buy, measure s.t. by the foot. <form>di-</form> <tr>foot-powered</tr>, esp. by means of a treadle. <form>-s</form> <xr>= <sc>PYÍ</sc> (plural&mdash;used only after Spanish numbers).</xr> <i>Dus pyís,</i> Two feet. <form>pyís dil pátu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ornamental palm around 2&prime; high with semi-circular leaves, slit nearly to the base: <bio>Rhapis excelsa</bio>.

<p><form>pyimríra</form> <xr>= <sc>TIMBRÍRA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyirdi</form> <xr>= <sc>PILDI</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyirdigána</form> <xr>= <sc>PIRDIGÁNA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyirnu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bolt</tr>, a threaded metal pin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> fasten with a bolt.

<p><form>pyís</form> <xr>= <sc>PYÍ</sc> (plural).</xr>

<p><form>pyísa</form> <xr>= <sc>PÍSA<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyista</form> <xr>= <sc>PISTA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyunggut</form> <xr>= <sc>PYUNGKUT</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyungkù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> sit on one&apos;s <tr>haunches</tr>. <i>Pyungkúi ang inudúru, ayaw lingkúri,</i> <tr>Squat</tr> on the toilet, don&apos;t sit on it.

<p><form>pyungkut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB6; c16]</itype> get <tr>bunched up</tr>, <tr>gathered</tr> into folds and <tr>wrinkled</tr>, cause s.t. to become so. <i>Mupyungkut (mapyungkut) nang ímung buldáhan ug dílì ka mugámit ug bastidur,</i> You are going to sew wrinkles into your embroidery if you don&apos;t use an embroidery frame. <i>Pyungkúta (ipyungkut) lang ang bàbà sa sáku arun dì mayabu ang bugas,</i> <tr>Bunch</tr> up the mouth of the sack and tie it so the rice won&apos;t spill.

<p><form>pyúr</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>unadulterated</tr>, <tr>pure</tr>. <i>Pyúr tablíya ang ákung palitun,</i> I&apos;ll buy pure chocolate. <number>2</number> <tr>virgin</tr>, <tr>chaste</tr>. <i>Pyúr siyang pagkababáyi,</i> She is a virgin. <number>3</number> the <tr>genuine</tr>, unmixed breed. <i>Pyúr nga danggit,</i> The <tr>genuine</tr> <ix>danggit</ix> fish (not the one that looks similar to it and which may still be so called but is not the real one). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c16]</itype> drink liquor <tr>straight</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; c1]</itype> be pure, <tr>unmixed</tr>. <i>Ug mapyúr ang ímung tubà mailhan ku,</i> I can recognize unadulterated toddy. <pos>n</pos> winning hand in mahjong consisting of only one design.

<p><form>pyuríya</form> <xr>= <sc>PAYURÍYA</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyúrus</form> <xr>= <sc>BAYÚUS</sc>.</xr>

<p><form>pyuus, pyúus</form> <xr>= <sc>BAYÚUS</sc>.</xr>


</body>
</text>
</TEI.2>
