<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN" [

<!ENTITY larr       CDATA "&#x2190;"            -- leftwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY rarr       CDATA "&#x2192;"            -- rightwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY glots      CDATA "&#x0294;"            -- glottal stop -->

<!ENTITY amacr      CDATA "&#x0101;"            -- a with macron -->
<!ENTITY imacr      CDATA "&#x012B;"            -- i with macron -->
<!ENTITY umacr      CDATA "&#x016B;"            -- u with macron -->

<!ENTITY amacrgra   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0300;"    -- a with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY imacrgra   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0300;"    -- i with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY umacrgra   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0300;"    -- u with macron and grave -->

<!ENTITY amacracu   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0301;"    -- a with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY imacracu   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0301;"    -- i with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY umacracu   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0301;"    -- u with macron and acute -->

<!ENTITY Acaron     CDATA "&#x01CD;"            -- A with caron -->
<!ENTITY acaron     CDATA "&#x01CE;"            -- a with caron -->
<!ENTITY Icaron     CDATA "&#x01CF;"            -- I with caron -->
<!ENTITY icaron     CDATA "&#x01D0;"            -- i with caron -->
<!ENTITY Ucaron     CDATA "&#x01D3;"            -- U with caron -->
<!ENTITY ucaron     CDATA "&#x01D4;"            -- u with caron -->

<!ENTITY schwa      CDATA "&#x0259;"            -- schwa (turned e) -->
<!ENTITY N          CDATA "N"                   -- N symbol (as used in this dictionary) -->

]><TEI.2 lang=en>
<teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
        <titleStmt>
            <title>A Dictionary of Cebuano Visayan</title>
            <author>John U. Wolff</author>
        </titleStmt>
    </fileDesc>
    <profileDesc>
        <langUsage>
            <language id=en>English</language>
            <language id=en-US>English (United States)</language>
            <language id=ceb>Cebuano</language>
        </langUsage>
    </profileDesc>
</teiHeader>
<text>
<body>
<pb n=186>




<div1 type=Letter id=letter.d n=D>
<head>D</head>


<p id=3837><form>da</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>ada</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>ra</sc>.</xr> <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|da} man</formx> <xr>= <sc>mau ra</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p id=3838><form>dá</form> <xr>= <sc>dala</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3839><form>dà</form> <number>1</number> <ix>particle at end of a clause:</ix> <number>1a</number> used upon <tr>noticing</tr> s.t. new, <tr>remembering</tr> s.t. one had forgotten. <i>Mu ra kug gitugnaw dà,</i> I feel cold! <i>Grábi ning bátà dà,</i> I notice the child is in serious condition. <i>Lamían tung ímung sud-an dà!</i> Your food was delicious! <number>1b</number> <ix>particle of apology for doing s.t. poorly, that one was pressed into doing:</ix> don&apos;t <tr>blame</tr> me if things don&apos;t work out right. <i>Dì ra ba ku kamau nga mubayli dà,</i> I don&apos;t know how to dance. <number>2</number> <ix>initial in a clause:</ix> there, I <tr>told you so</tr>! <i>Dà, nasámad ka hinúun,</i> There, now you have hurt yourself.

<p id=3840><form>dâ</form> <xr>= <sc>dà</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr>

<p id=3841><form>daabdaab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>crackle</tr> in flames. <i>Magdaabdaab ang mga dáhung layà basta daúban,</i> Dry leaves crackle when burned.

<p id=3842><form>dáan</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>old</tr>, not new. <i>Dáang sinínà,</i> An old dress. <form>{&mdash;|Dáan} Nga Túgun</form> <tr>Old Testament</tr>. <number>2</number> the one before, <tr>previous</tr>. <i>Ang dáan nílang gikakasabútan,</i> Their previous agreement. <number>3</number> <tr>already</tr>, <tr>beforehand</tr>. <i>Didtu na siyang dáan pag-abut ku,</i> He was already there when I arrived. <i>Dáan na siyang natáhap nga nagluib siya,</i> He had already suspected before that she was being unfaithful. <form>bag-ung {&mdash;|dáan}</form> s.t. one has for the first time but not new. <i>Ákung kutsing bag-ung dáan,</i> My new car which is old. <form>{&mdash;|dáan} pa <r>[<ix>subject</ix>]</r></form> just as [subject] thought. <i>Nagminyù sila. Dáan pa lagi ku,</i> They got married, just as I suspected they would. <i>Gidakup siya sa pulis. Dáan pa giyud kung púga siya,</i> He was arrested by the police. He was an escaped convict, just as I thought. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> <tr>become old</tr>. <i>Dalì mudáan (madáan) ang balay nga way limpiyu,</i> A house gets old easily if it is not taken care of. <form>{pasi-(&rarr;)|pasidaan}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr><corr sic=forwarn>forewarn</corr></tr>, <tr>caution</tr>. <i>Ipasidaan kaníya nga dúgay tang muabut,</i> Forewarn him that we will arrive late. <pos>n</pos> <tr>warning</tr>. <form>{ka-|kadáan}</form> <pos>n</pos> state of being old. <i>Milubad na sa kadáan,</i> It faded when it was old. <form>karáan</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>olden times</tr>. <i>Sa karáan dílì maáyung <pb n=187>malígù ug hápun,</i> In the olden times they thought it wasn&apos;t good to bathe in the afternoon. <number>2</number> very <tr>old</tr>, <tr>leftover</tr> from an olden time. <i>Karáan kining galingan, gigámit pa sa ákung apuhan,</i> This spinning wheel is very old. My grandmother used it. <form>{&mdash;|karáan} nga gantang</form> <number>a</number> <tr>old-fashioned</tr>. <number>b</number> <tr>old maid</tr>. <i>Nabyaan sa trín ang karáan nga gantang,</i> The old maid missed the boat (in getting married). <form>{&mdash;|karáan} nga kansiyun</form> an old song, s.t. so often repeated it can no longer be believed. <form>kinaraan</form> <pos>a</pos> old-fashioned. <i>Sinayawang kinaraan,</i> Dancing in an old-fashioned way. <form>pangaráan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> be <tr>engaged</tr> in s.t. over a long period of time. <i>Nangaráan na siya niíning buháta,</i> He is an old hand in this job.

<p id=3843><form>daánà</form> <xr>= <sc>niánà</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>kanà<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3844><form>daáni</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>root crops</tr> that are fibrous and lacking moisture because they have been left in the ground too long. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> get to be <tr>fibrous</tr> and lacking moisture. <i>Ug dúgayng kalútun ang kamúti mudaáni (madaáni),</i> If sweet potatoes are left in the ground too long, they become fibrous and dry.

<p id=3845><form>dáat</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>grass</tr> with a square-shaped, sharp-edged stem having saw-edged leaves. The <tr>shoots</tr> mixed with grains of mung, corn, and rice are given for teething or measles.

<p id=3846><form>daay</form> <xr>= <sc>diay</sc> (humorous slang).</xr>

<p id=3847><form>dába</form> <pos>n</pos> wide-mouthed clay <tr>pot</tr> used for stewing vegetables. <form>dabahan</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>dába</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3848><form>dabdab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b]</itype> set <tr>fire</tr> to s.t. with a <tr>torch</tr>. <i>Nagdabdab siya sa kakugnan,</i> He burned the saw grass field. <i>Gidabdaban ku ang gagmayng balhíbu sa manuk,</i> I singed the fine feathers off of the chicken. <form>{-un|dabdabun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>burning</tr> easily, esp. tobacco. <i>Ang tabákung dabdabun daling mahurut,</i> Tobacco that burns easily gets used up quickly.

<p id=3849><form>dabudabu, dabudábu</form> <pos>n</pos> successive <tr>blows</tr>. <i>Nalúnud ang barku gumíkan sa dabudábu sa kaáway,</i> The battleship sunk from the enemy bombardment. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>bombard</tr>, rain blows upon. <i>Dabudabúha (dabudabúhi) siyag pátid,</i> Bombard him with kicks. <number>2</number> for the chest to <tr>throb</tr>. <i>Nagdabudábu ang íyang dughan sa kakulbà,</i> His breast throbbed in fear.

<p id=3850><form>dábuk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> make a <tr>fire</tr>. <i>Pagdábuk dihà kay magdigámu ta,</i> Make a fire because we&apos;re going to fix dinner. <number>2</number> <tr>fumigate</tr> an area. <i>Dabúkan ta ang mangga arun mudaghan ang búnga,</i> Let&apos;s subject the mango tree to smoke so that there will be lots of fruit. <form>{(&rarr;)|dabuk}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fire</tr> in an open place. <number>2</number> place where an open fire is built. <i>Duul ra sa balay ang dabuk (dabukan),</i> They built the fire too close to the house. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|dabukan}</form> <xr>= <sc>dabuk</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr>

<p id=3851><form>dábuk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>crush</tr> by <tr>pounding</tr>. <i>Dabúka ang mani pára sa kaykay,</i> Pound the peanuts for the cookies. <form>{(&rarr;)|dabuk}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>crushed</tr> to fine bits, <tr>crumbled</tr>. <i>Dabuk sa pán,</i> Bread crumbs.

<p id=3852><form>dabul bid</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>double bed</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> use a double bed.

<p id=3853><form>dabung</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>young</tr>, <tr>immature</tr>. <i>Malímut pa siya sa kamatáyun sa íyang inahan kay dabung pa ang íyang kaisípan,</i> He will forget his mother&apos;s death because his mind is still young. <number>2</number> <tr>unripe</tr> fruits and vegetables. <i>Dabung mangga,</i> Green mangoes. <number>3</number> <tr>metal</tr> tempered in such a way that it is too soft. <i>Daling nagíbang ang sundang kay dabung pagkapanday,</i> The machete knicks easily because it has not been tempered long enough. <pos>n</pos> bamboo shoots. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> <tr>cook</tr> s.t. with bamboo shoots.

<p id=3854><form>dádi</form> <tr>title</tr> for a <tr>father</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> call s.o. &lsquo;Daddy&rsquo;.

<p id=3855><form>dága<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dagger</tr>. <form>punta {&mdash;|dága}</form> <xr>= <sc>dága<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3856><form>dága<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>dalága<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=3857><form>dagà</form> <xr>= <sc>ilagà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3858><form>dagáang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>heat</tr>, warmth given off, usually by s.t. solid. <i>Ang dagáang sa ílang duha ka láwas,</i> The warmth given off by their two bodies. <i>Ang dagáang sa nasúnug nga balay,</i> The heat from the burning house. <number>2</number> <tr>warmth</tr> of emotion. <i>Ang dagáang sa ílang pagbátì,</i> The warmth of their love. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B25]</itype> <number>1</number> become warm. <i>Midagáang na ba ang plantsa?</i> Is the iron hot yet? <number>2</number> <tr>shimmer</tr> in the heat. <form>{-in-|dinagáang}</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>dagáang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3859><form>dagabdab</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>disease</tr> of tobacco where the leaf turns rough and stiff and gets white spots all over it. <number>2</number> k.o. skin <tr>ailment</tr> characterized by rough and discolored spots. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a4]</itype> for tobacco to get this disease. <number>2</number> <itype>[B146; a4]</itype> for skin to get this ailment. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|dagabdabun}</form> <pos>a</pos> of a <tr>diseased</tr> sort.

<p id=3860><form>dagáhay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>noise</tr> made by the stomach when the digestive system is disturbed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> for the stomach to make a <tr>rumbling</tr> sound.

<p id=3861><form>dagámi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stalk</tr> that is left after grain or sugar has been harvested.

<p id=3862><form>dágan</form> <xr>= <sc>dalágan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3863><form>dagánas</form> <pos>n</pos> prolonged <tr>sound</tr> of water or wind. <i>Dagánas sa busay,</i> The sound of the waterfall. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S4]</itype> make such a sound. <i>Nagdaganas nga dagkung balud,</i> The thundering waves.

<p id=3864><form>dagandang</form> <xr>= <sc>dalagangdang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3865><form>dagang</form> <pos>n</pos> ring made of corncobs or similar material to set a pot on when it is off the stove so that it will not tilt. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> make a <tr>pot rest</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> use a pot rest. <form>{-an|dagangan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>dagang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3866><form>dágang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the long <tr>feathers</tr> on the wings of <pb n=188>fowls that enable them to fly. <number>2</number> <tr>pen</tr> for writing literature (poetic usage). <form>{mag-r-|magdadágan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>writer</tr> of fine literature.

<p id=3867><form>dagangdang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. <tr>snapper</tr>. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>dalagangdang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3868><form>dagasdas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> <tr>skid</tr> on a flat, hard surface. <i>Pagkurbáda sa mutursiklu midagasdas (nadagasdas) kini,</i> The motorcycle skidded on the curve.

<p id=3869><form>dagasdas<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> <tr>force</tr> one&apos;s way into a crowd. <i>Midagasdas siya padúlung sa taliwálà sa dakung tígum,</i> She forced her way into the center of the crowd.

<p id=3870><form>dágat</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sea</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>sea water</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> <tr>feel sick</tr> to one&apos;s stomach, <tr>seasick</tr>. <i>Makadágat (makapadágat) pamináwun ang íyang mga hambug,</i> It&apos;s sickening to listen to his boasting. <i>Gidágat ang bátà tungud kay mabalud,</i> The child felt seasick because it was wavy. <form>{(&rarr;)|dagat}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> for sugar, salt, or dried fish to become damp. <i>Magdagat ang kámay ug hitun-ugan,</i> If you let the sugar get exposed to the damp, it will get sticky. <form>{pa&N;-|panágat}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a]</itype> <tr>fish</tr> in the sea, <tr>catch</tr> fish. <i>Dílì sila makapanágat,</i> They cannot go out fishing. <i>Panagátun námù ang mga bangsi sa lawud,</i> We will catch the flying fish in the deep waters. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> fish out information. <i>Napanágat na giyud sa pulis ang ibidinsiya,</i> The police finally fished the evidence out. <form>{-in-|dinágat}, {-in-(&rarr;)|dinagat}</form> <pos>n</pos> fish <tr>dried</tr> with sea water as the only preservative. <form>{ma&N;-r-(&rarr;)|mananagat}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fisherman</tr> in the sea. <form>{pa&N;-|panágat}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> way of <tr>fishing</tr>. <number>2</number> equipment for fishing in the sea. <form>{pina&N;-an|pinanágatan}</form> <pos>n</pos> fish caught in the sea. <form>{-um-|dumágat}</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>dumágat</sc>.</xr> <form>{-un(&rarr;)|dagatun}</form> <pos>a</pos> prone to <tr>seasickness</tr>. <form>{-nun|dágatnun}</form> <pos>a</pos> pertaining to the sea. <i>Dagatnung mananap,</i> Marine creatures. &dagger;

<p id=3871><form>dagaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>thoughts</tr> which come to the mind. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be <tr>daydreaming</tr>, <tr>absent-minded</tr>. <i>Gidagaw ka man tingáli. Láin man ang ímung gitubag sa ákung pangutána,</i> You must be daydreaming! You gave me a funny answer to my question. <form>{-in-|dinagaw}</form> <pos>a</pos> absent-minded. <i>Mitangdù siya sa dinagaw nga pagtangdù,</i> He nodded an absent-minded assent.

<p id=3872><form>*dagáyà</form> <form>{ka-|kadagáyà}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>abundance</tr>. <i>Magpasalámat ta sa Ginúu tungud sa kadagáyà nga átung nadáwat,</i> Let us thank the Lord for the abundance we have received. <form>{pa-|padagáyà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> <tr>provide</tr> in abundance. <i>Mga kaáyu nga gipadagáyà sa Diyus,</i> The blessings the Lord has bestowed upon us.

<p id=3873><form>dagayday</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> flow in <tr>trickles</tr> or little rivulets. <i>Midagayday ang mga lúhà sa íyang mga áping,</i> Tears trickled down her cheeks. <pos>n</pos> trickling. <i>Ang dagayday sa túbig dílì maatu ug páhid,</i> We cannot wipe the water away fast enough as it streams down.

<p id=3874><form>dagdag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; c1]</itype> <tr>fall</tr>, make s.t. fall from the place where it is growing. <i>Uyúga ang punúan arun madagdag ug hurut ang búnga,</i> Shake the tree so that all the fruit will fall. <i>Idagdag (dagdága) ang búnga sa kayimítu,</i> Shake the fruit from the star-apple tree. <number>1a</number> <itype>[BN4]</itype> for hair to fall. <i>Ayawg gámit ug tayid arun dílì mudagdag (managdag, mangdagdag) ang ímung buhuk,</i> Don&apos;t wash your hair with detergent or it will fall out. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>pick</tr> coconuts. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> for coconut trees to <tr>yield</tr>. <i>Ang íyang kalubihan mudagdag hasta tagdiyis mil káda saka,</i> His farm yielded as many as 10,000 nuts per harvest. <pos>n</pos> yield of coconuts. <form>{ting-|tingdagdag}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>season</tr> when a particular tree loses its leaves.

<p id=3875><form>daghan</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>much</tr>, <tr>many</tr>. <i>Daghang mga batan-un karun nga walay trabáhu,</i> There are lots of young people today who are out of work. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> become, <tr>make plentiful</tr>. <i>Midaghan (nadaghan) ang ákung núka,</i> My sores increased greatly in number. <i>Dì ta na lang ni daghánun ug sulti,</i> Let&apos;s not say much about this. <form>{-an|daghanan}</form> <pos>a</pos> very many. <form>{gi-un(&rarr;)|gidaghanun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>quantity</tr>. <form>{ka-an|kadaghanan}, karaghánan</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>owned</tr> by many people. <i>Kining yutáa dílì mabaligyà kay sa kadaghánan,</i> This land cannot be sold because it is titled to many people. <number>2</number> <tr>public</tr>. <i>Maúlaw ta sa kadaghánan,</i> We&apos;ll be put to shame in public. <number>3</number> <tr>most</tr>. <i>Kadaghánan sa íyang libru gíkan sa Amirika,</i> Most of his books come from America. <form>{maka-|makadaghan}, {ka-|kadaghan}</form> many times. <i>Kadaghan (makadaghan) ku na siya sultíhi,</i> I&apos;ve told her many times. <form>{-um-r-|dumadaghan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tending</tr> to come in large quantities. <i>Dumadaghan silang pamilyáha,</i> Theirs is a prolific family.&dagger;

<p id=3876><form>daghung</form> <pos>n</pos> groan. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3; a2]</itype> <tr>groan</tr>. <i>Midaghung ang masakitun sa kasakit,</i> The patient groaned in pain.

<p id=3877><form>dagil</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>cut</tr> a little bit off of s.t. <i>Dagili rag gamay ning ákung patilya,</i> Remove a little from my sideburns. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>cook</tr> a little extra staple for s.o. not prepared for. <i>Idagil ang anglit ug dalìdalì kay díay ákung kúyug,</i> Cook a small potful of extra rice because I have a visitor. <number>3</number> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> <tr>string</tr> an extra small string along the bass string of the guitar pitched to the same note. <pos>n</pos> guitar string of this sort. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> put a small magical amulet on s.t. esp. a cock. <pos>n</pos> <tr>amulet</tr>.

<p id=3878><form>daging</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>June bug</tr>.

<p id=3879><form>dagínut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>use sparingly</tr>. <i>Daginúta ang bugas arun muhangtud,</i> Use the rice sparingly so it will last. <number>2</number> <tr>use</tr> the last bit of s.t. <i>Mudagínut kug mga tinábas,</i> I will use up the remnants. <number>3</number> <tr>save money</tr>, be economical. <pb n=189><i>Makadagínut ka kun mupalit kag dinusina,</i> You can save if you buy by the dozen. <number>4</number> <tr>heed</tr> things not worth heeding. <i>Daginútun pa giyud nà níyang pitsipitsi?</i> Does she really care about those worthless things? <number>4a</number> heed and <tr>spread</tr> small details of gossip not worth heeding. <number>5</number> <itype>[A12S3S]</itype> <tr>masturbate</tr>, save money by <tr>self-gratification</tr> (humorous slang). <form>{-an(&rarr;)|daginutan}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>thrifty</tr>, <tr>frugal</tr>. <form>{-an|daginutan} ug sulti</form> tending to <tr>gossip</tr> about things not worth gossiping about. <form>{-in-|dinagínut}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>done slowly</tr>, usually to make s.t. last to put it off. <i>Dinagínut ang íyang mga lákang arun dúgayng muabut,</i> He walked home slowly so it would take long to get back. <form>{ma-un|madaginútun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>economical</tr>, <tr>inexpensive</tr> to use. <i>Madaginútung panlaba,</i> An economical soap for washing. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|daginutun}</form> <pos>a</pos> be little in quantity, intensity. <i>Daginutun ang kaháyag sa ispat kay gastádu na ang batiríya,</i> The flashlight gave off a weak light because the batteries were down. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|daginutun} ang bulsa</form> have little money. <pos>a</pos> <tr>thrifty</tr>, <tr>frugal</tr>.

<p id=3880><form>dágir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dagger</tr>. <number>2</number> name given to the red dragon (<ix>drágun</ix>) piece in mahjong. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ab2]</itype> <tr>stab</tr> with a dagger.

<p id=3881><form>dágit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>swoop</tr> down and <tr>seize</tr> a prey. <number>2</number> <tr>kidnap</tr>, <tr>abduct</tr>. <form>{ma&N;-r-(&rarr;)|mananagit}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>kidnapper</tr>. <form>{pina-|pinadágit}</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>short fuse</tr> used in dynamite fishing so that the explosion will be near the surface.

<p id=3882><form>dagítab</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>electric current</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>stimulation</tr> as if by electricity. <i>Ang dagítab sa íyang kamadaníhun nakapakúrug sa ákung tibuuk nga láwas,</i> Her electric charm made my whole body tremble. <form>{-nun|dagitabnun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>electric</tr>. <i>Sugang dagitabnun,</i> Electric lights.

<p id=3883><form>dagkut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>light</tr> a flame, lamp, fire, etc. <i>Dagkuti ang sigarilyu,</i> Light the cigarette. <i>Unsay ákung idagkut sa parul?</i> What shall I light the lantern with? <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; cN]</itype> <tr>light a candle</tr> as an offering to a saint and pray to him to do s.t. good or bad or give thanks. <i>Idagkut (ipanagkut) tikag dì ku nímu pakaslan,</i> I&apos;ll light a candle to a saint to curse you if you don&apos;t marry me. <form>{-ay|dagkutay}</form> <pos>a</pos> for s.t. lighted to be burning. <i>Dagkutay pa ang lampara pag-abut námù,</i> The lamp was still lighted when we arrived. <form>{-um-l-|dumalagkut}, {<corr sic="um-r-">-um-r-</corr>|dumadagkut}</form> <pos>n</pos> one who lights candles as an <tr>offering</tr>.

<p id=3884><form>dagmà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> <tr>stumble</tr> and <tr>fall</tr>. <i>Ayaw pagdágan kay madagmà ka unyà,</i> Don&apos;t run, you might fall.

<p id=3885><form>dagmal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>maltreat</tr>, treat cruelly. <i>Gidagmálan níya ang íyang asáwa,</i> He maltreated his wife. <number>2</number> <tr>cause suffering</tr>. <i>Dakung gútum ang midagmal sa mga mag-uúma,</i> A great famine tortured the farmers. <pos>n</pos> <tr>maltreatment</tr>. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|dagmalan}, {ma-un|madagmalun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>cruel</tr>.

<p id=3886><form>dagmuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>throw</tr> s.t. anywhere in a disorderly way. <i>Sila ang mudagmuk sa basúra ngadtu sa baybáyun,</i> They dumped the garbage on the seashore. <i>Ayaw idagmuk sa karsáda ang mga káhuy,</i> Don&apos;t just dump the wood on the street. <pos>n</pos> <tr>garbage</tr>.

<p id=3887><form>dagnay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>nickname</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give a nickname. <i>Gidagnáyan kug Inday ni Máma,</i> Mother nicknamed me &lsquo;Inday&rsquo;.

<p id=3888><form>dagpak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>slap</tr> hard enough to make a noise. <i>Dagpáka siya kay nagdahan,</i> Give him a spanking because he is getting to be too naughty. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>cover</tr> a hole in any sort of material by laying s.t. over it and attaching it. <i>Kinsay nagdagpak sa kisì sa ákung karsúnis?</i> Who patched up the tear in my pants? <i>Playwud ang idagpak sa buhù sa bungbung,</i> Patch the hole in the wall with plywood. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>join</tr> two flat pieces together by making two of their edges overlap. <i>Nagdagpak ku sa duha ka hábul,</i> I joined two blankets together. <number>4</number> <itype>[B126; b8]</itype> <formx>{&mdash;|dagpak} sa pamilya</formx> <tr>marry</tr> into a family. <i>Nadagpak siya sa mga pamilyang way nahut,</i> She married into a family poor as church mice. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ranking</tr>. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>dagp&acaron;k</sc>.</xr> <form>{(&rarr;)|dagp&acaron;k}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>piece</tr> used in covering up a hole. <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;|dagp&acaron;k} sa pamilya</formx> one who has become part of a family by virtue of marrying into it.

<p id=3889><form>dagpal<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>plug</tr>, <tr>caulk</tr>. <i>Ang bátà mauy midagpal ug lápuk sa grípu,</i> The child was the one who plugged the mud into the faucet. <i>Ang panday nagdagpal ug simintu sa mga likì sa paril,</i> The carpenter patched the cracks of the wall with cement.

<p id=3890><form>dagpal<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> <tr>slap</tr> with the palm of the hand. <i>Íyang gidagpal ang bukubuku sa kabáyù,</i> He slapped the back of the horse.

<p id=3891><form>dagpas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>swat</tr> s.t. to remove s.t. from it. <pos>n</pos> <tr>broom</tr> made out of coconut midribs. <form>{&mdash;|dagpas} sa abug</form> <tr>duster</tr> made of chicken feathers. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. used to brush s.t. away. <number>a</number> broom made of coconut midribs. <number>b</number> <tr>feather duster</tr>. <number>c</number> <tr>fly swatter</tr>. <number>2</number> action of swatting to remove s.t. <i>Wà mapapha ang húgaw sa usa ka dagpas,</i> He didn&apos;t get rid of the dirt with one swat.

<p id=3892><form>dagpì</form> (from <ix>dapì</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; ab2]</itype> <tr>slap</tr> with the palm of the hand. <i>May kamut nga midagpì (nanagpì) sa ákung áping,</i> A hand slapped my cheek. <number>2</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> <tr>whip</tr> with woman&apos;s hair to relieve the skin disease called <ix>ugáhip</ix>. <i>Ang ugáhip maáyu kun dagpían sa buhuk,</i> The kind of sores called <ix>ugáhip</ix> get better if you whip them with hair. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>dagpak</sc></xr> <number>2</number>, <number>3</number>. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>slap</tr>. <number>2</number> a k.o. <tr>sorcery</tr> whereby a sorcerer inflicts harm by tapping the victim. The victim counteracts the sorcery by tapping the sorcerer back. <number>3</number> application <pb n=190>for skin diseases consisting of herbs cooked in banana leaves over live coals. The cause of the disease is thought to appear in the compress after it has been applied. <form>{&mdash;|dagpì} timù</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>small</tr> in size or quantity (humorous). <i>Matawag ba gud tu nímug píging nga dagpì timù ra man ang pagkáun?</i> Could you call that a banquet when only a small amount of food was served? <form>{-in-|dinagpì}</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>pancake</tr> made from ground starch. <form>{ma&N;-r-|mananagpì}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sorcerers</tr> who practice the sorcery called <ix>dagpì</ix>.

<p id=3893><form>dagsà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; c]</itype> <tr>wash</tr> to the shore. <i>Midagsà ang dakung isdà,</i> The big fish drifted ashore. <i>Didtu siya idagsà,</i> He was washed ashore in that place. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. <tr>washed ashore</tr> s.w. <number>2</number> one who happens to be in a place. <i>Namána siyag usa ka dagsà,</i> She married a person who happened to be in that place by chance. <form>{-um-l-|dumalagsà}</form> <xr>= <sc>dagsà</sc>, <ix>n</ix> <bx>2</bx>.</xr> <form>{-um-|dumagsà}</form> <pos>n</pos> name of <tr>wind</tr> that hits Cebu from the Northeast.

<p id=3894><form>dagsang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN3(1)]</itype> become abundant. <i>Nanagsang (nagdagsang) ang mga ilagà sa Kutabátu,</i> Cotabato is being overrun with rats. <i>Kinahanglan sumpúun ang krímin únà makadagsang,</i> Crime should be stopped before it becomes rampant. <form>{pa-|padagsang}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>propagate</tr>, raise in plentiful quantities. <i>Padagsánga (ipadagsang) ang ságing sa inyung yútà,</i> Propagate bananas on your land.

<p id=3895><form>dagsay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cymbals</tr>.

<p id=3896><form>dagtum</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dark grey</tr>, <tr>gloomy</tr>. <i>Ang dagtum sa lángit nagtilimad-un ug ulan,</i> Dark skies are a sign of rain. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be, become dark. <i>Midagtum ang íyang nawung pagkadungug sa nutisya, pagbinulad,</i> His face became gloomy when he heard the news; his face got tanned dark from being in the sun. <i>Nagdagtum ang íyang karsúnis sa buling,</i> His trousers were black with dirt.

<p id=3897><form>dagubdub</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>gudgeon</tr>.

<p id=3898><form>dagúhub</form> <pos>n</pos> hollow, <tr>rumbling</tr> sound. <i>Ang dagúhub sa ayruplánu,</i> The roar of the airplane. <pos>a</pos> loud in a hollow, rumbling way. <i>Dagúhub kaáyu nang ímung pagtambul,</i> Your drumming is very loud. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make hollow, rumbling sounds.

<p id=3899><form>dagúhung</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>howling</tr> sound of the wind. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4; b6]</itype> make howling sound. <i>Nagdagúhung ang hángin sa bagyu,</i> The wind howled in the storm.

<!-- TODO No dagukduk_2 -->

<p id=3900><form>dagukduk<sub>1</sub></form> (from <ix>dukduk</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>hammering</tr>, <tr>knocking</tr> sound. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4]</itype> make hammering, knocking sound. <i>Ug mudagukduk ang makina náay dipiktu,</i> There&apos;s s.t. wrong with the machine if it knocks. <number>2</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> go <tr>fishing</tr> in shallow waters with a hook and line at night using a <ix>tingkarul</ix> lamp (so called because the fish are attracted by knocking the side of the boat with the paddle). <form>{pa&N;-|panagukduk}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> go hook and line <tr>fishing</tr> in shallow waters using a <ix>tingkarul</ix> lamp. <form>{-an|dagukdukan}</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>lamp</tr> used in this k.o. fishing (<xr>= <sc>tingkarul</sc></xr>).

<p id=3901><form>dagul</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>close cut</tr> or <tr>cropped</tr> or <tr>shaven</tr> head. <number>2</number> for soil to have nothing growing on it. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>cut</tr> hair closely, <tr>shave</tr> the hair off the head. <i>Dagulun ta lang ning ímung alut,</i> Let&apos;s make your haircut a crew cut. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for land to become <tr>unproductive</tr>. <i>Nadagul ang yútà kay dúgayng wà ulana,</i> The land became barren because it hadn&apos;t received rain for a long time.

<p id=3902><form>dágum</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>needle</tr>. <i>Dágum pára tahì,</i> Sewing needle. <i>Dágum pára indiksiyun,</i> <tr>Hypodermic needle</tr>. <form>{-in-|dinágum}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pin</tr>. <i>Ang mga papil gialpiliran ug dinágum,</i> The papers were fastened together with a pin. <number>2</number> needle-like <tr>thorns</tr> on plants. <form>alpilir {-in-|dinágum}</form> <xr>= <sc>{-in-|dinágum}</sc> <bx>1</bx>.</xr>

<p id=3903><form>dag-um</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rain cloud</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ABN3; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>cloud</tr> over. <i>Mudag-um (manag-um) na gánì ang lángit,</i> If the sky clouds over. <i>Gidag-úman ang lángit,</i> The sky was covered with clouds. <number>2</number> make s.o. feel gloomy. <i>Midag-um dihà sa íyang kahiladman ang dakung kasákit,</i> A great pain made him feel gloomy. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|dag-um} ang lángit</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1)4; b4]</itype> be on the verge of tears. <i>Hunúnga na ang inyung sulugsúlug sa dalága kay midag-um na ang lángit,</i> Stop teasing the poor girl because she&apos;s on the verge of tears.

<p id=3904><form>dagun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>amulet</tr>, <tr>charm</tr> for good luck or defense. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>attach</tr> a charm to. <i>Gidagunan ni Tikyu ang íyang igbubulang,</i> Tikyo has attached a charm to his fighting cock.

<p id=3905><form>dagundagun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> come or happen one after another. <i>Nagdagundagun ang mga bagyu rung panahúna,</i> We&apos;ve been having typhoons one after another. <i>Ayawg dagundaguna ang ímung prublíma sa pagsingárig pangútang,</i> Don&apos;t let your problems pile up by incurring so many debts.

<p id=3906><form>dagundun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> half-hard, half-soft, <tr>lumpy</tr> texture of raw bananas, sweet potatoes. <number>2</number> deep <tr>rumbling</tr> of distant thunder, distant motor with insufficient muffling.

<p id=3907><form>dagundun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>drinks</tr> to go with food. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> take drinks with food. <i>Gidagundunan níyag tubà ang kinílaw,</i> He washed the raw fish down with toddy.

<p id=3908><form>dagundung, dagungdung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6N; b6]</itype> be <tr>thick</tr> with leaves, fruit. <i>Midagundung (nanagundung) ang káhuy sa dáhun,</i> The tree is thick with leaves. <i>Ang káhuy gidagundúngan sa búnga,</i> The tree is full of fruits.&dagger;

<p id=3909><form>dágut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> completely <tr>removed</tr>, <tr>used up</tr>. <i>Dágut na ang mga káhuy sa bakilid,</i> Every single <pb n=191>piece of wood has been removed from the slope. <number>2</number> completely <tr>rotten</tr> so that it cannot rot any further. <i>Dágut nang sinínà, dílì na mapunit,</i> A dress so rotten that you can&apos;t even pick it up. <i>Dágut nga nangkà,</i> A completely rotten jackfruit. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> use to the last grain, bit; <tr>take away</tr> every bit of s.t. <i>Kining pán mauy idágut sa dyam nga namilit sa butilya,</i> Use this bread to wipe up the last bit of jam sticking to the jar. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> <tr>rot</tr> completely to the point that it will not hold together. <i>Nadágut ang papil sa libru,</i> The paper in the book has turned completely to dust.

<p id=3910><form>dagúuk</form> <pos>n</pos> steady <tr>roaring</tr> sound made by the rushing of water, machines in a distance, roar of a crowd, the <tr>sound</tr> of an empty stomach. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b4]</itype> make a roaring sound. <i>Midagúuk ang ákung tiyan sa kagútum,</i> My stomach is rumbling from hunger. <i>Nagdaguuk ang ulan nga hápit na muabut,</i> The rainstorm made a roaring noise as it drew near. <form>{-in-|dinagúuk}</form> <xr>= <sc>dagúuk</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=3911><form>dagway</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>face</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>appearance</tr>, <tr>looks</tr>. <i>Ang namiyáhuk níyang áping dagway sa kagútum,</i> Her sunken cheeks portray hunger. <number>2a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|dagway} táwu</formx> <tr>human form</tr>. <i>Nawálà ang ílang dagway táwu ug nahímu silang irù,</i> They shed their human form and turned themselves into dogs. <number>3</number> <tr>perhaps</tr>, <tr>probably</tr>. <i>Muulan dagway karun,</i> It probably will rain now. <number>3a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|dagway} ug</formx> it looks as though. <i>Dagwayg muulan,</i> It looks as though it&apos;s going to rain. <form>{-an|dagwayan}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>pretty</tr>, <tr>handsome</tr>. <form>{ka-|kadagway}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>similar</tr> in appearance to s.o. else. <i>Kadagway mu siya,</i> He looks like you. <form>{pa&N;-|panagway}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>countenance</tr>. <i>Ang kasubù sa íyang kahiladman makítà sa íyang panagway,</i> The sadness in her heart can be seen in her countenance.&dagger;

<p id=3912><form>dagyaw</form> <pos>n</pos> day&apos;s <tr>work</tr> done by a group without pay for landlord or for a communal project (usually on a Monday). <i>Dagyaw ang pagtúkud sa iskuyláhan,</i> The school was built by communal work. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> do communal work.

<p id=3913><form>dahan</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B4; b4]</itype> for s.t. bad to <tr>persist</tr>, <tr>get worse</tr>. <i>Nidahan ang íyang kabúang sa madiyung,</i> Her madness for mahjong got worse. <i>Gidahanan siya sa hilánat,</i> His fever is persisting. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> <tr>keep up</tr> with. <i>Dílì ku madahan ang trabáhu sa balay,</i> I cannot keep up with the work in the house. <form>{ma-|madahan} nga</form> it is <tr>ridiculous</tr>, incredibly <tr>stupid</tr> that [so-and-so] happened. <i>Madahan ba gud nímu nga gidisdísan siyang way anistisya,</i> Imagine! They operated on him without anesthesia. <form>{ma-|madahan} ug</form> it would have been ridiculous if [so-and-so] had happened. <i>Madahan ug dì ka mutambung sa kasal sa ímung anak,</i> You surely could not fail to attend your son&apos;s wedding! <form>{pa-|padahan}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> <tr>allow</tr> s.t. to <tr>persist</tr>, <tr>get worse</tr>. <i>Dílì maáyung padahanun (ipadahan) ang íyang batásan,</i> It&apos;s not advisable to allow this behavior of his to go on.

<p id=3914><form>dahay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sighs</tr>, <tr>bewailing</tr> of misfortune. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> <tr>moan</tr>, <tr>bewail</tr> one&apos;s misfortune. <i>Midahay siya sa dautan níyang gidangátan,</i> She sighed mournfully over her misfortune. <i>Dílì angayang dahayan ang ímung kakabus,</i> It&apos;s not right to bewail your poverty. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>behave</tr> for no good reason in an unusually jolly, high-spirited manner, laughing gaily and easily. Such behavior is believed to portend s.t. bad for whoever engages in it. <i>Ngánung nagdahay man mu bísag nagngíub ning kalibútan?</i> Why are you boisterously mirthful with such gloomy weather?

<p id=3915><form>dáhig</form> <xr>= <sc>daláhig</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3916><form>dahik</form> <xr>= <sc>dalahik</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3917><form>dahil</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>iron</tr> s.t. over quickly to smooth it out. <i>Dahili úsà kanang sinináa kay gigámit na man nímu,</i> Iron out the creases in that shirt because you wore it once. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> iron a few things. <i>Mu ra niy ímung dahilun,</i> This is all you are to iron.

<p id=3918><form>dahilì</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. dwarf <tr>coconut</tr>, not more than <measure reg="3.0 m">10&prime;</measure> tall, with thin-husked nuts the size of a grapefruit. <form>{&mdash;|dahilì} humay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small-grained <tr>rice</tr> with white husk and grains, considered desirable for consumption as staple.

<p id=3919><form>dahílì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S3; c]</itype> <number>1</number> for solids in small pieces (grains, small rocks, etc.) to <tr>slip</tr>, <tr>slide</tr> down touching a surface; or for liquids to <tr>move</tr>. <i>Singut nga midahílì sa íyang kalawásan,</i> Sweat that rolled down his body. <i>Nagdahilì ang grába,</i> The gravel was slowly falling out of the truck. <number>2</number> for solids in small pieces to be abundant. <i>Magdahilì ang mangga sa Sibu sa ting-init,</i> Mangoes are abundant in Cebu in the summer. <i>Gidahilían ang Sibu ug kwarta ni Markus,</i> Marcos flooded Cebu with money.

<p id=3920><form>dahilug</form> <pos>n</pos> small venomous snake-like creature, shiny black in color, <measure reg="7.7 cm">3&Prime;</measure> long.

<p id=3921><form>dahílug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B5; b6]</itype> <tr>slip</tr> off downwards, <tr>slide</tr> down. <i>Midahílug lang ang kasíli gíkan sa ákung kamut,</i> The eel just slipped out of my hand. <i>Nagdahilug sa bakilid ang mga trúsu,</i> The logs slid down the steep slope.

<p id=3922><form>dahílus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B5; c]</itype> for things in one piece to slide over a surface having continuous contact with it. <i>Dalì kaáyu kung nakadahílus sa lubi,</i> I slid down the coconut tree fast. <i>Maáyu mang dahilúsan ang sínaw ninyung salug,</i> What fun to slide on your shiny floor.

<p id=3923><form>dahinggay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> for liquid to <tr>flow</tr> <pb n=192>downwards without leaving the surface over which it is flowing. <i>Nagdahinggay ang ímung sip-un,</i> Your nose is running. <i>Ang kamisin nga gidahinggáyan sa singut,</i> A shirt that had sweat flow down into it.

<p id=3924><form>dahiraw</form> <xr>= <sc>dawíraw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3925><form>dahis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>press</tr> clothes hastily and without much care. <i>Kadalì ra ug akuy mudahis sa mga ig-ulúran,</i> It won&apos;t take long to iron clothes to wear around the house.

<p id=3926><form>dahug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>urge</tr> s.o. to do s.t. not to his advantage. <i>Siya ang midahug sa duha ka bátà arun magsinumbagay,</i> He was the one who egged the children into having a fistfight. <i>Gidahugan (gidahug) siya sa pagsulud sa util,</i> She was talked into going to a hotel. <pos>n</pos> <tr>incitement</tr> to do s.t. disadvantageous. <form>{-un|dahugun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>urging</tr> people to act against their best interest.

<p id=3927><form>dáhug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>play</tr> a practical joke on s.o. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; b4]</itype> for an evil spirit to work his power (through an intermediate sorcerer or not). <i>Mibúrut ang íyang láwas kay gidahúgan sa mga dílì ingun nátù,</i> His body is swelling with an affliction sent by a supernatural being. <pos>n</pos> <tr>affliction</tr> suffered by s.o. through the workings of a supernatural being or his agent. <i>Dáhug ang namatyan ni Kulas,</i> Kolas died of a disease inflicted by a supernatural being. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|dahugan}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> one who is fond of making practical jokes. <number>2</number> one who <tr>inflicts</tr> diseases of supernatural origin.

<p id=3928><form>dahul</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>coarse-grained</tr>, for thread to be coarse. <i>Dahul ra kining hilúha pára sa ákung sinínà,</i> This thread is too coarse for my dress. <number>2</number> <tr>coarse</tr> in manners. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> become coarse, <tr>grind</tr> s.t. coarsely. <i>Dahulun (idahul) ku paggaling ang kapi,</i> I will grind the coffee coarse. <form>dahuldahul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B23(1); a2]</itype> be, become bigger. <i>Makadahuldahul pa ning prutása ug wà pa pùpúa,</i> This fruit would have grown bigger if it had not been picked so quickly. <i>Dahuldahulun ku ang ímung páhat,</i> I&apos;ll give you a bigger share. <pos>a</pos> <tr>bigger</tr>.

<p id=3929><form>dahúlug</form> <xr>= <sc>dalhug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3930><form>dahum</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <tr>expect</tr>, <tr>hope</tr> for s.t. to happen. <i>Wà ku magdahum nga maglúib ka,</i> I didn&apos;t dream you would stab me in the back. <i>Ayaw damha nga mubálik pa ku,</i> Don&apos;t expect me to come back. <form>{pa&N;-|panahum}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>expectation</tr>, <tr>supposition</tr>. <i>Sa ákung panahum tigúlang siya, piru batan-un diay,</i> I expected him to be an old man, but it turned out he was actually quite young.

<p id=3931><form>dáhun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>leaf</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>grow</tr> leaves. <i>Kusug mudáhun ang agbáti,</i> <ix>Agbáti</ix> tends to grow lots of leaves. <form>{&mdash;|dáhun} ug lagpad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c5]</itype> <tr>improve</tr> financially (lit. grow wide leaves). <i>Mudáhun (manáhun) tag lagpad ug magkúgi,</i> We will improve financially if we work hard. <form>{&mdash;|dáhun} tubu, {&mdash;|dáhun} sa, ug tubu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. long thin flat <tr>fish</tr> with green bones and fins all round the body. <form>{(&rarr;)|dahun}</form> <number>1</number> <tr>leaf of a book</tr>. <number>2</number> cured <tr>tobacco</tr>. <form>{pa&N;-|panáhun}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>sprout</tr> leaves. <pos>n</pos> leaf <tr>arrangement</tr>. <i>Ang panáhun sa káhuy nga tagiluyluy nag-atbang,</i> The ipil-ipil tree has bipinnate leaves. <form>dahundahun</form> <pos>n</pos> any <tr>insect</tr> that looks like a leaf. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; a4]</itype> be more <tr>thick</tr> with leaves than fruits or grains. <i>Mudahundahun (dahundahunun) ang humay basta lutábun ra ang yútà,</i> Rice plants have more leaves than grains if the soil is too boggy. <form>{-in-|dináhun}, {-in-(&rarr;)|dinahun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sold</tr> by the leaf. <i>Tagái kug tabákù nga dinahun,</i> Give me some leaf tobacco. <form>{ka-an|kadáhunan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>leaves</tr>.

<p id=3932><form>dahúnug</form> <pos>n</pos> continuous <tr>rumbling</tr>, <tr>roaring</tr> sound. <i>Ang dahúnug sa mga dagkung trák,</i> Loud rumbling sounds of the trucks. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S3]</itype> make rumbling sound. <i>Midahúnug ang makusug nga silbátu sa barku,</i> The loud blowing of the foghorn resounded.

<p id=3933><form>dáhup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <i>1</i> <tr>close</tr> the mouth of a bag or net by pulling a drawstring run through a casing in the edge. <number>2</number> <tr>haul</tr> in a fishing net<corr sic="."></corr> by pulling the edges together in a bunch. <i>Káda dáhup daghang makúhà,</i> Each time you pull in the net, you get a lot of fish.

<p id=3934><form>dahut</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>close-fisted</tr> to an intense degree. <i>Ang táwung dahut dílì manggihatágun,</i> A stingy person is not generous. <number>2</number> completely <tr>poverty-stricken</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> be, become <tr>stingy</tr> or <tr>miserly</tr>. <number>2</number> be, become <tr>poor</tr> or <tr>penniless</tr>. <i>Mudahut (madahut) ka kun magpúnay ug sugal,</i> If you keep on with your gambling, you&apos;ll wind up in the poorhouse.

<p id=3935><form>dahúyag</form> <pos>a</pos> nonsense word used to fill out a line in rhymes. <i>Dayun, dayun, dahúyag/ Walay makagsantà ug makagbábag/ Ning palasyu námung payag,</i> Come-in, come-in <ix><corr sic=dahuyag>dahúyag</corr></ix>, No one can bar your way, Into this palace of a hut.

<p id=3936><form>dáig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> set s.t. on <tr>fire</tr>. <i>Unyà na lang daígi ang mga layang dáhun,</i> Set these dried leaves on fire later on. <number>2</number> <tr>light</tr> s.t. <i>Tagái kug idáig sa ákung sigarilyu,</i> Give me s.t. to light my <corr sic=cigaret>cigarette</corr> with. <pos>n</pos> <form>{(&rarr;)|daig}</form> fire in the open. <i>Wà giyud mapálung ang ámung daig sa ulan,</i> The rain did not put our fire out.

<p id=3937><form>dáik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>start</tr> s.t. <tr>burning</tr> by putting s.t. glowing to it. <i>Gidaíkan nákù ang sigarilyu,</i> I lighted the cigarette.

<p id=3938><form>dail</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>full moon</tr>. <i>Inigsáwup sa adlaw mau say isubang sa dail,</i> The full moon rises as soon as the sun sets. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for the moon to become full. <form>{-un|dailun}</form> <pos>a</pos> moon that is full.

<pb n=193>

<p id=3939><form>daílus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>move</tr>, <tr>slide</tr> or <tr>trickle</tr> slowly across or down on a surface. <i>Inigsaylu sa balud mudaílus pud pagbálus ang sakayan,</i> When the wave passes by, the boat in turn moves slowly down. <i>Inánay ang túbig nga nagdaílus sa bungbung,</i> Water is trickling slowly down the wall. <number>2</number> <itype>[AP; b6]</itype> move, let oneself slide s.w. <i>Kun walà magtan-aw ang dalága mudaílus (mupadaílus) pud si Pidru sa duul,</i> When the girl wasn&apos;t looking, Peter would slide closer. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; ab3c]</itype> <tr>come</tr> from the village to town. <i>Daílus na mu sa lungsud sa pista,</i> Come to the town during the fiesta.

<p id=3940><form>daít</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C1]</itype> have good personal relationships. <i>Makigdáit kita sa átung silíngan,</i> We should have good relations with our neighbors. <form>{ma-un|madaítun}, {makig-un|makigdaítun}</form> <pos>a</pos> in a manner inspiring good personal relationships. <form>{panag-|panagdaít}, {panag-ay(&rarr;)|panagdaitay}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>good relations</tr>.

<p id=3941><form>daitul, daítul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>touch</tr> a small part of s.t. against s.t. else. <i>Midaítul siya sa íyang ngábil sa akúa,</i> She pressed her lips against mine. <i>Gidaitlan níyag binágang puthaw ang pinaakan sa hálas,</i> He touched red-hot iron to the snake bite. <i>Íyang gidaítul ang tilipunu sa íyang dalunggan,</i> She pressed the telephone receiver to her ears.

<p id=3942><form>*daiya</form> <form>{ka-|kadaiya}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>varied</tr>, of all different kinds. <i>Nagkadaíya ang ámung bálun,</i> We took along all kinds of food.

<p id=3943><form>dak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Doc</tr>, nickname for a doctor.

<p id=3944><form>dakaldakal</form> <pos>n</pos> things which make a road rough. <form>{-un|dakaldakalun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>rough road</tr>.

<p id=3945><form>dakan</form> <xr>= <sc>arun</sc> (dialectical).</xr>

<p id=3946><form>dakbálay</form> <pos>n</pos> large <tr>building</tr>, <tr>house</tr>.

<p id=3947><form>dakbayan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>city</tr>. <form>{pa-|padakbayan}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> go to, live in the city. <form>{ka-an(&larr;)|kadakbayánan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cities</tr>. <form>{-un(&larr;)|dakbayánun}</form> <pos>a</pos> having to do with the city.

<p id=3948><form>dakbut</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>amphibious boat</tr>, boat that can go on land.

<p id=3949><form>dakdak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; b8]</itype> <tr>fall</tr> down with a bang. <i>Pisti ning pálut sa ságing, mau niy nakadakdak (nakapadakdak) nákù,</i> Damn this banana peeling. That is what made me fall. <number>2</number> <itype>[ANB12; c]</itype> <tr>throw</tr> s.t. down with force that is heavy; fall down with a bang on the rump. <i>Nadalispang ug nadakdak,</i> He slipped and fell on his rear end. <i>Ayaw ug idakdak ang lubi sa asíras. Hidakdakan unyà ang ímung tiil,</i> Don&apos;t smash the coconut on to the sidewalk. It might hit your foot. <number>3</number> <itype>[AN; b]</itype> <tr>wash</tr> clothing by hitting it against a flat surface. <i>Dakdáki ang hábul ug maáyu arun malimpiyu,</i> Beat the blanket thoroughly so it will become clean. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>knock</tr> s.o. on the head. <i>Dakdákan ta ka ning kabù,</i> I&apos;ll knock you on the head with this dipper. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>spend</tr> a large amount to win an election. <i>Pila kahà ang idakdak ni Markus dinhi?</i> How much money do you think Marcos will pour here? <number>5</number> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> <formx>{&mdash;|dakdak} ulan</formx> for a rainstorm to break. <number>6</number> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> <tr>heap</tr> <tr>blame</tr>, <tr>abuse</tr>, etc. on s.o. <i>Gidakdákan aku níya ug daghan kaáyung trabáhu,</i> He heaped a huge amount of work on me. <i>Pait nga panimalus ang íyang idakdak kanímu,</i> He will wreak bitter revenge on you. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|dakdakan}</form> <pos>n</pos> a piece of flat stone or anything where one beats his laundry on in washing.&dagger;

<p id=3950><form>dakdákan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. branching edible <tr>seaweed</tr>, dark-green in color, soft and spongy in texture, and about &frac14;&Prime; thick. It tends to be flat on both sides.

<p id=3951><form>dakinas, dakin-as</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> <tr>slip</tr> and <tr>fall</tr>. <i>Paghínay, madanlug. Madakin-as ka unyà,</i> Be careful. It&apos;s very slippery. You might fall.

<p id=3952><form>dákit</form> <xr>= <sc>dalakit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3953><form>daklap</form> <xr>= <sc>daplak</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3954><form>daklit</form> (from <ix>kalit</ix>) <pos>a</pos> for a very short time. <i>Daklit nga panagkítà,</i> A momentary meeting. <i>Nakadisidir siya sa daklit,</i> He made up his mind in an instant. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b5c]</itype> do s.t. for a second. <i>Daklítan (daklítun) kug tan-aw ang libru,</i> I&apos;ll look at the book for a second. <i>Mahímu ning idaklit nímug hatud?</i> Can you take out a second to deliver it?

<p id=3955><form>dakrun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dacron</tr> fiber.

<p id=3956><form>daktil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hair style</tr> for women in which the hair about <measure reg="5.1 cm">2&Prime;</measure> below the nape is cut like a duck&apos;s tail. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> cut hair into a duck-tail style, wear hair in this style.

<p id=3957><form>daktul</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>full moon</tr>. <i>Háyag karun kay daktul ang búlan,</i> It&apos;s bright tonight because there&apos;s a full moon. <form>{&mdash;|daktul} ug nawung</form> <tr>round-faced</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3; b4]</itype> for the moon to get to be full. <i>Gidaktúlan na lang sila sa búlan wà pa gihápun kahumag dáru,</i> The full moon was upon them before they had finished plowing. <form>{-um-r-|dumadaktul}</form> <pos>n</pos> moon about to be full.

<p id=3958><form>dakù</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>big</tr>, <tr>great</tr>. <i>Dakù na ang íyang anak,</i> Her child is grown up now. <form>{&mdash;|dakù} ug anínu</form> <tr>prominent</tr> person. <i>Gamay túung táwu si Rumulu píru dakug anínu,</i> Romulo may be small in stature, but he is a very important man. <form>{&mdash;|dakù} ug bàbà</form> having <tr>tendency</tr> to tell secrets. <form>{&mdash;|dakù} ang dágat</form> be <tr>high tide</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|dakù} nga kábaw</form> be already <tr>grown up</tr>, but still doing things inappropriate to adults. <i>Kadakù na nímung kábaw magdúwà ka pa gihápug dyúlin,</i> You still play marbles at your age! <form>{&mdash;|dakù} nga mamsà</form> <tr>bigwig</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|dakù} nga táwu</form> <number>a</number> <tr>important person</tr>. <number>b</number> <tr>spokesman</tr> in asking a woman&apos;s hand of her parents. <form>{&mdash;|dakù} nga tái</form> a <tr>big wheel</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>very much</tr> (modifying forms which refer to a person&apos;s condition, mood, or status). <i>Mangasáwa <pb n=194>siya nímu bísan búhì pang dakù ang íyang asáwa. Minyù nà siyang dakù,</i> He will marry you even though his wife is very much alive. He is very much a married man. <i>Dì na nà siya kapasar kay dakù na kaáyu ug palta,</i> She cannot pass because she has been absent many times. <i>Dakung masakitun ang íyang asáwa,</i> His wife is gravely ill. <i>Gikalípay kug dakù ang nahitabù,</i> I am very happy about what happened. <i>Magulang siyag dakù nákù,</i> He is much older than I am. <form>adlaw nga {&mdash;|dakù}</form> <tr>broad daylight</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|dakù} ang hunàhúnà</form> be <tr>anxious</tr> to do s.t. <i>Dakù kaáyu ang ákung hunàhúnà pag-adtu sa Kanada,</i> I&apos;ve been thinking very much about going to Canada. <form>{&mdash;|dakù} ang tingúhà</form> be <tr>intent</tr> on doing s.t. <i>Dakù ang ákung tingúhà pagtábang nímu,</i> I&apos;m moving heaven and earth to help you. <number>3</number> <formx>usa ka {&mdash;|dakù}</formx> one centavo <tr>coin</tr> (so called because formerly it was a large coin). <number>4</number> <formx>{&mdash;|dakù} nga</formx> [<ix>word referring to an action</ix>] it&apos;s highly <tr>improbable</tr> [such-and-such] an action would be done. <i>Dakung palit nákù ánà nga náa may barátu,</i> You think I&apos;d buy that when there are so many inexpensive ones available? <i>Dakung hátag níya nátù nga dawù man nà siya?</i> You think that greedy guy would give us any? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> become, make big. <i>Nagdakù siyang walay inahan,</i> He grew up without a mother. <i>Gidaku níya ang íyang tíngug arun madungug,</i> She made her voice loud enough to be heard. <i>Gidak-an (gidakuan) ra aku sa ábang,</i> I consider the rent too high. <form>{&mdash;|dakù} ang atay, úlu</form> for s.t. to <tr>go to one&apos;s head</tr>. <i>Midakù ang íyang atay (úlu) kay gibulatíkan,</i> He was flattered and it went to his head. <form>{pa-|padakù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>raise</tr> animals, children. <i>Padak-a (padakua) kining batáa sáma sa tinúud mung anak,</i> Raise this boy like your own child. <i>Ang tangkal padak-an kug bábuy,</i> I will raise pigs in the pigpen. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> make s.t. bigger. <i>Padak-a (padak-i, ipadakù) ra gud ang síga,</i> Turn the light up, please. <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> <tr>allow</tr> s.t. to <tr>grow</tr> big. <i>Padak-a (padakua) ang kamúti,</i> Let the sweet potatoes grow big. <form>dakùdákù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>chief</tr>, <tr>head</tr>, <tr>foreman</tr>. <i>Kinsay dakùdákù niíning upisína?</i> Who is the head of this office? <form>{-an(&larr;)|dakúan}, {-ay(&larr;)|dakúay}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>very great</tr>. <i>Dakúan (dakúay) uyámut ang íyang kaúlaw,</i> Her shame was indeed great. <form>{-g-|dagkù}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>big</tr> (plural). <i>Púlus dagkù ang íyang gipalit,</i> He only bought big ones. <form>{pa&N;-g-|panagkù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> become great. <i>Nanagkù ang ílang mga mata,</i> They became wide-eyed. <form>{ka-g-an|kadagkúan}</form> <pos>n</pos> higher <tr>officers</tr>, <tr>authorities</tr>. <i>Púrus mga langyaw ang kadagkúan niíning kumpaníya,</i> The top officers of this company are all foreigners. <form>{-in-g-|dinagkù}</form> <pos>a</pos> on a large scale. <i>Ang dinagkù nga pagpamalit barátu,</i> It is cheap to buy wholesale. <form>dumalagkù, dumalagkuun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>variety</tr> of a plant or animal that tends to be bigger. <i>Dumalagkuung maísa píru gagmayg púsù,</i> The corn is of a large variety, but the ears are small. <form>gidak-un</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>size</tr>. <form>kadak-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>living room</tr>, largest room in the house. <form>kinadak-an</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>biggest</tr>. <number>2</number> the whole <tr>world</tr>. <i>Ang nahitabù gisibya sa kinadak-an,</i> The event was broadcast to the whole world. <form>{ma&N;-(&larr;)|manákù}, {tag-(&larr;)|tagdákù}, {tagma&N;-(&larr;)|tagmanákù}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>costing</tr> one centavo. <i>Manákù (tagdákù, tagmanákù) ang tundan,</i> Small bananas cost one centavo each.

<p id=3959><form>dakul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b5]</itype> <tr>rap</tr> s.o. on the head with s.t. <i>Dakla (dakula, dakli) siya kay nagdahan,</i> Rap him on the head because he is acting up too much. <pos>n</pos> <tr>rapping</tr>. <form>dakuldákul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>rap</tr> s.t. to make noise. <i>Dakuldakúli ang máya,</i> Rap empty cans to chase away the birds.

<p id=3960><form>dákun</form> <xr>= <sc>kanákù</sc> (dialectal).</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>aku</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3961><form>dakung</form> <xr>= <sc>dakul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3962><form>dakup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>catch</tr>. <i>Nadakup (hingdakpan) na ba ang kabáyù nga nakaguwà sa kural?</i> Did you manage to catch the horse that broke out of the enclosure? <number>2</number> <tr>apprehend</tr>, <tr>arrest</tr>. <i>Dakpun ka ug mamúhì kag dinamíta,</i> You will be arrested if you go dynamite fishing. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> <tr>catch fire</tr>. <i>Dakpun ang káyu sa gasulína,</i> The gasoline will catch fire. <form>{(&larr;)|dákup}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>period</tr> of time that arrests are being made. <i>Dákup run sa mga draybir nga walay lisinsiya,</i> They&apos;re arresting drivers without licenses these days. <form>{-in-|dinakup}, dinakpan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>suspect</tr>. <i>Ang mga dinakup (dinakpan) ibalhug sa bilangguan,</i> The suspects will be put in jail. <form>{ma&N;-r-(&larr;)|mananakup}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>arresting officer</tr>. <form>dakupdákup, dakpánay</form> <pos>n</pos> game of <tr>tag</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> <tr>play</tr> tag.

<p id=3963><form>dakúyung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>stay</tr> put meekly, usually with the head bowed. <i>Mudakúyung dáyun ang ámung irù basta sutsútan,</i> Our dog stays put meekly when you hiss at him.

<p id=3964><form>dakyup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> for things that fly to <tr>swarm</tr>, fly around close to s.t. <i>Ang anunugba mudakyup sa sugà,</i> The moths will fly around the lamp. <number>2</number> <tr>appear</tr> suddenly. <i>Gidakyúpan ang ákung panumdúman sa ímung hulagway,</i> Your picture appeared suddenly to my thoughts. <number>3</number> <tr>envelop</tr> with an atmosphere. <i>Mga mabagang dag-um nagdakyup sa kabungtúran,</i> Dark clouds enveloped the hills. <i>Kun dakyúpan ka sa kamíngaw,</i> When loneliness envelopes you.

<p id=3965><form>dál</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>doll</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>term of endearment</tr> for a small child.

<p id=3966><form>dala</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>take</tr>, <tr>bring</tr>, <tr>carry</tr>. <i>Magdala <pb n=195>ba kug rigálu ngadtu?</i> Shall I bring presents there? <i>Bug-at na kaáyung dad-un (dalhun, dal-un) ang táru,</i> The can is too heavy to carry. <number>1a</number> for an <tr>illness</tr> to take. <i>Dad-un ka untà sa kulira,</i> Drop dead! (Lit. I hope cholera takes you!) <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>play</tr> a role. <i>Ang papil ni Husi Risal ang gidala ni Rumíyu,</i> Romeo played the role of <corr sic=Jose>José</corr> Rizal. <number>2a</number> <tr>sing</tr> a certain voice in choral groups, <tr>play</tr> an instrument in an ensemble. <i>Akuy mudala sa báhu, ikay kanta sa túnu,</i> I&apos;ll sing the bass while you sing the melody. <number>2b</number> <formx>{&mdash;|dala} ug hílas</formx> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>fake</tr> s.t. without showing it. <i>Maáyu siyang mudág hílas kay dì muusab ang íyang dagway ug mamutbut,</i> He can really fake it, because when he tells a lie his face remains unchanged. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>drive</tr> a vehicle, make s.t. go. <i>Maáyu diay kang mudalag sista,</i> You sure play the guitar well! <i>Impála ang íyang dad-un sa paráda,</i> He will drive an Impala during the parade. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>treat</tr>, <tr>manage</tr> s.t. or s.o. <i>Ang táwu nga nagdala sa upisína maáyung mudala sa íyang mga kawáni,</i> The man who manages the office treats his employees well. <number>5</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> <tr>endure</tr>, <tr>bear</tr>. <i>Madala pa sa kábaw ang kaínit sa adlaw,</i> The carabao can bear the heat of the sun. <number>6</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> be of some <tr>help</tr>. <i>Ang ímung grádu dílì na madala ug ínat. Hagbung ka giyud,</i> Stretching your grade won&apos;t be of any help. You failed, period. <number>7</number> <itype>[A13; a2]</itype> <tr>include</tr> with, be together with, <tr>accompany</tr>. <i>Ang íyang tíngug nagdala ug kahadluk,</i> There was fear in her voice. <number>8</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>carry</tr> clothes, personal belongings well, poorly. <i>Maáyu siyang mudala ug bisti,</i> She carries her clothes well. <pos>n</pos> s.t. brought, carried, taken along as a load. <i>Nagsangkiig aku sa ákung dala,</i> I staggered under my load. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>together</tr> with. <i>Mikalagiw ang inahan dala ang gamay níyang bátà,</i> The mother fled together with her small child. <number>2</number> <tr>carried</tr> along with, <tr>influenced</tr> by. <i>Dala sa ákung kalágut nakahílak aku,</i> Influenced by my anger, I burst out crying. <number>3</number> the <tr>accompaniment</tr> of. <i>Kining ákung hilánat dala sa ákung húbak,</i> My fever came on with my asthma. <number>3a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|dala} sa pagkatáwu</formx> <tr>inborn</tr>. <i>Ang íyang pagkabúta dala sa íyang pagkatáwu,</i> He is blind from birth. <number>4</number> <tr>included</tr>. <i>Ang singkuwintang plíti dala na ang túbig,</i> Water is included in the fifty pesos rent. <form>{(&larr;)|dála}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125]</itype> be influenced by, carried along. <i>Nadála aku sa íyang kakúgi,</i> I was influenced by her industriousness. <form>daladála</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>bring</tr> repeatedly, <corr sic=where-ever>wherever</corr> one goes. <i>Kining ímung pagkasaksi mauy mudaladála kanímu sa pagpaatúbang sa husgádu,</i> If you are a witness it will keep bringing you back to court. <i>Daladaláun gayud nákù kining batáa,</i> I will surely take the child with me wherever I go. <i>Hápit na mutúig ang pagdaladála níya sa íyang sakit,</i> He has been going around with his sickness for almost a year. <pos>n</pos> female <tr>genitalia</tr> (humorous). <form>{pa-|padala}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>send</tr>. <i>Ipadala níya ang ímung urdir kun padad-an mu siyag kwarta,</i> He will send the order if you send him money. <form>{-um-(&larr;)|dumála}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>manage</tr>. <i>Nagdumála siya sa usa ka bangku dinhi,</i> He managed one of the banks here. <form>kadumaláhan, dumaláhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>management</tr>. <i>Ang Urmuk ubus gihápun sa íyang kadumaláhan,</i> Ormoc is also under his administration. <form>{-in-|dinála}</form> <pos>a</pos> <xr>= <sc>dala</sc>, <ix>a 1, 2.</ix></xr> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> male genitalia (humorous). <number>2</number> <tr>children</tr> of a former marriage brought into a new marriage. <number>3</number> <tr>idiosyncrasies</tr> a woman may experience during conception. <i>Ayaw tagda ang kapungtánun sa ímung asáwang burus kay dinala nà,</i> Don&apos;t mind your wife&apos;s irritability. That&apos;s part of her pregnancy. <form>dinad-an, dinalhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>treatment</tr>. <i>Ang ngil-ad nga dinad-an sa íyang bána,</i> The bad treatment her husband gives her. <form>dalad-unun, dad-unun, dalhunun</form> <pos>n</pos> things to be brought. <pos>a</pos> needing care because of sickness or needing tact because of touchiness.

<p id=3967><form>dalag<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>light yellow</tr>. <i>Dalag ang íhì,</i> Urine is yellow. <pos>n</pos> yellowed or brown fallen <tr>leaves</tr>. <i>Dalag sa lumbuy himúun ug líkin,</i> Yellowed <ix>lumbuy</ix> leaves are made into cigars. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN; a]</itype> <number>1</number> become, make s.t. <tr>yellow</tr>. <number>2</number> for the voice to get <tr>off pitch</tr>. <i>Nadalag (midalag) ang íyang tíngug tungud sa hilabihang kahadluk,</i> She was so frightened her voice went out of key. <number>3</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> <tr>wear</tr> s.t. yellow. <form>{ma-|madalag}</form> <pos>a</pos> yellow. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be yellow. <i>Nagamadalag ang pangánud sa matahum buluk sa buláwan,</i> The clouds were yellow with beautiful hues of gold.

<p id=3968><form>dalag<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>haluan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3969><form>dalága<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>unmarried</tr> woman. <i>Anak sa pagkadalága,</i> A child born to an unmarried woman. <i>Dalágang lagas,</i> An old maid. <number>2</number> young <tr>girl</tr> who has reached maturity. <i>Sus! Dalága ka na kaáyung tan-áwun,</i> My! You look very much a young lady. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12S]</itype> <number>1</number> for a girl to <tr>grow up</tr>, act like a <tr>grown-up</tr>. <i>Ang ímung inahan ug aku dúngan nga nadalága,</i> Your mother and I grew up at the same time. <number>1a</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> reach <tr>womanhood</tr> by virtue of <tr>menstruating</tr>. <i>Nadalága ku sa idad nga katursi,</i> I had my first menstruation at fourteen. <form>{pa&N;-|panalága}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> get to a girl&apos;s bed to have <tr>intercourse</tr> with her. <i>Panagáun ta <pb n=196>ka karung gabíi,</i> I&apos;ll sneak into your bed tonight. <form>{hi&N;<corr>-</corr>(&rarr;)|hinalaga}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B145]</itype> <tr>grow</tr> into full womanhood. <i>Nanindut ang íyang láwas dihang naghinalaga na,</i> She developed a beautiful body as she grew to maturity. <form>kadalagáhan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>maidens</tr>. <i>Ang mga kadalagáhan atúa sa sayáwan,</i> The girls are at the dance. <form>{-um-|dumalága}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>female</tr> animal just about ready for reproduction, esp. chickens. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12S]</itype> <number>1</number> be old enough to reproduce. <i>Ígu giyung nagdumalaga na, gidúnguy ang tanan kung manuk,</i> My chickens got diseased just as they were about to start laying. <number>2</number> for a girl that is too young to act like a <tr>teen-ager</tr>. <i>Nagdumalaga ka nag pulupanglipstik,</i> You think you&apos;re grown-up already wearing lipstick. <form>dalagíta</form> <pos>n</pos> a girl close to <tr>maturity</tr> but not yet mature (ten to thirteen years old). <i>Dalagíta na giyud si Gríta kay gipamukúlan na,</i> Greta has indeed reached puberty because her breasts are beginning to develop. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BS]</itype> become a young girl. <form>dalaginding</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>term for endearment</tr> for a small girl. <i>Grid wan na ákung dalagingding,</i> My little darling is in the first grade.&dagger;

<p id=3970><form>*dalága<sub>2</sub></form> <form>tudlù {&mdash;|dalága}</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>banana</tr>, eaten as is when ripe, growing <measure reg="15 cm">6&Prime;</measure> long, tapering and narrow. The peel is light green and the meat white when ripe.

<p id=3971><form>dalágan</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2S; ab3c]</itype> for a person to <tr>run</tr>. <i>Midágan siya kay nahadluk,</i> He ran away because he was afraid. <i>Kinsa tung nagdagan dihà?</i> Who is that running over there? <i>Dì na ku kadágan kay gikutasan ku,</i> I can run no further because I am out of breath. <i>Dagána ang táwu kay wà pa siya kabayad,</i> Run after the man. He didn&apos;t pay. <i>Unsay ímung gidagánan?</i> What are you running away from? <i>Bantáyi kanang karni, kay idágan sa irù,</i> Watch the meat because the dog will run away with it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2S]</itype> for a machine to run, <tr>function</tr>. <i>Dì mudágan ang makina,</i> The machine stopped running. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>run for office</tr>. <i>Katulu na siya mudágan pagkamayur,</i> He ran for mayor three times. <number>4</number> <itype>[A2; b8]</itype> <tr>run for help</tr>. <i>Wà siyay láing kadagánan,</i> He has no one else to turn to. <number>5</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>extend</tr> a certain time or distance. <i>Ang pilikula mudágan ug tulu ka úras,</i> The show lasts for three hours. <i>Gíkan dinhi ang karsáda mudágan ngadtu sa subà,</i> From here the road runs toward the river. <i>Usa ka baril nga aspaltu mudágan ug unsi mitrus,</i> A barrel of asphalt lasts eleven meters. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>speed</tr>, <tr>velocity</tr>. <i>Singkuwinta milyas káda úras ang dágan sa awtu,</i> The car is traveling at fifty miles per hour. <number>2</number> <tr>running</tr>, <tr>functioning</tr> condition. <i>Maáyu pa ang dágan sa awtu,</i> The car is still in good running condition. <number>3</number> <tr>time elapsed</tr> during which s.t. happened. <i>Pila ka úras ang dágan sa idru ngadtu?</i> How many hours is the trip there by plane? <number>3a</number> passing of time. <i>Wà ku makaalinggat sa dágan sa panahun,</i> I failed to notice the passing of the time. <number>4</number> <tr>circulation</tr>. <i>Kusug ang dágan sa dugù sa hayblarun,</i> A person with high blood pressure has rapid blood circulation. <number>4a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|dalágan} sa hitabù</formx> flow of <tr>events</tr>. <form>{(&rarr;)|dalagan}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> go <tr>hurriedly</tr> s.w. for a purpose. <i>Dagna (dagana, dagána) ang ímung igsúun,</i> Run and get your brother. <i>Idagan (idágan) ni ngadtu,</i> Run, bring this there. <form>{pa-|padalágan}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>operate</tr> a business, machine. <i>Hínay siyang mupadágan sa kutsi,</i> He drives the car slowly. <i>Didtu sa kadagátan sa Mindanaw padagána (ipadágan) ang ímung panágat,</i> Operate your fishing equipment in the seas around Mindanao. <number>1a</number> run the woof to a certain point in the warp. <number>1b</number> <formx>{&mdash;|padalagan} sa dágang</formx> <tr>create</tr> a literary work. <number>2</number> allow to <tr>circulate</tr>, <tr>advertise</tr>. <i>Mau kanà ang tabì nga gipadágan níya,</i> That was the gossip she circulated. <number>3</number> create a literary work. <form>{pina-|pinadalágan}</form> <pos>n</pos> job <tr>not well done</tr>. <i>Pinadágan ang pagkatahì niíni,</i> This was hastily sewn. <number>2</number> <tr>literary creation</tr>. <form>{tag-|tagdalágan}, {tag-(&rarr;)|tagdalágan}</form> <pos>n</pos> one sent on <tr>errands</tr>. <i>Siya mauy tagdágan sa kinahanglánun sa balay,</i> He is the one who is sent to run after the things we need in the house. <form>{-an|daláganan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>runway</tr> in an airport. <form>{-in-ay(&rarr;)|dinalaganay}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wartime</tr> (when people ran away). <form>{tali-|talidalágan}</form> <pos>n</pos> about to <tr>run away</tr>.&dagger;

<p id=3972><form>dalagangdang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>shrub</tr> of waste places with alternate bipinnate leaves, used as a local medicine: <bio>Acacia sp</bio>.

<p id=3973><form>daláhig</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>implicate</tr> in a bad action, be <tr>influenced</tr>. <i>Ayaw dahíga (idáhig) ang ákung inahan sa átung panaglális,</i> Don&apos;t bring my mother into our quarrel. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> be brought to <tr>ruin</tr>, <tr>embarrassment</tr> by what s.o. else did.

<p id=3974><form>dalahik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>drag</tr> s.t. that slides along the ground, usually said of boats. <i>Idahik (dahika) ang sakayan sa baybáyun,</i> Drag the boat onto the beach. <number>2</number> drag oneself along on the buttocks. <i>Kanúnayng mahúgaw ang lubut sa bátà kay nagdahik na man pud,</i> The child&apos;s buttocks are always dirty because he drags himself around.

<p id=3975><form>dalakit</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to various species of <bio>Ficus</bio> which start as epiphytes and strangle their host, assuming tree form. They are much feared as being haunts of various supernatural beings.

<p id=3976><form>dálam</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>Congress</tr>.

<p id=3977><form>dalambà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>scaffolding</tr>.

<pb n=197>

<p id=3978><form>dálan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>street</tr>, <tr>road</tr>, <tr>way</tr>. <i>Giaspaltu ang tanang dálan,</i> All the streets are paved. <i>Nagbúlag silag dálan,</i> They parted ways. <number>2</number> way, <tr>means</tr>. <i>Ang pagbása dálan sa kinaadman,</i> Reading is a way to knowledge. <number>3</number> the way one <tr>acts</tr>, <tr>lives</tr>. <i>Giampíngan ang ímung dálan,</i> Your behavior is being observed. <number>4</number> <formx>hátag ug {&mdash;|dálan}</formx> give a <tr>hint</tr> of the answer. <i>Gitagáan ka nag dálan dì gihápun ka katubag?</i> You were given a hint and you still can&apos;t answer? <form>{sin-(&rarr;)|sindalan}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. else while walking. <i>Sindalanun (sindalanan, isindalan) nátug káun ang mansánas,</i> Let&apos;s eat the apples along the way. <number>2</number> do s.t. at the same time as one does s.t. else. <i>Nagsindalan siyag hílak samtang nagkanta,</i> She cried as she sang.

<p id=3979><form>dalángin</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>panalángin</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3980><form>dálap</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>measles</tr> with <tr>eczema</tr>, affecting the eyes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> have measles.

<!-- TODO: truncated half sentence -->

<p id=3981><form>dalapúgan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. sea <tr>fish</tr> growing to <measure reg="30 cm">a foot</measure> in length<corr sic=" and neal">.</corr>

<p id=3982><form>dalaput</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small <tr>tree</tr>, the leaves of which have medicinal use.

<p id=3983><form>dálar</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dollar</tr>.

<p id=3984><form>dalaurà</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>shrub</tr> with dark green leaves, wild and cultivated, the leaves of which produce a red dye. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> <tr>dye</tr> with <ix>dalaurà</ix>.

<p id=3985><form>daláyig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>admire</tr>, <tr>praise</tr>. <i>Gidáyig sa tanan ang íyang katahum,</i> Everyone admired her beauty. <number>1a</number> <formx>{gi-|gidaláyig}</formx> for a child to do s.t. all the more when he is told to stop, as a way to get attention. <i>Manday gibuyag, misíaw. Gidayig,</i> We told him to stop and he did it all the more. He&apos;s asking for attention. <form>{pa-|padaláyig}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>show off</tr>, ask for praise. <form>{mag-r-|magdadaláyig}</form> <tr>admirer</tr>, <tr>fan</tr>. <form>daygun</form> <tr>Christmas carols</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a]</itype> <tr>sing</tr> carols about s.t. <form>{pa&N;-|panaláyig}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> go <tr>caroling</tr>. <pos>n</pos> caroling. <form>dinaygúnan</form> <tr>proceeds</tr> from caroling. <form>mananaygun</form> <tr>carolers</tr>.

<p id=3986><form>daldag</form> <xr>= <sc>dagdag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3987><form>daldal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>influence</tr> s.o. to do s.t. objectionable. <i>Ayaw siyag daldála sa súgal,</i> Don&apos;t initiate him into the vice of gambling. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>reveal</tr> a secret in idle gossip. <i>Nag-áway sila kay gidaldálan na usab ang asáwa,</i> They&apos;re quarrelling because s.o. probably told the wife about it. <pos>n</pos> idle <tr>gossip</tr>. <form>{-ira|daldalira}, {-iru|daldaliru}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>spreading</tr> gossip, <tr>repeating</tr> idle rumors about others.

<p id=3988><form>dalhap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>move</tr> with intermittent sudden pushes of the body. <i>Midalhap siya sa halígi,</i> He shimmied up the post. <i>Nagdalhap na ang ákung apu,</i> My grandchild is already on the crawling stage.

<p id=3989><form>dalhig</form> <xr>= <sc>dalhug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=3990><form>dalhug</form> (from <ix>húlug</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB2; c1P]</itype> <tr>slide</tr> down, bring down by sliding. <i>Midalhug lang sa bakilid ang palwa nga ákung gisakyan,</i> The coconut frond I rode on just slid down the slope. <i>Akuy nagdalhug (nagpadalhug) sa kargamintu dihà sa andamyu,</i> I brought the cargo down by sliding it on the gangplank. <i>Nalingaw ang bátang nagpadalhug sa bakilid,</i> The child had fun sliding down the slope.

<p id=3991><form>dáli</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b5]</itype> <tr>deceive</tr> s.o., take one in. <i>Hápit ku madáli sa kwartang minì,</i> I was almost taken in by the fake money. <i>Ayaw kug dalíhi (dalíha) sa ímung pangatarúngan,</i> Don&apos;t try to fool me with your excuses.

<p id=3992><form>dalì<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>easy</tr>. <i>Dalì ra kaáyu kanang buhátun,</i> It is very easy to do that. <number>2</number> <tr>quick</tr>, <tr>immediate</tr>. <i>Dalì nga kahuwásan,</i> Quick relief. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B14]</itype> be in a <tr>hurry</tr>. <i>Dì ku kahuwat kay nagdalì ku,</i> I can&apos;t wait because I am in a hurry. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> do s.t. quickly. <i>Gidalì pagpáhid ni Dúris ang íyang lúhà,</i> Doris quickly wiped her tears. <form>dalìdalì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. hastily. <i>Ayaw siyag dalìdalía paghangyù,</i> Don&apos;t ask her hastily. <i>Dalìdalii lang siyag sulat,</i> Just write him hastily. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> be the first person to whom s.t. is likely to happen. <i>Aku ra giyuy madalìdalig tawag ni mam,</i> I&apos;m the most likely person for the teacher to call on. <form>dinalìdalì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>work</tr> done hastily. <form>madalìdalíun</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of <tr>rushing</tr> up things, <tr>impulsive</tr>. <form>dalìdálì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>approach</tr> s.o. directly without formality. <i>Bisag dalìdalíun na siyag hangyù, musugut lang,</i> Even if you ask him without preparing him beforehand, he&apos;ll go along with it. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> be overcome readily. <i>Dílì siya madalìdálì kay bansay man sa dyúdu,</i> You can&apos;t overcome him just like that because he is good in judo. <form>{hi&N;-r-(&larr;)|hinanálì}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>happening</tr> on the spur of the moment, <tr>suddenly</tr>. <i>Hinanálì ra kaáyu ang íyang kamatáyun,</i> His death was so sudden. <form>{-in-an|dinalian}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>urgent</tr>, in a hurry. <i>Dinalian ang ákung sulat kaníya,</i> My letter to him is urgent. <pos>n</pos> k.o. short term <tr>rice</tr> which ripens in three months. <form>{ka-|kadalì}</form> for a moment. <i>Gustu ku makigsulti nímu kadalì,</i> I would like to talk to you for a second.

<p id=3993><form>dalì<sub>2</sub></form> <tr>come here!</tr> <i>Dalì ra,</i> Please come here!

<p id=3994><form>dalid</form> <pos>n</pos> large <tr>root</tr> which is flat and projects above the ground.

<p id=3995><form>dalidáli</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to some species of flat fishes (flounders, soles, brills).

<p id=3996><form>daligdig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>trickle</tr> slowly. <i>Midaligdig ang mga singut sa íyang agtang,</i> Sweat trickled down his forehead. <pos>n</pos> <tr>trickling</tr>.

<p id=3997><form>dalikdik</form> <pos>n</pos> rolls, blobs of dirt on the body, esp. in the folds of the skin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> have folds of dirt.

<pb n=198>

<p id=3998><form>dalikyat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c]</itype> do s.t. for a short time, go s.w. for a short time. <i>Mudalikyat ku sa íla,</i> I will stop in to see them for a moment. <i>Dalikyátun (dalikyátan, idalikyat) ni nátù paghisgut,</i> Let&apos;s take out a second to talk this over. <i>Idalikyat ra ni sa íla,</i> Drop this off for a second to their house.

<p id=3999><form>dalílang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>supernatural being</tr>, a small white woman that does no harm.

<p id=4000><form>dalin-as</form> <xr>= <sc>dakin-as</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4001><form>dalinúan</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>karbalyas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4002><form>dalínug</form> <pos>n</pos> soft, whitish, oily substance on the surface of the meat of a mature coconut which is forming <ix>buwà</ix> (the sponge-like growth which precedes the sprout).

<p id=4003><form>dalipanus, dalipánus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; c]</itype> <tr>slip</tr> by sliding. <i>Midalipánus lang ang ubud sa ákung kamut,</i> The eel just slipped from my hand. <i>Gidalipánus nákù ang ákung kamut sa háwak sa babáyi,</i> I slid my hand down the woman&apos;s hips.

<p id=4004><form>dalipsang</form> <xr>= <sc>dalispang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4005><form>dalipsù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; c1P]</itype> <tr>slide</tr>. <i>Midalipsù ang bátang ákung gikúgus,</i> The child I was carrying slipped out of my arms. <i>Nadalipsù ang dyip sa danlug nga karsáda,</i> The jeep skidded on the slippery highway. <i>Nagkalingaw ang mga bátag padalipsù sa bakilid,</i> The children amused themselves sliding down the hill.

<p id=4006><form>dalipsut síhì</form> <xr>= <sc>síhì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4007><form>dalipunga, dalipungà</form> <xr>= <sc>alipunga</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4008><form>dalísay</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pure</tr> and <tr>unmixed</tr>, esp. coconut juice. <number>2</number> for emotions to be pure. <i>Dalísay nga gugma,</i> Unsullied love.

<p id=4009><form>dalispang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>slip</tr>, lose one&apos;s footing. <i>Midalispang siya sa pálut sa ságing,</i> He slipped on the banana peel. <number>2</number> lose one&apos;s honor, fall into disrepute. <i>Nadalispang siya sa mapasalígung sáad,</i> She lost her honor because of reassuring promises. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for wind or water to <tr>brush</tr> against s.t. <i>Ang dágat midalispang sa kílid sa barútu,</i> The sea slid off the edge of the boat. <i>Gidalispángan ang ákung nawung sa huyúhuy,</i> A breeze brushed against my face.

<p id=4010><form>dalispù</form> <xr>= <sc>dalipsù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4011><form>dálit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>offer</tr> food, refreshments, expressions of good feeling to guests. <i>Mudálit giyud nà silag pagkáun human sa pangadyì,</i> They will surely serve food after the novena. <i>Dalíti usab siyag pahíyum,</i> Greet her with a smile. <number>1a</number> offer for entertainment. <i>Kining prugramáha gidálit ninyu sa ...,</i> This program has been presented to you by ... <number>2</number> offer food to spirits in the <ix>búhat</ix> ceremonies. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. offered to visitors. <number>2</number> <tr>food</tr> offered in the <ix>búhat</ix> ceremonies.

<p id=4012><form>dalítik</form> <xr>= <sc>handilítik</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4013><form>dalius-us</form> <xr>= <sc>daus-us</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4014><form>dalù</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>selfish</tr>, disliking to give things. <i>Dawù nà siya kay dì man muhátag bísag gamay,</i> He&apos;s selfish, he won&apos;t even give a little bit. <number>2</number> eagerly <tr>desirous</tr> to do s.t., esp. eating. <i>Dawù kug mangga,</i> I&apos;m crazy about mangoes. <i>Dawù siyag bayli,</i> She is fond of dancing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B14; b6]</itype> become selfish. <form>{(&larr;)|dálù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>begrudge</tr> giving s.t. <i>Kun náa lay ákù dì giyud ku mudáwù nímu,</i> If I only had any, I wouldn&apos;t begrudge you any. <i>Ngánung gidawúan mu man ang kaugalíngun mung anak?</i> Why do you have to begrudge your own child? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>tease</tr> by offering s.t. and then taking it away. <i>Ayaw akug dalúa. Ug ihátag, ihátag,</i> Don&apos;t take away what you have given me. If you&apos;re going to give it, <asc>O.K.</asc> <form>kadalùdalù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be <tr>overly fond of</tr>. <i>Nagkadawùdawù ku sa lab-as isdà kay tagsa ra ku kakaun,</i> I like fresh fish too much because I rarely get it.

<p id=4015><form>daludalu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. slate-gray, edible cerith <tr>shell</tr>, about <measure reg="3.8 cm">1&frac12;&Prime;</measure>, common in saltwater marshes.

<p id=4016><form>dalugdug</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>thunder</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN]</itype> thunder. <i>Mudalugdug (manalugdug) na gánì buklása ang mga hinayhay,</i> If it thunders, take in the wash.

<p id=4017><form>daluk-an</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b8]</itype> be <tr>caught unaware</tr>. <i>Hidaluk-an sila nga nangáwat,</i> They were caught stealing.

<p id=4018><form>dálum</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <tr>beneath</tr>, <tr>below</tr>. <i>Daghang sagbut sa dálum sa ílang balay,</i> There is lots of rubbish beneath their house.

<p id=4019><form>dalundalun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for the fish to go in schools.

<p id=4020><form>dalundun</form> <xr>= <sc>dagundun<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=4021><form>dalungdung</form> <xr>= <sc>gunù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4022><form>dalunggan</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>dungug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4023><form>dalúpang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>shrub</tr>, the leaves of which are used topically for rashes and stomach ailments: <bio>Urena lobata</bio>. <form>{&mdash;|dalúpang} ginting</form> variety with palmately-lobed leaves, considered the best for medicinal use. <form>{&mdash;|dalúpang} kukhan</form> <pos>n</pos> variety with serrate but not lobed leaves, shaped like a fingernail.

<p id=4024><form>dalupápa</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>squid</tr> with a body growing to <measure reg="30 cm">a foot</measure> in length.

<p id=4025><form>dalupúgan</form> <xr>= <sc>dalapúgan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4026><form>dal-us</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB; c1P]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>drag</tr> or <tr>slide</tr> slowly in a downward direction. <i>Ang íyang nigusyu nagkadal-us sa kapútu,</i> His business gradually slipped into bankruptcy. <i>Idal-us (dal-úsa, padal-úsa, ipadal-ús) na lang ang sáku sa kupras pagkanáug,</i> Just put the sacks of copra off by letting them slide. <number>2</number> <tr>move</tr> forward slowly (figurative usage). <i>Ang sakayan midal-us sa línawng dágat,</i> The boat <pb n=199>moved slowly over the calm sea. <number>3</number> <itype>[APB; c1P]</itype> move the eyes down over s.t. <i>Midal-us ang íyang pagtan-aw gíkan sa líug ngadtu sa bitíis,</i> He let his gaze move over her from her neck to her legs. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|dal-usan}, {-anan(&rarr;)|dal-usanan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>slide</tr>.

<p id=4027><form>dalus-us</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB; c1P]</itype> <tr>slide down</tr>. <i>Mahadluk siyang mudalus-us (mupadalus-us) sa gabayan sa hagdanan,</i> He&apos;s afraid to slide down the bannister. <i>Kinsay nagdalus-us (nagpadalus-us) sa sáku sa harína?</i> Who slid the sack of flour down? <form>{-an(&rarr;)|dalus-usan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>slide</tr>, children&apos;s playground equipment.

<p id=4028><form>daluyduy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4; a4]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>cough</tr> hard continuously, have such a cough. <i>Nagdaluyduy ang ubu sa bátà,</i> The child&apos;s cough was hard and continuous. <number>2</number> for tears to come fast and furious. <i>Nagdaluyduy ang íyang mga lúhà,</i> Her tears flowed copiously.

<p id=4029><form>dalwak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hernia</tr> in the groin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; b4]</itype> have, cause hernia in the groin.

<p id=4030><form>dalyang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> for s.t. solid to be in such large quantities it hangs out beyond its area. <i>Midalyang ang íyang tiyan,</i> His stomach hangs out over his belt. <i>Nagdalyang lang ang pagkáun sa lamísa,</i> The food on the table is in overflowing quantities.

<p id=4031><form>dam</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dam</tr>.

<p id=4032><form>dáma<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>demijohn</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|dáma} hwána</form> <xr>= <sc>dáma<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B256; b6]</itype> be a demijohn full. <i>Wà ra ni mudáma (madáma) ang tubà nga nahurut námù,</i> The toddy we drank wasn&apos;t even a demijohn. <form>damahan</form> <xr>= <sc>dáma<corr><sub>1</sub></corr></sc></xr>.

<p id=4033><form>dáma<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lady-in-waiting</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>runner-ups</tr> in a beauty contest who attend the winner in the coronation.

<p id=4034><form>dáma<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> game of <tr>checkers</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>king</tr> in checkers. <number>3</number> a <tr>furrow</tr> which crosses the main furrows (<ix>tudling</ix>). After harrowing (<ix>pagsudlay</ix>), a furrow is made for the seeds (<ix>pagtudling</ix>), after which a cross furrow is made (<ix>pagdáma</ix>) to mark where to put the seeds. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; a2]</itype> <tr>play</tr> checkers. <i>Ug gustu kang tigpaabilidaray, damáhun lang nátù,</i> If you want to have a contest, let&apos;s have it out playing checkers. <number>2</number> <itype>[B23; a12]</itype> become a king in checkers. <i>Bantay kay tulu nay nakadáma sa ákung batu,</i> Watch out because three of my men have become king. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>plow</tr> a field across the main furrow to mark where the seeds are to be placed. <form>{(&rarr;)|dama}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> <number>1</number> get to first base with a woman. <i>Naglángan ka lang kay dì giyud ka makadama kang Maríya,</i> You&apos;re wasting your time because you can&apos;t get to first base with Mary. <number>2</number> <tr>convince</tr>, have an effect on. <i>Ang mga hulgà dílì giyud makadama kanákù,</i> Threats can have no effect on me. <form>damahan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>checker board</tr>.

<p id=4035><form>dáma dinutsi</form> <pos>n</pos> a climbing ornamental shrub bearing numerous, slender, scented, yellow-green flowers which open at night: <bio>Cestrum nocternum</bio>.

<p id=4036><form>dámag<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> for ghosts to <tr>molest</tr> people causing them to get sick or disturbed. <i>Kalag nga wà kabinditáhi ang midámag níya,</i> An unblessed soul haunted him. <number>2</number> <formx>{gi-|gidámag}</formx> are you crazy, doing s.t. unthinkable. <i>Gidámag ka dihà nga nangulitáwu ka mag minyù?</i> Are you crazy (lit. molested by a ghost) courting a married woman?

<p id=4037><form>dámag<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>damlag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4038><form>dam-ag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[BC1; b6]</itype> <tr>crash</tr>, <tr>bump into</tr>. <i>Nadam-ag ku sa lamísa kay ngitngit,</i> In the darkness I bumped into the table. <i>Nagkadam-ag mi,</i> We crashed into each other. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN2; b6]</itype> <tr>lunge</tr> at, <tr>attack</tr>. <i>Gidam-ágan dáyun sa asáwa ang kirída sa íyang bána,</i> The wife lunged at her husband&apos;s paramour. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> do s.t. impulsively without much thought. <i>Mahal ra níyang pagkapalíta kay midam-ag man dáyun,</i> She paid too high a price because she rushed into buying it.

<p id=4039><form>damagan<sub>1</sub></form> <corr><pos>n</pos> </corr>k.o. <tr>rudderfish</tr>: <bio>Kyphosus spp</bio>.

<p id=4040><form>damagan<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>beautiful woman</tr> (slang).

<p id=4041><form>damahwána</form> <xr>= <sc>dáma<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=4042><form>damak</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>careless</tr> in attending to small, trivial things. <i>Damak. Way panudlay, way pamatúnis,</i> He&apos;s careless. He doesn&apos;t comb his hair, he doesn&apos;t button his pants. <i>Damak, bisag ása biyái ang hunsuy,</i> He&apos;s careless. He leaves his pipe any old place. <i>Damak. Húgaw kaáyug ági,</i> He&apos;s very careless. His handwriting is untidy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> be, become careless.

<p id=4043><form>daman<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B14; a4]</itype> <tr>talk</tr>, <tr>walk</tr> in one&apos;s sleep. <i>Unsa nang ímung gipanulti? Nagdaman ka man tingáli,</i> What are you saying? You must be talking in your sleep. <i>Kanúnay siyang damnun run. Unsa may nakasámuk níya?</i> What&apos;s bothering him that he always walks in his sleep? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>dream</tr>. <i>Unsay ímung gidaman?</i> What did you dream? <pos>n</pos> <tr>walking</tr>, <tr>talking</tr>, <tr>crying</tr> in sleep. <form>damandaman</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>padamandáman</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[BN; b5c1]</itype> <tr>appear</tr> vaguely to one&apos;s senses. <i>Damandamanun (damandamanan) ku sa manánuy níyang tíngug káda gabíi,</i> Her sweet voice comes back vaguely to me every evening. <i>Ngánung idamandaman (damandamanun) nímu pagpakítà?</i> Why don&apos;t you show it clearly? <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pretense</tr> of walking, talking in sleep. <number>2</number> <tr>vague</tr> sense of s.t. <form>padamandáman</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>pretend</tr> to walk or talk in sleep.

<p id=4044><form>daman<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>mau ra</sc> (dialectal).</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>mau</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4045><form>dámas</form> <pos>n</pos> small, narrow dug-out <tr>boat</tr> which <pb n=200>may or may not have outriggers.

<p id=4046><form>dambà</form> <xr>= <sc>dalambà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4047><form>dambil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dumbbell</tr>. <pos>a</pos> <tr>stupid</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be <tr>dull</tr> and stupid. <i>Gidambílan kaáyu kung nagtan-aw sa ímung míd,</i> Your maid seems to me to be a terrible dumbbell.

<p id=4048><form>damgu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dream</tr>. <i>Ákung mga damgu nga maduktur ku,</i> My dreams of becoming a doctor. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> dream. <i>Damgúhun ku ikaw,</i> I&apos;ll dream of you. <form>madamgúhun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dreamy</tr>, <tr>dreamily</tr>.

<p id=4049><form>damhuy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B14; a4b4]</itype> be <tr>sleepy</tr>. <i>Kanúnay siyang magdamhuy sa klási,</i> He&apos;s always sleepy in class. <i>Kat&umacracu;g na, kay gidamhuy (gidamhuyan) ka na man,</i> Go to sleep because you&apos;re sleepy.

<p id=4050><form>dámids</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>expense</tr> in a treat, compulsory contribution, and the like (slang). <i>Ang dámids sa ikskursiyun tris káda táwu,</i> The damages for the excursion are three pesos a person. <i>Pilay ímung dámids sa blu-awut?</i> How much did you spend for your party?

<p id=4051><form>damig</form> <pos>n</pos> small amount of <tr>food</tr> eaten with staple. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>eat</tr> a small, simple <tr>side dish</tr> together with the staple. <i>Asin lay ílang gidamig,</i> The only thing they had to go with their rice was salt.

<p id=4052><form>damikà, damíkà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b3]</itype> <tr>sit</tr> around doing nothing. <i>Nagdamikà (nagdamíkà) lang mi kay way buluhatun,</i> We are just sitting around because we have nothing to do.&dagger;

<p id=4053><form>damili</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dirty</tr> and <tr>sticky</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> get, become dirty. <i>Nagdamili ang lamísa kay gitrapúhan ug húgaw,</i> The table is sticky because it was wiped with a dirty cloth.

<p id=4054><form>damlag</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>future</tr>. <i>Wà siya maghunàhúnà kun unsay damlag,</i> He is not thinking about his future. <number>2</number> day after tomorrow. <i>Ugmà dì, apan sa damlag,</i> Not tomorrow, but on the next day. <number>3</number> <tr>tomorrow</tr> morning. <i>Dì na lang ta manggíkan karun kay hápun na. Damlag na lang,</i> Let&apos;s not leave today because it&apos;s late. Let&apos;s leave tomorrow morning. <form>ugmà {&mdash;|damlag}</form> <number>1</number> in the <tr>future</tr>. <i>Mahímu siyang abugádu ugmà damlag,</i> He will become a lawyer in the future. <number>2</number> tomorrow, God willing. <i>Mularga ku ugmà damlag,</i> I&apos;ll leave tomorrow, God willing.

<p id=4055><form>dampilas</form> <xr>= <sc>dampiyas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4056><form>dampiyas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> for a bladed instrument to <tr>glance off</tr>. <i>Pastilan ug dampiyasan gánì sa sundang nang ímung tiil, ikaw lang,</i> Goodness, if the bolo glances off onto your feet, don&apos;t say I didn&apos;t warn you.

<p id=4057><form>dampug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>put</tr> s.t. s.w. carelessly. <i>Idampug lang sa daplin ang bulingun,</i> Just throw the dirty clothes to the side.

<p id=4058><form>damput<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>dangput</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4059><form>damput<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>dampug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4060><form>dampuug</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>large amount</tr> of s.t. piled up. <i>Dampuug sa basúra,</i> Large heap of garbage. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>pile up</tr>, form a heap. <i>Nagdampuug na ang átung mga bulingun,</i> The laundry is piled up now.

<p id=4061><form>damù</form> <xr>= <sc>daghan</sc>, <ix>a</ix> (dialectal).</xr> <form>{(&larr;)|dámù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>daghan</sc>, <ix>v</ix> (dialectal).</xr>

<p id=4062><form>dámù</form> <xr>= <sc>kanámù</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>kami</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4063><form>dam-ug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>sprinkle</tr> water on s.t. to moisten it. <i>Dam-úgan ta ug dágat ang kupras,</i> Let&apos;s sprinkle sea water on the copra. <number>2</number> <tr>spurting</tr> water from the mount on a fighting cock in order to strengthen it. It is also massaged at the same time.

<p id=4064><form>dam-uk</form> <xr>= <sc>dan-uk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4065><form>damulmug, damulug</form> <xr>= <sc>dalínug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4066><form>dámung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; b5]</itype> for s.t. to <tr>persist</tr> and <tr>intensify</tr> despite attempts made against it. <i>Midámung ang pátay sa dihang nangusug ug kampanya ang kapulisan,</i> The killings are on the rise despite the intensified police campaign. <i>Damúngan (damúngun) ka núug hílak sa bátà ug ímung pahilúmun,</i> The baby will persist in crying if you hush him up.

<p id=4067><form>damurhaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> be <tr>blank</tr> in the mind, <tr>unthinking</tr> about what one is doing. <i>Nagdamurhaw lang nang batáa. Dì katunung,</i> That boy doesn&apos;t pay attention to what he&apos;s doing. He never does it right.

<p id=4068><form>damúsing</form> <xr>= <sc>dumísing</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4069><form>dam-ut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b]</itype> <tr>wash</tr> around the mouth. <form>{pa&N;-|panam-ut}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> wash one&apos;s mouth off. <i>Panam-ut dihà. Nagkamulitsing ang ímung bàbà,</i> Wash your mouth; it&apos;s covered with dirt.

<p id=4070><form>damyang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>spread</tr> s.t. out, usually grains or small objects. <i>Idamyang ang bás sa nátad,</i> Spread the sand over the front yard. <i>Gidamyángan sa ahinti ang salug sa íyang mga gibaligyang duwáan,</i> The salesman spread the toys on the floor. <form>{pa-|padamyang}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <number>1</number> have s.o. <tr>spread</tr> s.t. out. <number>2</number> <tr>lie</tr> spread out. <i>Nagpadamyang giyud siyag higdà mu rag nagpauga,</i> She is lying with her arms and legs spread out like laundry spread out to dry.

<p id=4071><form>damyu</form> <xr>= <sc>andamyu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4072><form>dan</form> particle which warns the interlocutor that what is going to be said is connected with what immediately follows it. <number>1</number> <ix>preceding a statement which describes the reason for what follows</ix>: so ... <i>Dan, kay walà man siya mutuun, nahagbung,</i> So, since he didn&apos;t study, he failed. <i>Dan, nía kami arun pagbisíta ninyu,</i> Well, we came here to visit you. <number>2</number> <ix>preceding a question with a condition</ix>: so then, if [so-and-so] is the case, what will happen? <i>Dan, ug walà ka dinhi, kinsa may <pb n=201>muhíkay sa pagkáun?</i> So then, if you&apos;re not here, who will prepare the meals? <number>3</number> particle to hold a narration together: <tr>now then</tr>. <i>Adlaw tung Duminggu. Dan, sa sunud adlaw, Lúnis kadtu,</i> It was Sunday. Then, the next day, it was Monday.

<p id=4073><form>dán</form> <xr>= <sc>dálan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4074><form>dánag</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>half-conscious</tr>. <i>Dánag na lang ang tinan-awan sa táwu nga hubug kaáyu,</i> That drunkard looked at us as if he were only half-aware of what was going on. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B45]</itype> be half conscious. <i>Nagdánag na lang ang pamínaw sa himatyun,</i> The dying man is only dimly aware of what is going on.&dagger;

<p id=4075><form>dan-ag</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>light</tr> given off. <i>Dan-ag sa daktul,</i> Light of the full moon. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bright</tr>. <number>2</number> well-illuminated. <i>Dan-ag ang baylihánan,</i> The dance floor is well-illuminated. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give off light. <i>Gidan-ágan ang íyang nawung sa háyag sa ispat,</i> His face was illuminated by the light from the flashlight.

<p id=4076><form>danakit</form> <xr>= <sc>dalakit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4077><form>dánas</form> <xr>= <sc>gánas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4078><form>danasdánas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c6]</itype> use a vehicle or wear clothes going through a place it might get damaged. <i>Kinsay nagdanasdánas sa bisklíta nga nagkagarasgaras man?</i> Who treated the bicycle so rough? There are scratches on it. <i>Kining maung idanasdánas sa kakugnan,</i> Wear the denim in going through the saw grass.

<p id=4079><form>dánaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> form a <tr>pool</tr> in, <tr>flood</tr>. <i>Magdánaw (danáwan) ang nátad basta muulan,</i> The yard gets flooded when it rains. <i>Nagdánaw ang túbig sa nátad,</i> The water is forming a pool in the yard. <form>{(&rarr;)|danaw}</form> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>dánaw</sc>.</xr> <pos>n</pos> pool of water.

<p id=4080><form>danay</form> it is <tr>likely</tr> to happen. <i>Danay man ta hibyaan sa dyip ning ímung pagkalanganlanganun,</i> We are likely to miss the jeep because of your <corr sic=dillydallying>dilly-dallying</corr>.

<p id=4081><form>danga</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> for a failure to do s.t. to lead to misfortune. <i>Nakadanga ang ímung pagkatabian. Naapil ka sa kasámuk,</i> Your big mouth got you into trouble. Now you&apos;re involved in the quarrel. <i>Gidangahan ka sa ímung pagkagáhig úlu,</i> What happened to you is the result of your stubbornness.

<p id=4082><form>dangàdangà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>approaching</tr>. <i>Nagdangàdangà na si Máma. Tabángi sa íyang dala,</i> Mother is approaching. Help her carry her things. <form>{(&larr;)|dangàdángà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>approach</tr> for help. <i>Dì siya madangàdangáan kay kuríput,</i> You <corr sic="can not">cannot</corr> approach him for help because he is tight.

<p id=4083><form>dangag</form> <xr>= <sc>danghag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4084><form>dángan<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> any <tr>pest</tr> that destroys crops. <i>Ang mga tanum nadáut sa dángan,</i> The plants were destroyed by the pests. <number>2</number> <tr>destruction</tr> caused by pests. <i>Tungud sa dángan sa ilagà gamay mig áni,</i> Because of the destruction wrought by the rats, we had a small harvest. <pos>a</pos> <tr>destructive</tr>. <i>Dángan kaáyung bataána. Manggisì sa balasahun,</i> What a destructive child. He rips up the magazines. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> for pests or s.t. comparable to <tr>destroy</tr>. <i>Ang súgal ug ínum makadángan sa pagpuyù,</i> Gambling and drinking are destructive to family life. <i>Gidangánan (gidángan) ang ámung humayan,</i> Our ricefield was destroyed by pests.

<p id=4085><form>dángan<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <ix>palutput</ix> <tr>fish</tr>.

<p id=4086><form>dangarag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B46; b(1)]</itype> be <tr>careless</tr>, <tr>heedless</tr>, heedless of detail. <i>Ug magdangarag kang mulabang sa karsáda, maligsan ka giyud,</i> If you are careless in crossing the street, you will get run over. <i>Ayawg dangaragi nang inyung búhat arun dílì magkasáyup,</i> Don&apos;t be careless with your work so that you won&apos;t make mistakes. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> come <tr>suddenly</tr> s.w. for a reason. <i>Mudangarag dáyun nà siya dinhi kun may kasuk-an sa íla,</i> She runs here if anything goes wrong at home. <pos>a</pos> careless.

<p id=4087><form>dangarang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>approach</tr>. <i>Maung nagláin ang panahun kay náa may nagdangarang nga bagyu,</i> The weather is rather bad because a storm is approaching. <number>2</number> come into view. <i>Ang nagdangarang nga bapur,</i> The boat coming into view.

<p id=4088><form>dangas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> having a <tr>receding hairline</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> have a receding hairline. <i>Mudangas (madangas) ang ímung agtang ug magsígi kag kálù,</i> You will get bald on your forehead if you keep wearing a hat.

<p id=4089><form>dangas<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; c1]</itype> be <tr>inattentive</tr> to what one is supposed to be doing. <i>Nagdangas siyang nanáug. Nahúlug hinúun,</i> She wasn&apos;t paying attention when she went down the stairs, so she fell.

<p id=4090><form>dángas, dangás</form> <xr>= <sc>danglas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4091><form>dángat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> <tr>reach</tr>, <tr>arrive</tr> at a place. <i>Midángat mi sa ámung distínu,</i> We arrived at our destination. <i>Walà pa ku dangáti ug kwarta,</i> No money has reached me yet. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23; b5]</itype> happen to s.o. <i>Ayaw giyud ku basúla kun may mudángat nímu,</i> Don&apos;t ever blame me if s.t. happens to you. <i>Mu nay ímung gidángat (gidangátan),</i> That&apos;s what happened to you. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> for time to <tr>elapse</tr>. <i>Wà makadángat ang tulu ka adlaw namatay ang pasyinti,</i> The patient died before three days had elapsed. <i>Gidangtan sila ug tulu ka búlan sa Sibu,</i> They&apos;ve been in Cebu for three months. <number>4</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> go to a woman&apos;s house for the purpose of proposing marriage. <i>Mudángat ta run sa íla arun <pb n=202>mamáyi,</i> Let&apos;s go to their house to make the marriage proposal. <form>{pa-|padángat}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>state</tr> s.t. by letter, cable, etc. <i>Ipadángat ang ímung urdir sa ámung upisína,</i> Send your order to our office. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>cause</tr> to get s.w. <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> <tr>wait</tr> for s.t. to happen. <i>Padangátun ang takdul únà itárì ang manuk,</i> Wait for the full moon before you allow your cock to fight. <form>{<corr sic="r-an">-r-an</corr>|dadangátan}</form> <pos>n</pos> what happens to one. <i>Dautan ang ímung dadangátan,</i> You will come to grief.

<p id=4092><form>dángaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>measurement</tr>, the <tr>distance</tr> from the tip of the thumb to the tip of the middle finger extended. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>measure</tr> s.t. in <ix>dangaw&apos;s</ix>. <form>dangawdangaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. inchworm, caterpillar that moves by lifting the center of its body, about <measure reg="5.1 cm">2&Prime;</measure>. It turns into a butterfly. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be <tr>infested</tr> with this sort of inchworm.

<p id=4093><form>dangay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>danglay</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> dried <ix>palutput</ix> fish.

<p id=4094><form>dángay</form> <xr>= <sc>danglay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4095><form>dangdang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>heat</tr> s.t. slightly near fire or under the sun. <i>Idangdang (dangdánga) ang túbig sa ínit,</i> Leave the water in the sun to heat it.

<p id=4096><form>danggà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for a child to be <tr>spoiled</tr> to the point of being abusive. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be spoiled, be <tr>abusive</tr> from being spoiled. <i>Mudanggà (madanggà) siyag patumánan sa íyang <corr sic=gutus>gustu</corr>,</i> He will become spoiled if his every wish is granted.

<p id=4097><form>danggà<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>anggà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4098><form>danggas</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> running a <tr>slight fever</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>warm</tr>. <i>Danggas pa ang plantsa,</i> The iron is still warm. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a4]</itype> have a slight fever. <i>Walà man gánì danggása (magdanggas) ang bátà,</i> The child doesn&apos;t even have a fever.

<p id=4099><form>danggit</form> <pos>n</pos> small, smooth-skinned and flat fish with thirteen poisonous dorsal spines. <number>1</number> name given to the species of <bio>Teuthis</bio> which have dots. <number>2</number> by extension, name given to other small fishes that are species of <bio>Teuthis</bio>. <form>{-in-|dinanggit}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>move</tr> toward s.t. sideways or do s.t. with the side facing the goal of the action. <i>Dinanggit ang íyang initsahan sa búla,</i> He shoots the ball with his side facing the basket. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do, move with the side towards the goal of the action.&dagger;

<p id=4100><form>danghag</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>inattentive</tr> to what one is doing. <i>Danghag siya nga naglakaw, mau nà nga nabulásut,</i> He wasn&apos;t paying attention to what he was doing, so he stepped into a hole. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146]</itype> <tr>fail</tr> to pay attention. <i>Nagdanghag ka tingáli pagpanuklì maung naalkansi ta,</i> You were probably careless in making change. That is why we are short now. <i>Nagdanghag nang ímung nawung,</i> You&apos;re looking everywhere but where you are supposed to be.

<p id=4101><form>danghal</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lacking</tr> alertness and attention. <i>Danghal nga iksplikahan. Dílì manimátì,</i> She has a dopey expression on her face when you explain s.t. to her. She doesn&apos;t listen. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be <tr>dopey</tr>, <tr>unalert</tr>. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|danghalan}</form> <pos>a</pos> of a dopey sort.

<p id=4102><form>danghili</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fish</tr> similar to and of same genera as <ix>danggit</ix> (and loosely also called <ix>danggit</ix>) but which have a mosaic pattern: <bio>Teuthis spp.</bio>

<p id=4103><form>dangílag</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>kindling</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>set</tr> a fire with kindling. <i>Sinipilya ang idangílag pagháling,</i> Set the fire by using wood shavings.

<p id=4104><form>dangili</form> <xr>= <sc>danghili</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4105><form>dangka</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>warm</tr> s.t. gently by placing near a fire, usually in order to dry it. <i>Idangka (dangkáha) ang mga basang sinínà,</i> Put the wet dresses near the fire.

<p id=4106><form>dangkalan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible jellyfish, to <measure reg="51 cm">20&Prime;</measure> in diameter, dome-shaped, violet, fading toward the edges, with short tentacles that inflict a mild sting.

<p id=4107><form>dangkit</form> <xr>= <sc>langkit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4108><form>dangkúlus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>jump</tr> playfully on s.o. <i>Gidangkulúsan (gidangkúlus) sa dakung irù ang ituy,</i> The big dog leaps about playfully on the puppy. <number>2</number> <itype>[C2; c3]</itype> <tr>frolic</tr> with physical intimacy. <i>Láin tan-áwun ang babáying makigdangkúlus ug mga laláki,</i> It looks terrible for a woman to engage in horseplay with men.

<p id=4109><form>danglas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>clamber</tr> over, <tr>climb</tr> up on s.t. vertical. <i>Dílì madanglas ang paril kay dangug,</i> You can&apos;t climb up that wall because it&apos;s slippery. <i>Danglásan aku sa mga bátà ig-abut nákù,</i> The children clamber all over me when I get home. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2; c]</itype> <tr>run</tr> boats onto the beach. <i>Midángas (midangás, midanglas) ang sakayan sa lapyahan,</i> The boat was beached on the shore. <pos>a</pos> for one&apos;s forehead to be wide and sloping due to a receding hairline.

<p id=4110><form>danglay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large slipmouth with a protracted mouth: <bio>Leiognathus equulus</bio>.

<p id=4111><form>danglug</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>slippery</tr> from being wet or having s.t. slimy on it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> become, make slippery. <i>Mudángug (madángug) ang kalsáda kun muulan,</i> The road will become slippery when it rains. <pos>n</pos> <tr>slime</tr> emitted by snails. <form>{pa-|padanglug}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> make s.t. slippery. <i>Tubà ang átung ipadángug áring litsun,</i> We&apos;ll wash the roast pig down (lit. make it slippery) with toddy. <number>2</number> <tr>bribe</tr>. <i>Magpadángug siya úsà mulíhuk,</i> He waits for a bribe before he gets moving. <pos>n</pos> grease money.

<p id=4112><form>dangput</form> <pos>n</pos> room <tr>partition</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make a <pb n=203>room partition.

<p id=4113><form>dangs</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fairy</tr>, <tr>homosexual</tr> that acts effeminate.

<p id=4114><form>dangug, dángug</form> <xr>= <sc>danglug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4115><form>dangulngul</form> <xr>= <sc>danguynguy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4116><form>dangup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> <number>1</number> go s.w. for safety. <i>Ang mga tulisan midangup sa búkid,</i> The bandits took refuge in the mountain. <number>2</number> <tr>resort</tr> to s.t. <i>Midangup sila sa hukmánan,</i> They resorted to the courts. <number>3</number> go, turn to s.o. for help. <i>Walà siyay láing kadangpan,</i> He has no one else to turn to. <i>Ayaw ug idangup ang ímung prublíma diri nákù,</i> Don&apos;t bring your troubles to me.

<p id=4117><form>danguynguy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3c1]</itype> <tr>wail</tr>, <tr>cry</tr> with deep sorrow. <i>Gidanguyngúyan níya ang ámung panagbúlag,</i> She wept profusely because we broke our engagement. <pos>n</pos> <tr>crying</tr>, <tr>wailing</tr>.

<p id=4118><form>dani</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>persuade</tr>, <tr>win over</tr>, <tr>convince</tr>. <i>Rasun nga dílì makadani (makapadani) nákù,</i> Reasons that cannot convince me. <i>Dílì madani ang mga Múrus sa átung tinuúhan,</i> You can&apos;t convert the Muslims to our religion. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>induce</tr> s.o. to do s.t. along with s.o. <i>Mudani aku níya sa pagpangalígù,</i> I&apos;ll invite her to go swimming. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> <tr>captivate</tr>, <tr>allure</tr>. <i>Pahiyum nga makadani,</i> An alluring smile. <form><corr sic=madanihun>madaníhun</corr></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>convincing</tr>. <i>Madaníhung pangatarúngan,</i> Persuasive reasoning. <number>2</number> <tr>alluring</tr>. <i>Madaníhung tíngug,</i> An alluring voice.

<p id=4119><form>danlak</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rupture</tr> immediately above a man&apos;s genitals such that the intestines or bladder descend into the scrotal sack. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a1b4]</itype> have rupture of this type.

<p id=4120><form>danlug</form> <xr>= <sc>danglug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4121><form>dansbul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dodge ball</tr> game. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a2]</itype> <tr>play</tr> dodge ball.

<p id=4122><form>dansir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dancer</tr> in a nightclub, dancer on stage. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a dancer.

<p id=4123><form>dansuy</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. boy&apos;s <tr>shirt</tr> similar to the T-shirt in form, but with an opening partway down the front, made of calico or other cheap woven material. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, <tr>wear</tr> a <ix>dansuy</ix>.

<p id=4124><form>danug</form> <xr>= <sc>ban-ug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4125><form>dan-uk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>dump</tr> s.t. s.w. carelessly. <i>Ayaw idan-uk sa suuk ang inyung mga bulingun,</i> Don&apos;t just dump your dirty clothes in the corner. <number>2</number> dump <tr>blame</tr> on s.o. <i>Aku ang gidan-úkan sa pagbásul,</i> They put the blame on my shoulders.

<p id=4126><form>danyus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>damages</tr> awarded by court in a lawsuit. <form>{&mdash;|danyus} piruhisyus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>punitive damages</tr> in a court case.

<p id=4127><form>dáp</form> <xr>= <sc>dálap</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4128><form>dapà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>storage</tr> place (hut or large box) for corn and rice.

<p id=4129><form>dapà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>lie</tr> on the stomach. <i>Gidapà sa mga mungha ang ílang láwas atubángan sa Santu Kristu,</i> The monks lay prostrate before the crucifix.

<p id=4130><form>dapà<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shoes</tr> (slang). <form>way {&mdash;|dapà}</form> name given to the guerillas during the Japanese occupation because they were mostly barefoot.

<p id=4131><form>dap-ag</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. poisonous sea urchin, similar to <ix>tuyum</ix> but with white spots on the spines.

<p id=4132><form>dapak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> for a top to fail to spin.

<p id=4133><form>dápak</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish similar to a spotted snapper in shape, but much smaller.

<p id=4134><form>dápal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>measurement</tr> equal to the width of the palm with the fingers outstretched and together reckoned from the middle of the thumb to the base of the little finger. <form>{(&rarr;)|dapal}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> <tr>strike</tr> with the palm of the hand. <i>Dapalun ku ang ímung úlu,</i> I&apos;ll slap your head. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1c]</itype> put s.t. in the mouth with the palm of the hand. <i>Ayaw idapal ug hurut ang <corr sic=kik>kík</corr>,</i> Don&apos;t shove all of the cake in your mouth at once. <pos>n</pos> <tr>flat-footed</tr>. <form>dapaldapal</form> <pos>n</pos> person who is unusually short.

<p id=4135><form>dap-as<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>climb</tr> up s.t. using both hands and feet. <i>Dap-ásun lang níya ang lubi ug way hakhak,</i> He&apos;ll shin up the coconut tree if there are no steps.

<p id=4136><form>dap-as<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>daplas</sc>.</xr> <form>{&mdash;|dap-as} sa kapáyas</form> <xr>= <sc>kalatkat sa kapáyas</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>kalatkat</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4137><form>dápat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2SC; ac]</itype> bring s.t. into contact with s.t. else. <i>Nagdapat sa yútà,</i> Touching the ground. <i>Dapátun ta ang duha ta ka kamut,</i> Let&apos;s let our hands touch each other. <i>Idápat ang ímung tiil sa sanga,</i> Let your feet touch the branch. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>administer</tr> medicine. <i>Nahikatúlug siya human kadapátig tambal,</i> He fell asleep after the medicine had been administered to him. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> lay hands on one, <tr>hit</tr>. <i>Anad giyud nà siyang mudápat sa íyang asáwa,</i> He is used to hitting his wife. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> use in building s.t. <i>Dì ku mudápat ug lawáan sa salug,</i> I won&apos;t use lauan wood for the floor. <i>Ang balay gidapátan ug kawáyan,</i> The house was built of bamboo. <number>5</number> <itype>[c]</itype> <tr>money</tr> spent on. <i>Unsay ímung gidapátan sa ímung kwarta?</i> What have you done with your money? a suitable, fitting (used by speakers influenced by Tagalog). <i>Dì dápat kanang kulúra nímu,</i> That is not a good color for you. <i>Dílì nà dápat pagabuhátun,</i> You shouldn&apos;t do that. <form>walay {&mdash;|dápat}</form> useless, inapplicable. <i>Way dápat nang kahúya kay gabuk,</i> That wood is useless because it&apos;s rotten. <form>{(&rarr;)|dapat}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>material</tr> used to make s.t., usually a house. <i>Lig-un ug dapat kining baláya,</i> This house is made of strong materials. <pos>a</pos> <tr>flat-footed</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> become flat-footed. <form>{ig-r-(&rarr;)|igdadápat}</form> <xr>= <sc>dapat</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<pb n=204>

<p id=4138><form>dápaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> hair on plants that causes itchiness. <number>2</number> <tr>rash</tr> resulting from contact with plants that have itchy hair. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b4]</itype> be <tr>affected</tr> with <ix>dápaw</ix>. <form>dapawdapaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. sea urchin with fine, whitish needles. <form>{-un|dápawun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>covered</tr> with itchy hair-like growths.

<p id=4139><form>dápaw<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>boastful</tr>, <tr>egotistic</tr>. <number>2</number> prone to tattling and gossiping. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; ab6]</itype> be boastful, egotistic. <i>Madápaw man ka lagi ug iatubang ug dága,</i> You become boastful when you are with a young lady.

<p id=4140><form>dapay</form> <xr>= <sc>dapal</sc>, <ix>v</ix> <bx>1</bx>.</xr>

<p id=4141><form>dapdap</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small tree of the seashore, widely planted as an ornamental for its numerous bright red flowers: <bio>Erythrina variegata</bio>.

<p id=4142><form>dapì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>slap</tr> with the open palm or s.t. flat. <i>Bantay kay hidapian unyà ka,</i> Watch out, or you&apos;ll get slapped. <i>Kining rulíra ákung idapì sa ímung samput,</i> I&apos;ll spank you with this ruler. <form>dapìdapì</form> <pos>n</pos> top part of the buttocks.

<p id=4143><form>dápig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>take sides</tr> in a quarrel. <i>Midápig kami kaníya kay hustu siya,</i> We took sides with him because he is right. <i>Walà akuy gidapígan,</i> I am not taking sides with anyone. <form>{ka-|kadápig}, {-um-r-(&rarr;)|dumadapig}, {um-l-(&rarr;)|dumalapig}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>political supporter</tr>.

<p id=4144><form>dap-ig</form> <xr>= <sc>dip-ig</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4145><form>dapigas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26; b8]</itype> <tr>loose</tr> one&apos;s footing, <tr>slip</tr> off its footing. <i>Midapigas (nadapigas) ang íyang tiil sa ang-ang,</i> His foot slipped off the step. <i>Nadapigas ang tiil sa lamísa sa bangil,</i> The leg of the table slipped off the edge.

<p id=4146><form>dapilus, dapílus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BP]</itype> <tr>slide</tr> straight downward. <i>Nadapílus ang bátà sa íyang kamut,</i> The child slid out of his hands. <i>Nagdapílus siya sa túbu,</i> He slid down the pole.

<p id=4147><form>dápit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>attract</tr> s.o. or s.t. to go s.w. <i>Ang budyung makadápit sa mga báka sa pagtígum,</i> The call from the horn will make the cows gather. <i>Dapítun ku ikaw sa ámù,</i> I&apos;ll invite you to our place. <i>Sugà nga ikadápit ug isdà,</i> A light to attract the fish. <number>2</number> attract notice, attention. <i>Ang íyang kaanyag makadápit sa ílang pagtagad,</i> Her beauty drew their attention. <number>3</number> <tr>divert</tr> water s.w. <i>Unsáun ku pagdápit sa túbig sa busay?</i> How shall I divert the water from the spring? <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>place</tr>. <i>Ang dápit níyang natawhan,</i> The place where she was born. <number>1a</number> <tr>position</tr>, relative <tr>standing</tr>. <i>Ikatulu ra siyang dápit sa lumbà,</i> He is third place in the race. <number>2</number> <tr>direction</tr>, <tr>vicinity</tr> of. <i>Dápit sa baybáyun,</i> Near the beach. <form>{(&rarr;)|dapit}</form> <xr>= <sc>dápit</sc></xr><corr>,</corr> <pos>n</pos>. <form>{pa-(&rarr;)|padapit}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b7c]</itype> put s.t. at some place. <i>Nagpadapit aku sa tumuy sa prusisiyun,</i> I stayed at the head of the procession. <i>Ipadapit ang mga bíbi sa túbig,</i> Have the ducks stay near the water. <form>{hi&N;-|hinápit}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>fond</tr> of inviting people s.w. <form>{-in-|dinápit}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>guests</tr>. <form>{mag-r-(&rarr;)|magdadapit}, {ma&N;-r-(&rarr;)|mananapit}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>host</tr>.

<p id=4148><form>dapíyas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> <tr>slip</tr> suddenly over or downwards. <i>Nadapíyas ákung tiil sa kanal,</i> My foot slipped into the ditch.

<p id=4149><form>dapíyu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a1b2]</itype> <tr>slap</tr> or <tr>strike</tr> s.o. heavily on the face or head. <i>Hidapyuhan ta man kag dì ka muhílum,</i> I might slap you if you don&apos;t shut up. <pos>n</pos> <tr>slapping</tr>, a heavy slap or strike.

<p id=4150><form>daplà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3P; c1P]</itype> <tr>press</tr> s.t. arched out flat on a surface. <i>Kinahanglan giyung idaplà (daplaun, ipadaplà, padaplaun) ang ímung pád sa sáwug kung magpus-ap ka,</i> You have to place your palms flat on the floor if you do push-ups. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become flat-footed. <i>Mudaplà (madaplà) kunu ang tiil basta tapulan,</i> They say laziness makes you flat-footed. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for s.t. arched to be pressed flat against a surface. <number>2</number> <tr>flat-footed</tr>.

<p id=4151><form>daplak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>cover</tr> s.t. over by putting s.t. flat on top of it. <i>Siyay nagdaplak sa playwud dihà sa lungag sa bungbung,</i> He is the one who covered the hole on the wall with a piece of plywood. <i>Idaplak ku karing kík sa ímung nawung,</i> I&apos;ll throw this cake into your face. <i>Maung ang idaplak sa gisì sa íyang karsunis,</i> Patch the tear in his pants with denim. <number>2</number> <tr>dump</tr>, <tr>throw</tr> s.t. in one <tr>heave</tr>. <i>Dapláki ug balas ang lungag sa yútà,</i> Dump sand into the hole in the ground. <i>Idaplak lang ang mga papil dihà,</i> Just dump the papers there. <number>2a</number> <itype>[AP; c1]</itype> throw oneself s.w. in a sprawled out way. <i>Midaplak (mipadaplak) siya ug lingkud,</i> She sat sprawled on the floor. <pos>n</pos> <tr>patch</tr>.&dagger;

<p id=4152><form>daplas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>clamber</tr> over s.t. <i>Ayaw pagdaplas dihà ánang mga tinápuk nga batu,</i> Don&apos;t go clambering over that pile of rocks. <i>Nagkalápuk ku kay gidaplásan ku sa irù,</i> I have mud all over me because the dog clambered over me.

<p id=4153><form>daplay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1PB3; c1]</itype> <tr>hang</tr> down loosely over an edge, make s.t. hang without being fixed. <i>Sudláya nang buhuk mung nagdaplay sa nawung,</i> Comb that hair of yours. It is hanging down over your face. <i>Kinsay nagdaplay (nagpadaplay) sa hábul sa bintána?</i> Who hung the blanket over the window sill?

<p id=4154><form>daplin</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>side</tr>, <tr>edge</tr>. <i>Sa daplin sa subà,</i> On the river bank. <number>2</number> <tr>beside</tr>. <i>Daplin giyud sa karsáda,</i> Right next to the road. <number>3</number> <formx>walay laing {&mdash;|daplin}</formx> there is no other alternative. <i>Wà giyud tay laing daplin kun dì pag-upira,</i> We have no other choice than to operate. <number>4</number> get out of the way! (short for <ix>padaplin</ix>). <form>{pa-|padaplin}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <pb n=205>move, put to the side. <i>Padaplína ang mga táwu,</i> Have the people move to the side. <i>Ipadaplin ang mga bangkù,</i> Move the benches to the side. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; c]</itype> move to the background. <i>Nagpadaplin lang ku kay wà man kuy lábut adtung ílang áway,</i> I just stayed in the background because I didn&apos;t have anything to do with their quarrel.&dagger;

<p id=4155><form>daplus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2PB23; aPc1]</itype> <tr>slip</tr>, <tr>move slowly down</tr>, make s.t. slip down. <i>Mudaplus ang písì kay walà maáyung pagkahukut sa pusti,</i> The rope will slip slowly down because it&apos;s not well tied to the post. <i>Kinsay nagdaplus (nagpadaplus) sa halayan?</i> Who moved the clothesline down?

<p id=4156><form>dapsut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a3]</itype> <tr>slip from the grasp</tr>, hold. <i>Ug makadapsut nang isdang ímung nagunitan, dì na gyud nà nímu hidakpan ug usab,</i> If the fish you&apos;re holding slips from your grasp, you&apos;ll never catch it again. <i>Ang tásang nadapsut sa ákung kamut, nasinsíyu,</i> The cup slipped from my hand and broke into pieces.

<p id=4157><form>dapu, dapù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>touch</tr> s.t. lightly with the hand. <i>Dapua ang úlug gihilantan pa ba,</i> Touch him on the head to see if he is still feverish. <i>Dapua ang duha nímu ka kamut,</i> Place your hands together, palm to palm. <form>{(&larr;)|dápu, dápù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> treat a supernaturally caused skin affliction by putting a bundle of herbs wrapped in leaves which has been heated on the afflicted area. <number>2</number> touch s.t. lightly with the hands. <i>Idápù ang ímung kamut sa utaw,</i> Touch the iron with your hands. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> for animals to be attracted s.w. <i>Mudápù ang amígas sa asúkar,</i> Ants will be attracted to sugar. <i>Mabungáhung sanga ang gidapúan sa mga langgam,</i> The birds alighted on the fruiting branch. <pos>n</pos> preparation for applying the <ix>dápù</ix> treatment.

<p id=4158><form>dapug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> place in the kitchen where the cooking fire is built. <form>{-an(&larr;)|dapúgan}</form> <xr>= <sc>dapug<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=4159><form>dapug<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>strike</tr>, usually the head, with s.t. bulky. <i>Dapuga siya íning batu,</i> Strike him with this stone. <i>Idapug ku ning libru sa ímung úlu,</i> I&apos;m going to slam this book on your head.

<p id=4160><form>dápug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>pile</tr> things of the same kind in an orderly fashion. <i>Dapúga (idápug) ang mga pinusù,</i> Pile the ears of corn up in an orderly way.

<p id=4161><form>dapúgan</form> <xr>= <sc>dalapúgan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4162><form>dápul</form> <pos>n</pos> holdup man (slang). <form>{pa&N;-|panápul}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>hold up</tr>. <i>Nangdápul ang mga matun sa draybir,</i> The ruffians held the driver up. <form>{-íru|dapulíru}</form> <pos>n</pos> holdup man.

<p id=4163><form>dapúlas</form> (from <ix>púlas<sub>2</sub></ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> rub the hand lightly, usually over the face, occasionally, also over other parts of the body. <i>Kinsay nagdapúwas ug lápuk sa ímung nawung?</i> Who spread mud on your face? <i>Dapulása ang singut sa ímung agtang,</i> Brush the sweat off your brow. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>eat</tr> s.t. with utmost speed as if just rubbing the hand over the mouth. <i>Gidapúlas lang níya ang usa ka plátung pansit,</i> He wolfed down a whole plate of noodles.

<p id=4164><form>dapya</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB23(1); c]</itype> <tr>splash</tr>, be splashed. <i>Ang balud midapya sa baybáyun,</i> The waves splashed onto the shore. <i>Kinsay nagdapya ug túbig sa bintánà?</i> Who splashed water through the window? <i>Nakadapya ang tubà kay punù ang sudlanan,</i> Some of the toddy splashed out because the container was filled to the brim.

<p id=4165><form>dapyas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <tr>glance off</tr>, <tr>graze off</tr> s.t. <i>Midapyas lang ang bála sa íyang úlu,</i> The bullet just grazed his head.

<p id=4166><form>darámi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>piece of meat</tr> sliced off by the butcher of an animal without the owner&apos;s knowledge. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> for a butcher to <tr>steal</tr> the owner&apos;s meat in this way.

<p id=4167><form>dariyut</form> <xr>= <sc>diriyut</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>diyut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4168><form>darling</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>darling</tr>. <number>2</number> having <tr><corr sic=Lesbian>lesbian</corr></tr> relations. <i>Darling nà sila si Líta ug si Pína,</i> Lita and Pina are going steady. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> call s.o. &lsquo;darling&rsquo;.

<p id=4169><form>dáru</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>plow</tr>. <i>Unsay itanum ninyu sa inyung gidarúhan?</i> What will you plant in the area you are plowing? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> have sexual relations (somewhat coarse). <i>Gidáru aku sa ákung bána gabíi,</i> My husband had relations with me last night. <number>3</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> fall down and scrape the ground. <i>Pagkasukámud níya nadáru ang íyang nawung sa asíras,</i> When he stumbled, his face scraped the sidewalk. <pos>n</pos> <tr>plow</tr>. <form>{(&rarr;)|daru}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>young water buffalo</tr>, just big enough to use for plowing. <form>{mag-r-(&rarr;)|magdadaru}</form> <pos>n</pos> farmer. <form>daruhan</form> <pos>n</pos> field that is planted with s.t. <form>{ig-r-|igdadaru}/{l-(&rarr;)|igdalaru}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> animal used for plowing. <number>2</number> s.t. worn for plowing, used in plowing.&dagger;

<p id=4170><form>darudaru</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>olive shell</tr>.

<p id=4171><form>das</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dash</tr>, <tr>hyphen</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> put a dash.

<p id=4172><form>dasà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> become <tr>spoiled</tr> due to overindulgence. <i>Pitúla ang bátà arun dì magdasà,</i> Discipline the child so he won&apos;t get spoiled.

<p id=4173><form>dasag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>thrust</tr> a mass forcefully against s.t. else. <i>Siyay nagdasag nákù sa bungbung,</i> He pushed me hard against the wall.

<p id=4174><form>das-ag</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>abounding</tr>, <tr>swarming</tr> around. <number>2</number> <tr>scattered</tr>, <tr>spread</tr>. <number>3</number> wandering, roaming aimlessly. <pos>n</pos> <tr>stranger</tr>, <tr>wanderer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[B; b5]</itype> <tr>swarm</tr>, <tr>crowd</tr> around. <i>Gidas-ag (gidas-ágan) ang artista sa mga táwu,</i> The people swarmed <pb n=206>around the movie star. <number>1b</number> <itype>[B; a]</itype> <tr>abound</tr>. <i>Nadas-ag ang mga tatlung sa ílang uma,</i> There were snails all over their field. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> <tr>scatter</tr>, be <tr>scattered</tr>. <i>Piligrung madas-ag ang káyu,</i> It would be dangerous if the fire were to spread. <i>Das-águn (idas-ag) ku ning mga binhì,</i> I will scatter these seeds. <number>3</number> <itype>[B3; b6]</itype> <tr>wander</tr> aimlessly about. <i>Sa lasang nakadas-ag (nadas-ag) mig dakung lángub,</i> In our wanderings in the forest we came across a large cave.

<p id=4175><form>dasdas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> <tr>advance</tr> to attack. <i>Midasdas ang mga sundálu sa ílang kaáway,</i> The soldiers advanced toward their enemies.

<p id=4176><form>dásig</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lively</tr>, full of action. <i>Dásig pamatíun ang mga kanta sa Bítuls,</i> The Beatles&apos; songs are lively to hear. <i>Dásig kaáyu siyang manlíhuk,</i> She is lively in her movements. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; a]</itype> <number>1</number> make s.t. lively. <i>Ang kumparsa nakadásig sa pista,</i> The string band made the fiesta lively. <number>2</number> <tr>encourage</tr>, <tr>inspire</tr> s.o. to do s.t. <i>Ang ímung mga púlung midásig (mipadásig) kaníya pagtuun,</i> Your words encouraged him to study. <i>Nadásig siya sa pagsulat ug bálak,</i> He was encouraged to write poetry. <form>{mag-r-|magdadásig}</form> <pos>n</pos> one who inspires. <form>{ka-|kadásig}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>enthusiasm</tr>. <form>{ma-un|madásigun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lively</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>inspiring</tr>, <tr>arousing</tr> <tr>enthusiasm</tr>. <form>dasigdásig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b5c2]</itype> <tr>divert</tr> s.o.&apos;s attention by being lively. <i>Dílì giyud kini mamilíti. Dasigdasígan lang níya ang kuliktur ug hinábì,</i> He never pays. He just diverts the conductor with his stories.

<p id=4177><form>dasmag</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26C; b6]</itype> <tr>bump into</tr>, <tr>crash into</tr>. <i>Ang awtu didtu mudasmag (madasmag) sa lubi,</i> The auto crashed into the coconut tree. <i>Nagkadasmag ang duha ka trák,</i> The two trucks collided with each other. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> <tr>lunge</tr> at, <tr>rush</tr> in to attack. <i>Kun mudasmag (manasmag) siya, dì ku giyud siya sibúgan,</i> If he lunges at me, I&apos;ll not move an inch. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>rush</tr> into doing s.t. <i>Mahangyù tà tu, apan midasmag ka man dáyun gud,</i> We could have gotten the price down, but you had to rush into it! <number>4</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> <tr>fall down</tr>. <i>Nadasmag siya ngadtu sa lápuk,</i> He fell into the mud. <pos>n</pos> <tr>attacks</tr>.

<p id=4178><form>dasngag<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>careless</tr>, <tr>inattentive</tr> to what one is doing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; a]</itype> be <tr>careless</tr> and <tr><corr sic=inattententive>inattentive</corr></tr> to one&apos;s work. <i>Subra ang ímung gisuklì kay nagdasngag ka man,</i> You gave him too much change. You sure are careless.

<p id=4179><form>dasngag<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2N; b5c1]</itype> <tr>push</tr> s.o.&apos;s face into s.t. or s.t. into s.o.&apos;s face, bump the face. <i>Ngánung gidasngagan (gidasngag) ka man sa íyang kúmu?</i> Why did he thrust his fist at you? <i>Ángay giyud kang idasngag,</i> You deserve to have your face pushed against s.t.

<p id=4180><form>daspan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dustpan</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>pick up</tr> dirt with a dustpan.

<p id=4181><form>dastir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>duster</tr>, loose <tr>house dress</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>duster</tr> to clean with. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, make into a duster.

<p id=4182><form>das-ug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> <tr>move</tr> over, <tr>downward</tr>, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Ug mudas-ug mug diyútay makalingkud pa ang usa,</i> If you move over a bit, one more can sit down. <i>Nadas-ug siya sa kawad-un,</i> He slipped down into poverty. <number>2</number> <tr>advance</tr>, make <tr>progress</tr>, <tr>flourish</tr>. <i>Midas-ug ang íyang kaálam,</i> His knowledge increased. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> movement to s.w. <number>2</number> advance, progress.

<p id=4183><form>dasuk</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>compressed</tr>, <tr>compact</tr>. <i>Dasuk kaáyu ang ginamus sa táru,</i> The can was stuffed full with salted fish preserves. <i>Dasuk ang katubhan,</i> The sugar cane field was thickly planted. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>compress</tr>, push into a tight place. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P; c]</itype> shove s.t. into a place forcefully. <i>Nadasuk siya sa suuk dihang ákung gitulud,</i> He was shoved into the corner when I pushed him. <form>{(&larr;)|dásuk}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C]</itype> <tr>crowd</tr>, <tr>squeeze</tr> a place. <i>Nagdásuk ang balay sa Pásil,</i> The houses in Pasil are jammed together. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1]</itype> be chock-full with s.t. <i>Nagdásuk sa mga táwu ang trák,</i> The truck was chock-full with people.

<p id=4184><form>dasun</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> say s.t. immediately after s.o. else says s.t. <i>Gidasunan ku níyag tubag sa wà pa ku makatiwas ug pangutána,</i> He answered me immediately before I finished asking the question. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> follow an action immediately with another action. <i>Nakadasun pa siyag pátid human makapatámà ug sumbag,</i> After he inflicted a cruel blow, he followed it up with a kick. <i>Dasunun nímug silhig ang ginabas arun dílì magkátù ang húgaw,</i> Sweep up the sawdust right away so the dirt won&apos;t pile up. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> approve of, endorse a plan or idea. <i>Gidasunan dáyun níla ang gahin pára sa unipurmi,</i> They at once approved the allocation for uniforms. <form>dasundasun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> happen in rapid succession, one after another.

<p id=4185><form>dáta<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b1c]</itype> <tr>pay off partially</tr>. <i>Wà nákù bayri tanan. Gidatáhan ku lang,</i> I did not pay it all off. I just paid a part. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> for men to have sexual intercourse with s.o. on a regular basis (humorous). <i>Datáhan níya ang íyang babáyi káda Sabadu,</i> He has intercourse with his mistress every Saturday. <number>2</number> pay off a debt partially or entirely with goods. <i>Datáhan nákug lubi ang kúlang,</i> I&apos;ll pay off what&apos;s lacking by giving you coconuts. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> installment. <number>2</number> s.t. given in lieu of money to pay off a debt entirely or partially. <form>datadáta</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b1c]</itype> pay for s.t. in installments, <pb n=207>buy on an installment basis. <i>Mudatadáta kug pridyidir,</i> I will buy a frigidaire on installment. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>installment</tr> basis. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>dáta<corr><sub>1</sub></corr></sc>, <ix>n1</ix>.</xr>

<p id=4186><form>*dáta<sub>2</sub></form> <form>walay {&mdash;|dáta}</form> <tr>no good</tr>. <i>Walay dátang panaptúna, kay húmuk mulubad,</i> The cloth is no good. It fades quickly.

<p id=4187><form>datag</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>level</tr> land. <form>{ka-an|kadatagan}</form> <pos>n</pos> plains.

<p id=4188><form>dáti</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small <tr>blister</tr> with water inside, often accompanied by fever.

<p id=4189><form>dáting</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> not be shy to speak a language one doesn&apos;t know well or recite s.t. memorized. <i>Gidáting nákù ang amural nga ákung bag-ung hingkat-unan sa ákung giulitawhan,</i> I tried out the line I memorized on my girl friend. <i>Datíngi sa ímung pila ka lugas nga ininglis ang Murmun,</i> Talk to the Mormon with the few English words you know.

<p id=4190><form>datslan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>buffet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> hold a buffet dinner.

<p id=4191><form>dátu</form> <xr>= <sc>dátù<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=4192><form>dátù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>rich</tr>, <tr>wealthy</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; a2]</itype> be, become rich, wealthy.&dagger;

<p id=4193><form>dátù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> title of a <tr>chief</tr>, now said only to Muslim leaders. <form>tudlù {&mdash;|dátù}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. long, slender <tr>banana</tr>. <number>2</number> jackknife clams, k.o. long, slender clams. <form>{-in-|dinátù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> sit with the buttocks flat on the ground and the ankles crossed, tucked in under the body (like the <ix>dátù</ix> in the presence of his subjects). <i>Nagdinátù siya sa lantay, nagdúlag baráha,</i> He sat on his buttocks on the bed, playing cards.

<p id=4194><form>dat-ug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> put s.t. on s.t. to weigh it down. <i>Aku ang nagdat-ug ug batu sa papil,</i> I laid a stone on top of the paper. <i>Namatay ang táwu nga nadat-ugan sa trúsu,</i> The man died because he was pinned down by the log. <number>2</number> put the <tr>blame</tr> on s.o. <i>Dat-úgan unyà aku sa pagbásul,</i> The blame will be put on me. <pos>n</pos> weight put on s.t.

<p id=4195><form>dat-ul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> put s.t. on top of s.t. to strike or work on it. <i>Kwanggul ang nagdat-ul ug sulat áning libru,</i> Whoever wrote on top of this book must be a fool. <i>Ayaw idat-ul ang káhuy sa ang-ang ug magbughà ka,</i> Don&apos;t lay the wood on the stairs when you split it. <number>2</number> put s.t. on top of s.t. else for a second. <i>Íyang gidat-úlan ang íyang samad ug ínit nga dáhun,</i> He put hot leaves on his wound. <number>3</number> put blame on s.o. <i>Siya ang nagdat-ul nákù ning saláa,</i> He put the blame on me. <pos>n</pos> block on which s.t. to be struck is laid. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|dat-ulan}</form> <xr>= <sc>dat-ul</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=4196><form>dátum</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> <number>1</number> for s.t. pointed to be driven into, <tr>penetrate</tr>. <i>Midátum ang punyal sa dughan,</i> The dagger penetrated into the breast. <i>Dágum nga idátum sa buktun,</i> A needle to inject into the arm. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a4b4]</itype> for an emotion to penetrate into one&apos;s inmost being. <i>Gugma nga nakadátum na,</i> A deeply-rooted love.

<p id=4197><form>datung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>give</tr> s.o. a gift to get a favor from him. <i>Gidatungan sa insik ang inahan sa íyang gipangulitawhan,</i> The Chinaman gave presents to the mother of the girl he was courting. <pos>n</pos> gift given to win a favor.

<p id=4198><form>datung<sub>2</sub></form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tungbálay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4199><form>dátus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>data</tr>, <tr>facts</tr>.

<p id=4200><form>dau</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large hardwood <tr>tree</tr>.

<p id=4201><form>dáub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>burn</tr>, set s.t. on fire in the open. <i>Dì ta makadáub run sa átung kaíngin,</i> We cannot burn our clearing. <number>2</number> <tr>smudge</tr>. <i>Daúban ta ang mangga arun mudaghan ang búnga,</i> Let&apos;s smudge the mango tree so that the fruits will become plentiful. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>open fire</tr>. <number>2</number> place where an open fire is usually built. <form>{(&rarr;)|daub}</form> <xr>= <sc>dáub</sc>, <ix>n</ix> <bx>1</bx>.</xr> <form>{-anan|daubanan}</form> <xr>= <sc>dáub</sc>, <ix>n</ix> <bx>2</bx>.</xr>

<p id=4202><form>daug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> <tr>outdo</tr>, <tr>overcome</tr> s.o. <i>Dì giyud ka makadaug níya,</i> You can never beat him. <i>Gidaug ku sa kaíkug,</i> I was overcome by my shame. <number>1a</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> give way, yield under weight or pressure. <i>Ang salagunting gidaug sa atup,</i> The rafters gave way under the weight of the roof. <i>Madaug sa hángin ang talabánug nga húmuk ug bawug,</i> A kite with a weak crosspiece will give way under the force of the wind. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> place a weight on s.t. to hold it in place. <i>Wà ilupad sa hángin ang papil kay gidaugan,</i> The paper wasn&apos;t blown away because a weight was put on it. <number>1b1</number> dump <tr>blame</tr> on s.o. <i>Ikaw unyay daugan sa mga pagbásul,</i> They&apos;ll dump the blame on you. <number>1c</number> <formx>dag-un pa</formx> it is better for [so-and-so] to happen and get some benefit (than to miss out on the benefit). <i>Sígi lang, ibaligyà, dag-un pag may kwarta,</i> Go on, sell it. It&apos;s better to have money (than perhaps to lose it and not have money). <i>Sagdi lag muuban siya, dag-un pag may kúyug,</i> Let him come with you. It&apos;s better to have s.o. with you (than not to). <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> be able to carry, lift, or move s.t. heavy. <i>Madaug ba ni nímung lamísa?</i> Can you lift this table? <number>2a</number> for one&apos;s body to manage. <i>Madaug pa sa ákung láwas kining trabahúa,</i> My body can still manage this work. <number>2b</number> support one&apos;s studies, existence. <i>Dì na nákù madaug ug gastu ang mga bátà,</i> I can&apos;t afford to support the children. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; ab3]</itype> win money, prize. <i>Dag-un giyud nátù ni kay dakù ang pusta,</i> We must win in this bet because we have big stakes. <i>Pilay ílang gidaug nímu?</i> How much did they win out of you? <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>defeated</tr>, <tr>bested</tr>. <i>Nahisáma siya sa irung daug nga mibahag ang íkug,</i> He went off like <pb n=208>a defeated dog with its tail tucked between its legs. <number>2</number> be unable to stand up to s.o. <i>Daug siya sa íyang asáwa,</i> He is henpecked by his wife. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|daug} pa</formx> be more than [subject] (lit. [subject] is bested by). <i>Daug pa nímuy buguy,</i> You&apos;re worse than a tramp. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>winnings</tr>. <i>Pila may ímung daug sa swipstik?</i> How much did you win in the lottery? <number>2</number> <tr>weight</tr> put on s.t. <form>{(&larr;)|dáug}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C]</itype> have it out as to who wins. <i>Magdáug ang duha ka sunuy. Ang usa mutung ug ang usa manálaw,</i> The two cocks will have it out. One will be the winner and the other will run away. <number>1a</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> call a game quits. <i>Daúgun nátù ning átung dúlà,</i> Let&apos;s declare s.o. the winner of this game (put an end to it). <number>1b</number> <itype>[b]</itype> determine the winner by reaching s.w. <i>Maglumbà ta. Kadtung káhuy átung daúgan,</i> Let&apos;s race. Whoever gets to the tree first wins. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; a12S]</itype> for two people under the same roof to be racing against each other as to who dies first. It is thought that when two people under the same roof are ill at the same time, one is bound to die. <i>Lisud kaáyu ang kahimtang sa inahan ug anak, magdáug tingáli ang duha,</i> The mother and daughter are both seriously ill. They are racing against each other as to which one will die. <i>Gidaug ang inahan sa anak. Bísan pa sa paningkámut sa duktur ang anak ray naluwas,</i> The mother lost her life to the child. Despite the doctor&apos;s efforts only the child was saved. <form>daugdáug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>maltreat</tr>, step on s.o. <i>Inaína nga midaugdáug kaníla,</i> A stepmother who maltreated them. <form>madaugdaúgun</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to maltreat. <form>{-an|daugan}, dag-an</form> <pos>n</pos> having won money. <i>Mangáyù ta níyag barátu kay dag-an,</i> We&apos;ll ask for a little cut because he won. <form>dag-anan</form> <number>1</number> amount needed to win. <i>Upat ra ka puntus ang dag-anan,</i> We only needed four points to win. <number>2</number> <tr>chance</tr> to win. <i>Wà kay dag-anan ug dì ka paluyhan sa Partídu,</i> You have no chance of winning if the Party does not back you. <form>{ka-an(&larr;)|kadaúgan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>victory</tr>, <tr>success</tr>. <form>{ma&N;-r-(&larr;)|mananáug}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>winner</tr>. <form>{ma-un(&larr;)|madaúgun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>victorious</tr>, <tr>successful</tr>. <form>{-um-r-(&larr;)|dumadáug}</form> <pos>n</pos> having the makings of a winner. <i>Dumadáug ug kalíwat kining manúka,</i> The cock has the winner&apos;s blood in him. <form>dag-unun ug lamas</form> easily becoming tasty if spices are added. <i>Dag-unun kaáyug lamas ang karning irù,</i> Dog meat is fine as long as you put spices with it.

<p id=4203><form>dául</form> <pos>n</pos> dried sheath of the coconut blossom.

<p id=4204><form>dáup</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13B2S346; c]</itype> fold the hands together and place them over the breast. <i>Natúlug nga nagdaup sa íyang kamut,</i> Sleeping with her hands over the breast.

<p id=4205><form>daurà</form> <xr>= <sc>dalaurà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4206><form>daúrus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP2; b(1)]</itype> <tr>slide</tr> down an incline. <i>Midaúrus siya sa ubus dihang nahúg sa banghilig,</i> He slid down when he fell on the slope. <i>Nindútang mudaúrus (mupadaúrus) sa bátà sa islayid,</i> The child enjoys sliding down the slide.

<p id=4207><form>daus-us</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB; c1]</itype> climb down, <tr>move down</tr>, bring s.t. down. <i>Gíkan sa ápir baks nidaus-us siya tupad kanákù sa lúwir baks,</i> From the upper box he climbed down and sat beside me in the lower box. <i>Aku na lang ang mudaus-us niánà,</i> I&apos;ll bring it down myself. <i>Daus-úsun (idaus-us) nátù paghínay ang baldi,</i> We&apos;ll lower the pail carefully.

<p id=4208><form>dáut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>destroy</tr>, make inoperative. <i>Nadáut ang makina kay wà kabutangig asíti,</i> The machine was ruined because it wasn&apos;t oiled. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>harm</tr>, have bad effects on. <i>Kining sabúna makadáut sa kamut,</i> This soap can harm your hands. <i>Nadáut ang karni kay wà ayúha paghípus,</i> The meat spoiled because it wasn&apos;t properly stored. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> <formx>ang {&mdash;|dáut}</formx> what&apos;s wrong with it. <i>Ang nakadáut nímu, wà kay kalígù,</i> What&apos;s wrong with you is that you don&apos;t bathe. <i>Ang nakadáut niíning kutsíha kay dakug kunsúmu,</i> What&apos;s wrong with this car is that it takes too much gas. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> get s.o. into trouble. <i>Ayaw ug sultig ingun kay madáut ta ánà,</i> Don&apos;t say that because we can get into trouble on account of it. <number>4</number> <itype>[AB16]</itype> be in bad health, cause bad health. <i>Ang pagsígig bása mudáut sa ímung mata,</i> If you keep reading it will ruin your eyes. <i>Nagdáut ákung tiyan,</i> I have stomach trouble. <number>4a</number> <itype>[B146]</itype> <form>{&mdash;|dáut} ang buut</form> be in a bad mood. <i>Nagdáut ákung buut kay kúlang sa katúlug,</i> I&apos;m in a bad mood because I didn&apos;t get enough sleep. <number>4b</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> give s.o. venereal disease. <i>Kanang bayhána makadáut,</i> That woman will give you venereal disease. <number>4c</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> harm s.o. with sorcery. <i>Gidáut siya sa barángan,</i> The sorcerer inflicted illness on him. <number>4d</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> for a supernatural being to inflict an illness. <i>Gidaútan siya sa ingkantu, kay gitagà man níya ang dákit,</i> The supernatural being inflicted illness on him because he chopped the banyan tree down. <number>5</number> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> speak ill of s.o. <i>Sigúru ka giyung daútun sa mga tabian,</i> The gossipers will surely speak ill of you. <number>6</number> <itype>[B14]</itype> for the weather to get bad. <i>Ug magdáut ang panahun, ayaw úsag byáhi,</i> If the weather is bad, don&apos;t travel for the while. <form>panday {&mdash;|dáut}</form> one whose handiwork is full of defects. <i>Panday dáut ang naghímu niíni kay daghang dipiktu,</i> A poor carpenter made this. There are so many defects. <form>{(&rarr;)|daut}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sickly</tr>, <tr>thin</tr>. <i>Daut ka man. May sakit ka?</i> <pb n=209>You&apos;re thin. Are you sick? <number>2</number> for an engine, appliance, etc. to be in bad condition. <i>Ang daut mung dyip,</i> Your beat-up jeep. <pos>n</pos> <tr>defects</tr>. <i>King mga tubúha walay likì, ug walay daut,</i> These tubes have no cracks and no defects. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B5]</itype> be, become sick, thin-looking. <i>Mudaut kag dì ka mukáug tárung,</i> You&apos;ll get sick if you don&apos;t eat properly. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1456]</itype> be menstruating (euphemism). <i>Paggámit ug pasadur ug magdaut ka,</i> Use a Kotex when you menstruate. <form>dautdáut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> keep malfunctioning. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> keep getting sick. <number>3</number> for the weather to start getting bad. <form>aláut</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>aláut</sc>.</xr> <form>{-an(&rarr;)|dautan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sorcerer</tr>. <pos>a</pos> <tr>bad</tr> in character or effect, not auspicious. <i>Dautang túyù,</i> Evil intention. <i>Dautan ang panahun,</i> The weather is bad. <i>Dautang samputánan sa íyang pag-inum,</i> The evil results of his drinking. <i>Dautan rung ibyáhi,</i> Now is a bad time to travel. <i>Dautang pálad,</i> Bad luck. <form>{-in-an|dinautan}</form> in an evil way. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> behave in an evil way. <form>{hi&N;-|hináut}</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>*hináut</sc>.</xr> <form>himaráut</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>*himaráut</sc>.</xr> <form>himuláut</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>himuláut</sc>.</xr> <form>{<corr sic="-ig-r-">ig-r-</corr>|igdadáut}, {ig-l-|igdaláut}</form> <pos>n</pos> things used in practicing sorcery. <form>{ka-|kadáut}</form> <pos>n</pos> extent of damage. <i>Ang kadáut sa bagyu,</i> The damage the storm caused. <form>{ka-an|kadáutan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ruin</tr>. <form>{mag-r-(&rarr;)|magdadaut}, {mag-l-(&rarr;)|magdalaut}</form> <xr>= <sc>{-an(&rarr;)|dautan}</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <form>{<corr sic="mang-r-(&rarr;)">mag-r-(&rarr;)</corr>|magdadaut}</form> <pos>n</pos> one who destroys maliciously. <i>Ang magdadaut dayag nga nasína,</i> Clearly the one who destroyed your things maliciously was envious. <form>pangdáut</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. used to harm s.t. <form>panday {pang-|pangdáut}</form> <xr>= <sc>panday dáut</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>panday</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4209><form>daw</form> <number>1</number> <tr>seem</tr>, like. <i>Daw subù siyang nanamílit,</i> He seemed sad to bid goodbye. <i>Daw kasábà tung íyang tambag,</i> His advice was like a scolding. <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;|daw} <r>[<i>adjective, verb</i>]</r></formx> be rather [adjective, verb]. <i>Daw nalíbug siya dihang nakadawat sa sulat,</i> He was rather confused upon receiving the letter. <number>3</number> go ahead, do [so-and-so]. <i>Abir sumbága daw ku!</i> Go ahead, try striking me. <i>Tilawi daw ug lamì ba,</i> Go on, try it. See if it&apos;s good. <number>4</number> he, she said. <i>Maghíkug daw siya,</i> He said he was going to kill himself.

<p id=4210><form>dáwa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>millet</tr>: <bio>Setaria italica</bio>. Widely cultivated, it is most commonly made into <ix>budbud</ix>. <form>dawadáwa</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tall grass bearing spikes similar to millet in appearance: <bio>Echinochloa crusgalli</bio>.

<p id=4211><form>dawal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> stick out of an opening, hang out. <i>Nagdawal ang pistúla sa bulsa,</i> The pistol stuck out of his pocket. <i>Padawala ang dílà,</i> Stick your tongue out.

<p id=4212><form>dáwat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3S; a1]</itype> <tr>receive</tr>, <tr>accept</tr>. <i>Mudáwat ba nà siyag suburnu?</i> Does he accept bribes? <i>Mudáwat mig kasíra,</i> We accept boarders. <i>Mudáwat siyag labáda,</i> She takes in laundry. <i>Dílì aku makadáwat niánà,</i> Sorry, I cannot accept that. <i>Nakadawat ka ba sa ákung suwat?</i> Have you received my letter? <number>2</number> <tr>take</tr>, receive s.t. conveyed. <i>Dawáta ning ákung itúnul nímu,</i> Take this thing I&apos;m going to hand you. <number>3</number> take hold of the hand that delivers a blow or fend it off. <i>Dawáta ang íyang kamut ug musukmag,</i> Fend off his arm if he delivers a blow. <number>4</number> <itype>[A3SN; a2]</itype> gather palm toddy. <i>Walà siya kapanáwat karun,</i> He hasn&apos;t gathered toddy today. <pos>n</pos> amount the lender gives for s.t. pawned. <i>Trayinta písus ang dáwat ánà,</i> You can only pawn that for thirty pesos. <form>{(&rarr;)|dawat}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>palm toddy</tr>. <i>Ang íyang dawat ganíhang buntag tam-is kaáyu,</i> The palm toddy he gathered this morning was very sweet. <form>dawatdáwat</form> <pos>v, n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>bùbuay</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>bùbù</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <tr>uvula</tr>. <form>{hi&N;-(&rarr;)|hinawat}</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of accepting. <i>Hinawat ug suburnu,</i> Fond of accepting bribes.

<p id=4213><form>dawdaw<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> tinker with s.t. without any definite purpose. <i>Dawdáwa ang plansang gubà básin pa ug makumpunir nímu,</i> Try tinkering around with this broken iron. Maybe you can fix it.

<p id=4214><form>dawdaw<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2N; a2]</itype> gather leftovers, the last remaining things. <i>Wà pay makadawdaw sa nasunúgan,</i> Nobody can salvage the leftovers from the fire. <i>Wà diyuy madawdaw bísag bukug,</i> There&apos;s nothing to get, not even bones.

<p id=4215><form>dawhug</form> <xr>= <sc>dalhug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4216><form>dáwi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> for a fish to bite on bait. <i>Gidawíhan siyag mamsà,</i> A large crevally bit his line. <pos>n</pos> fish that bit. <form>{(&rarr;)|dawi}</form> <xr>= <sc>dáwi</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=4217><form>dawin</form> <pos>n</pos> a single <tr>banana</tr>. <i>Mikúhà siyag lima ka dawin nga tinanuk,</i> He took five boiled bananas. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> separate bananas into pieces. <form>{-in-|dinawin}</form> <pos>n</pos> bananas sold by the piece.

<p id=4218><form>dawíraw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2S; c16]</itype> <number>1</number> grope about, as in the dark. <i>Magdawiraw ang buta ug mulakaw,</i> A blind man gropes about when walking. <number>2</number> for the mind to wander without concentration. <i>Wà kung kasabut sa liksiyun kay nagdawiraw lang ákung hunàhúnà,</i> I didn&apos;t get the lesson because my mind was wandering.

<p id=4219><form>dawpang</form> <xr>= <sc>dalúpang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4220><form>dawu-</form> <xr><ix>see also</ix> <sc>dalu-</sc></xr><corr>.</corr>

<p id=4221><form>dáwun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> be knocked down in boxing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> knock one&apos;s opponent down in boxing.

<p id=4222><form>dáwun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>down payment</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make a down payment.

<p id=4223><form>dawuntawun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>downtown</tr>. <number>2</number> a light passenger vehicle which plies a certain route and picks up passengers. <form>{&mdash;|dawuntawun} ikspris</form> <xr>= <sc>dawuntawun</sc>, <bx>2</bx>.</xr>

<p id=4224><form>day</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>inday</sc>.</xr>

<pb n=210>

<p id=4225><form>day-a</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for s.t. to hang out from a place in which it is contained. <i>Miday-a ang íyang tinái,</i> His guts were hanging out. <i>Prútas nga nagday-a sa baskit,</i> Fruits hanging out of the basket. <pos>a</pos> sticking, bulging out from the place that contains it. <i>Day-a na nang ímung tiyan,</i> Your stomach is hanging out.

<p id=4226><form>dayabítis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>diabetes</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> have diabetes.

<p id=4227><form>dayag</form> <pos>a</pos> clearly <tr>visible</tr>, <tr>obvious</tr>. <i>Dayag dinhi ang Buhul,</i> Bohol is visible from here. <i>Dayag ang íyang gugma nímu,</i> His love for you is obvious. <i>Dayag na ang íyang kadaúgan,</i> His victory is clear now. <form>{&mdash;|dayag} na lang</form> of course. <i>Dayag na lang nga mulában ku kay igsúun ku siya,</i> Naturally, I&apos;ll take his side. He is my brother. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B]</itype> be visible, seen. <i>Nagdayag ang ímung kamisun,</i> Your slip is showing. <number>2</number> <itype>[c]</itype> tell s.o. frankly. <i>Daygan ku siya nga wà ku siya higugmáa,</i> I&apos;ll tell him frankly that I don&apos;t love him. <form>{pasun-(&larr;)|pasundáyag}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> exhibit, show before an audience. <i>Nagpasundáyag ang sinihan ug malaw-ay nga salída,</i> The movie house showed pornographic movies. <i>Kadásig nga íyang gipasundáyag,</i> The enthusiasm he showed. <pos>n</pos> <tr>presentation</tr>. <form>{pasun-an|pasundáyagan}</form> <pos>n</pos> place where s.t. is shown. <form>{pa-|padayag}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> reveal, make s.t. clear. <form>{pina-|pinadayag}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. made known. <number>2</number> Book of Revelation. <form>dinayganay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> be frank with each other. <form>madinaygánun</form> <pos>a</pos> open and frank.

<p id=4228><form>dayagnus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for a doctor to <tr>diagnose</tr> a sickness. <pos>n</pos> <tr>diagnosis</tr>.

<p id=4229><form>dayagram</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>diagram</tr>, sketch. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> diagram, make a diagram.

<p id=4230><form>dáyak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> engage in a group activity with clamorous merriment. <i>Magdáyak ang mga bátà panahun sa pisikal,</i> The children revel during the physical education period. <i>Tubaan nga gidayákan sa mga palaínum,</i> The toddy stand where the drinkers are making merry. <number>2</number> <itype>[B6]</itype> be in extravagant quantities. <i>Magdáyak ang pagkáun sa íla basta pista,</i> There&apos;s all kinds of food at their place during fiestas.

<p id=4231><form>dáyal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dial</tr> of a watch, telephone. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> dial. <i>Unsang numirúha ang ímung gidáyal?</i> What number did you dial?

<p id=4232><form>dáyal tun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dial tone</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> give a dial tone. <i>Midáyal tun ba?</i> Was there a dial tone?

<p id=4233><form>dayalug</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dialogue</tr>. <number>2</number> dialogue between opposing parties. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> act s.t. out in a dialogue form. <number>2</number> <itype>[C]</itype> have a dialogue. <i>Wà magkadayalug ang administrasiyun ug ang istudiyanti,</i> The administration and students didn&apos;t get together in a dialogue.

<p id=4234><form>dayalugu</form> <xr>= <sc>dayalug</sc>, <ix>n</ix> 1.</xr>

<p id=4235><form>dayamanti</form> <xr>= <sc>diyamanti</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4236><form>dayamitru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>diameter</tr>.

<p id=4237><form>dayamun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> baseball diamond. <number>2</number> diamonds in playing cards.

<p id=4238><form>dayan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> be a decoration, adorn. <i>Ang kurtína nagdayan sa ílang balay,</i> The curtains add beauty to their house. <form>dayandáyan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> decorate, adorn. <i>Ang kurúna gidayandayánan ug buláwan,</i> The crown was adorned with gold. <pos>n</pos> decoration, adornment.

<p id=4239><form>dayána</form> <pos>n</pos> noise made early in the morning of a gala celebration to wake the people. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> make noise on the morning of the celebration. <i>Tulu ka banda ang nagdayána sa ámung pista,</i> Three bands played to <corr sic=wak->wake</corr> the people during our town fiesta.

<p id=4240><form>dáyang</form> <pos>n</pos> title given to a Muslim princess.

<p id=4241><form>dáyap</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small citrus tree producing small spherical, yellow fruits, juicy and sharply acid: <bio>Citrus aurantifolia</bio>.

<p id=4242><form>dayapir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>diaper</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make into a diaper, put a diaper on.

<p id=4243><form>dayari</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>diary</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> keep a diary.

<p id=4244><form>dayaríya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>diarrhea</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> have diarrhea.

<p id=4245><form>day-as</form> <pos>a</pos> foreign to a place. <i>Kalihúkan nga day-as sa kinabúhing Pilipinhun,</i> Ways which are so foreign to the Filipino way of life. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN23P; c]</itype> go to live in a far place, bring to a far place. <i>Manay-as siya pag-áni,</i> He goes to other places to help with the harvest. <i>Iday-as na lang ang panaptun sa prubinsiya kay dì mahálin dinhi,</i> Bring the cloth to the province because it won&apos;t sell here.

<p id=4246><form>dáyaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12b3]</itype> praise, comment favorably on. <i>Wà si Nánay makadáyaw niadtung ímung gibúhat,</i> Mother did not comment favorably about what you did. <i>Wà tay dayáwan ánang ímung trabáhu,</i> There&apos;s nothing to praise in your work. <pos>n</pos> <tr>praise</tr>.

<p id=4247><form>dayban</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>divan</tr>.

<p id=4248><form>dayday</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> put a landmark along a boundary line. <i>Gidaydayan kug nangkà ang utlánan,</i> I marked the boundary with jackfruit trees. <pos>n</pos> landmarks planted along a boundary. <form>{pa-|padayday}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> travel along the edge of s.t.: alongside landmarks, fields, rivers, etc. <i>Wà siya musulud, nagpadayday (nanayday) lang sa utlánan,</i> He wasn&apos;t tresspassing. He was just walking along the boundary. <form>{pa&N;-|panayday}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> <xr>= <sc>padayday</sc>.</xr> <form>{-an(&rarr;)|daydayan}, {-an|daydáyan}</form> <pos>n</pos> the top rim of the side of a boat.

<p id=4249><form>daygun</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>daláyig</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4250><form>dayhag</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> sloping downward. <i>Gíkan dinhi dayhag na púlus ang dálan,</i> From here on out the trail will all be downhill. <number>2</number> be wide and sloping at an angle. <i>Mutúlù ang ílang balay kay dayhag kaáyu ang atup,</i> Their <pb n=211>roof leaks because the roof slants. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be sloping downward, place s.t. in a slanting position. <i>Dayhaga (idayhag) pagsandig ang bisiklíta,</i> Lean the bicycle in a slanting position. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|dayhagan}</form> <pos>n</pos> top of a slope, place where a downward slope begins. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|dayhagun}</form> <pos>n</pos> sloping gradually.

<p id=4251><form>dayhard</form> <pos>a</pos> diehard follower of a politician or certain party. <i>Dayhard nga Usminyista,</i> A diehard follower of Osmeña.

<p id=4252><form>dáyib</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>diving</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; ac]</itype> <tr>dive</tr>. <i>Didtu siya mudayib sa húgawng túbig,</i> He dove into the dirty water. <i>Idayib ning sungsung sa iláwum ug isap-ung sa bangag,</i> Dive down with this plug, and plug up the hole with it.

<p id=4253><form>dáyig</form> <xr>= <sc>daláyig</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4254><form>dáyik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dike</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> build a dike.

<p id=4255><form>dáyis</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dice</tr>. <number>2</number> a game played with a dice. <number>2a</number> turn to throw the dice. <number>3</number> s.t. tricked out of s.o. else. <number>4</number> profit from sales (slang). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1C; c3]</itype> throw dice. <i>Kinsang dáyis run?</i> Whose turn is it to throw the dice? <i>Magdáyis lang ta,</i> Let&apos;s play a game with dice. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> get s.t. by cheating or tricks (slang). <i>Nakadáyis mi ug tris sa tigúwang,</i> We tricked the old man for three pesos. <number>3</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> masturbate (slang). <form>{-ir|dáyisir}</form> <pos>n</pos> one who throws the dice or plays a dice game. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> be the one to throw the dice.

<p id=4256><form>dayis-ul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> throw the dice to determine who will be the one to throw in a mahjong game. <pos>n</pos> action of throwing the dice to determine the deal.

<p id=4257><form>dáyit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>diet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> be on diet.

<p id=4258><form>daylang</form> <xr>= <sc>dalyang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4259><form>daynámu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dynamo</tr>.

<p id=4260><form>daysik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> dissect in a laboratory.

<p id=4261><form>day-u</form> <pos>n</pos> foreigner, from another place. <i>Batásang day-u,</i> Foreign customs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN23; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> migrate to. <i>Manay-u (muday-u) siya sa Mindanaw,</i> He will migrate to Mindanao. <number>2</number> visit a distant place. <i>Daghan ang mga turista nga muday-u (manay-u) dinhi,</i> Many tourists come here for a visit.

<p id=4262><form>dayugdug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP3; c1]</itype> go straight s.w. without paying any heed to one&apos;s surroundings. <i>Nanáug siya sa balay ug midayugdug (mipadayugdug) paingun sa lungsud,</i> He went out of the house and walked straight toward town without looking left or right.

<p id=4263><form>dayuk</form> <pos>n</pos> preserved salted fish intestines. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make <ix>dayuk</ix>, put <ix>dayuk</ix> into s.t.

<p id=4264><form>dáyun</form> <number>1</number> <tr>immediately</tr>, <tr>at once</tr>. <i>Milakaw siya dáyun,</i> He immediately walked away. <i>Walà dáyun níya himatikdi ang ulitáwu,</i> She did not notice the young man at once. <i>Karun dáyun,</i> This very instant. <form>pútung {&mdash;|dáyun}</form> <xr>= <sc>{-in-|dináyun}</sc>, <bx>2</bx>.</xr> <number>2</number> do as the next thing. <i>Mikáun siyag maáyu, dáyun natúlug,</i> He ate a good dinner and then went to sleep. <number>2a</number> <formx>sa {&mdash;|dáyun} <r>[<ix>gen.</ix>]</r> nga <r>[<ix>verb base</ix>]</r></formx> [gen.] was (will be) about to [do]. <i>(Sa) dáyun ku nang káun miabut sila,</i> As I was about to eat they arrived. <i>Iságul ang tunù sa dáyun na nímung háun,</i> Mix in the coconut milk just before you take it off the stove. <number>3</number> <tr>eternity</tr>. <i>Ang dáyung pahúlay,</i> Eternal rest. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> do s.t. immediately. <i>Ngánung mudáyun ka man lang ug kasukù?</i> Why do you flare up immediately? <number>1a</number> <itype>[a2]</itype> be killed at the first cockfight. <i>Kanang túbù niánang báya dì giyud nà dayúnun,</i> The cocks that are raised at that house will not be killed in the first cockfight. <number>2</number> <itype>[B36]</itype> remain as it is for long. <i>Hináut nga magdáyun ang íyang kabuútan,</i> I hope his good behavior will remain unchanged. <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> get possession of s.t. borrowed by keeping it forever. <i>Íya na giyung gidáyun ang íyang gihulamang sapátus nákù,</i> He took over the shoes that he borrowed from me. <number>4</number> <itype>[C; a12]</itype> push through in marriage. <i>Nagkadáyun sila,</i> They got married. <number>5</number>, <number>6</number> <xr>= <sc>dayun</sc>, 1, 2.</xr> <form>{(&rarr;)|dayun}</form> <number>1</number> <itype>[a3b4]</itype> for s.t. bad to come into being, be pushed through to reality. <i>Ayaw pagdunggabdunggab nákù kay madayun (madayunan) unyà nà,</i> Don&apos;t pretend to stab me, because you might just end up doing it. <number>2</number> <itype>[B23; c1]</itype> proceed to carry s.t. out. <i>Dì ku mudayun (madayun) paglarga kay hápun na,</i> I will not proceed to leave because it&apos;s already late. <i>Dayunun (idayun) ba ni nímug baligyà?</i> Will you push through with your plan to sell it? <number>3a</number> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> go into a house. <i>Dayun lang,</i> Come on in! <i>Dì na lang ku mudayun,</i> I won&apos;t come in. <number>3b</number> stay at a house. <i>Háin ka karun dayun?</i> Where are you staying now? <form>{pa-|padáyun}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> continue doing s.t. <i>Padayúna (ipadáyun) ang ímung kakúgi,</i> Continue your industriousness. <form>{hi&N;-|hinayun}/{ha&N;-(&rarr;)|hanayun}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be pushed through. <i>Wà sila mahinayun sa Karkar,</i> They ended up not going to Carcar. <i>Wà mahinayun ang balay pagbaligyà,</i> In the end the house wasn&apos;t sold after all. <form>gilayun</form> do s.t. immediately. <i>Gilayun siyang milarga,</i> He immediately left. <form>{-in-|dináyun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> process of cooking coconut oil where the juice is cooked off at once and not set aside to ferment. <number>2</number> <formx>pútung {-in-|dináyun}</formx> <pos>n</pos> <ix>pútu</ix> made from cassava or sweet potatoes without drying the meat. <form>dumaláyun</form> <pos>a</pos> lasting, eternal. <i>Dílì dumaláyun ang kalípayng lawasnun,</i> Earthly happiness is not eternal. <form>{ka-an|kadáyunan}</form> <pos>n</pos> eternity. &dagger;

<p id=4265><form>dáyung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3SC; bc3]</itype> for two or more people to accomplish s.t. together, most commonly carrying. <i>Dayúngi lang nà ninyu <pb n=212>kay bug-at,</i> Carry that together because it is heavy. <i>Dayúngan lang nílag bugsay ang surambáwan,</i> The fishermen just row their large fishing boat together. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2C2; bc3]</itype> share joys and sorrows. <i>Magdáyung gayud ta sa kalípay ug kasákit,</i> We will share our happiness and sorrows with each other. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|dáyung} ug túig</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C3]</itype> for siblings (not twins) to be born in the same year. <i>Nagdáyung mig túig sa ákung manghud,</i> My younger brother and I were both born in the same year. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|dayungan}</form> <pos>n</pos> stick or pole used for carrying s.t. hanging by holding on to each end. <form>{ka-|kadáyung}</form> <pos>n</pos> person with whom one carries s.t. or shares sorrows and joys.

<p id=4266><form>dayungyung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> be hanging down loosely over the face. <i>Gipadayungyung níya ang íyang buhuk<corr sic=", "> (</corr>kálù<corr>)</corr>,</i> She let her hair (hat) cover her face.

<p id=4267><form><corr sic=dga.>Dga.</corr></form> abbreviation for <xr><sc>dalága</sc>, unmarried woman.</xr>

<p id=4268><form>di</form> <pos>n</pos> letter <tr>D</tr>.

<p id=4269><form>dì</form> <xr>= <sc>dílì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4270><form>di-</form> prefix, usually followed by nouns of Spanish origin. <number>1</number> having a [noun] where it is s.t. special to have one. <i>Púru dikutsi ang ámung silíngan,</i> Our neighbors all have cars. <i>Diamirkána pa ba diay muadtug upisína?</i> You mean to say they wear jackets to the office? <i>Diayskrim giyud ang ámung pabugnaw,</i> We had refreshments with ice cream. <number>2</number> characterized by having being made of [noun]. <i>Sapátus digúma,</i> Rubber shoes. <i>Kísu dibúla,</i> Cheese shaped like balls. <i>Dialta ílang mga amígu,</i> Their friends are high society. <i>Manuk dirása,</i> Special breed of chicken. <number>3</number> having [noun] as a source of motion. <i>Plantsa dikuryinti,</i> Electric iron. <i>Makina dimánu, dipiyi,</i> Hand-, foot-operated machine. <i>Dinútang pagtukar,</i> Playing from the notes. <i>Ripling dirapidu, dibumba,</i> Automatic, air rifle. <number>4</number> intended for the use of [noun]. <i>Rilu dipulsu, dibulsa,</i> A wrist, pocket watch. <i>Tráhi dibayli,</i> Dancing costume. <i>Bapur digíra,</i> Warship. <i>Trák dipasahíru,</i> Passenger bus. <number>5</number> <formx>{-kampanilya|dikampanilya}</formx> <number>a</number> <formx>abugádu {-kampanilya|dikampanilya}</formx> first class lawyer (one that calls his helpers with a bell). <number>b</number> anything high class. <i>Dikampanilya na kanang pamilyáha,</i> That family is high class. <number>6</number> <formx>{-kumbáti|dikumbáti} nga parul, sugà</formx> barn lantern.

<p id=4271><form>día</form> <xr>= <sc>adía</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4272><form>diadtu</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>didtu</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>niadtu</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>kadtu</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p id=4273><form>dialta</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>alta</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4274><form>dialtamar</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>alta</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4275><form>diánà</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>dihà</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>niánà</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>kanà<sub>1</sub></sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p id=4276><form>diáni</form> <xr>= <sc>niáni</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>kini<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=4277><form>diay</form> <number>1</number> particle indicating speaker has received new information. <number>1a</number> <ix>making a statement of new information a question:</ix> &lsquo;so, [such-and-such] is the case, is it?<corr>&rsquo;</corr> <i>Mau diay nay hitsúra sa salíkan,</i> So, is that what a hammerhead shark looks like? <i>Lítu diay ímung ngálan,</i> Oh, so your name is Lito, is it? <i>Diay? Musúkul ka diay,</i> So you want to rebel, do you? <number>1b</number> I see that, ... as it turns out ... <i>Namatikdan aku níya kay diay wà matúlug,</i> He noticed me as he wasn&apos;t asleep after all. <i>Maáyu ka man diay nga mulútù,</i> I see you cook well. <number>1c</number> You mean to say [so-and-so] is going to happen? <i>Mutan-aw diay kag sini bisag way kwarta,</i> You mean to say you&apos;re going to the movies even though you haven&apos;t got any money? <form>{&mdash;|diay} ba</form>? Is that so? <i>Diay ba? Ingun kug nabayran ku na nà,</i> Is that so? I thought I had already paid it. <number>2</number> in questions with an interrogative. <number>2a</number> particle indicating deep curiosity. <i>Ása man diay ka, Nang?</i> Where are you going, Ma&apos;am? <number>2b</number> if it isn&apos;t [predicate], what<corr sic=","></corr> (where, etc.) is it then? <i>Ug dílì kini, unsa man diay?</i> Which one is it then if it is not this one? <number>2c</number> of course, what else (where else, who else, etc.) could it be? <i>Unsa man diay ug dílì asúkar mauy ibutang sa kapi,</i> Of course, what else do you put in coffee except sugar? <number>3</number> particle indicating that the speaker realizes s.t. about which he was previously unaware or pointing out s.t. to the interlocutor. <i>Kanà giyud diay ákung dad-un,</i> Oh, yes, that I will take along for sure. <i>Aku diay, wà ku tagái,</i> What about me? You didn&apos;t give me any. <i>Unsay way sapátus? Ag ímung putì diay?</i> What do you mean<corr>,</corr> you don&apos;t have shoes? How about your white ones? <form>ísà, úsà pa {&mdash;|diay}</form> excuse me (bringing up a new topic). <i>Ísà pa diay, nakapamahaw ka na?</i> Excuse me. Have you had your breakfast yet? <number>4</number> particle in statement correcting oneself. <i>Upat, aw, lima diay.</i> Four, oh, I mean five.

<p id=4278><form>díbal</form> <pos>a</pos> in utter disarray, noisy confusion. <i>Díbal kaáyu ang ákung hunàhúnà,</i> My thoughts are all in disarray. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB4; b6]</itype> be in utter disarray, confusion. <i>Mudíbal ang tibuuk syudad sa tungang gabíi sa Bag-ung Túig,</i> The whole city is noisily chaotic at midnight, New Year&apos;s Eve. <i>Nagkadíbal na ang kwartu, dúgayng way limpiyu,</i> The room is in complete chaos because it hasn&apos;t been cleaned in ages.

<p id=4279><form>dibaldi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> fail to compensate s.o. for his services or efforts. <i>Wà nákù dibaldíha (idibaldi) ang ímung kahágù kay gibayran <pb n=213>tikaw,</i> I gave you s.t. for your effort. I paid you.

<p id=4280><form>díban</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>divan</tr>.

<p id=4281><form>dibáti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>debate</tr>, <tr>argument</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; ab3]</itype> debate, argue about s.t. <i>Dì ni nátù kinahanglang dibatíhun (dibatíhan),</i> It&apos;s not necessary for us to make an argument out of this (argue about this). <form>{-sta|dibátista}</form> debater. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a]</itype> be, make into a debater.

<p id=4282><form>dibaydibay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1</number> do division. <number>2</number> divide s.t. up. <i>Dibaydibaya ninyu kining kík,</i> Divide this cake among yourselves. <pos>n</pos> inheritance (slang). <i>Maáyu siyang pangasaw-un kay dakù nag dibaydibay,</i> Marry her because she is going to come into a large inheritance.

<p id=4283><form>dibaydir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> room divider. <number>2</number> an instrument for dividing s.t.

<p id=4284><form>dibayid</form> <xr>= <sc>dibaydibay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4285><form>dibidind</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dividend</tr>.

<p id=4286><form>dibidindu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dividend</tr>. <number>2</number> one&apos;s children (humorous).

<p id=4287><form>dibílap</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> develop a picture from a negative. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26; aP]</itype> for love to develop. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> compose an essay. <i>Padibilápun mig tím,</i> We have been told to write themes. <number>4</number> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> develop, grow big. <i>Wà pa madibílap ang Maktan,</i> Mactan hasn&apos;t grown very much yet.

<p id=4288><form>dibilapir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> real estate developer. <number>2</number> chemical developer for photographs.

<p id=4289><form>dibílup</form> <xr>= <sc>dibílap</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4290><form>dibirsiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> diversion, recreation. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> have some recreation.

<p id=4291><form>dibisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> division, branch of government or business. <number>2</number> partition, compartment. <number>3</number> division in an <corr sic=Army>army</corr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> put up a partition or division.&dagger;

<p id=4292><form>dibisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> division in mathematics. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do division.

<p id=4293><form>dibítir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>debater</tr>.

<p id=4294><form>dibu</form> <pos>n</pos> debut in high society. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> have, give a debut.

<p id=4295><form>dibúhu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> draw, make a design. <pos>n</pos> drawing, design. <form>dibuhista</form> <pos>n</pos> artist, designer.

<p id=4296><form>dibultu</form> <xr>= <sc>ribultu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4297><form>dibumba</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>bumba<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=4298><form>dibursiyáda, dibursiyádu</form> <pos>n</pos> divorced person.

<p id=4299><form>dibursiyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>divorce</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; b1]</itype> divorce, get a divorce.

<p id=4300><form>dibusiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> devotion to a saint. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> have a devotion to a saint. <i>Magdibusiyun ku kang San Húdas Tadíyu arun ku maminyù,</i> I&apos;ll have a devotion to St. Jude so that I can get married.

<p id=4301><form>dibutanti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>debutante</tr>.

<p id=4302><form>dibútu, dibútus</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>dibusiyun</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> religious devotee. <i>Sa Byirnis mangaláwat ang mga dibútu sa Mahal nga Birhin,</i> On Friday the devotees of the Blessed Virgin will take communion.

<p id=4303><form>dibuynas</form> <xr>= <sc>buynas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4304><form>didak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6]</itype> deduct from a salary or grade. <i>Gididakan ímung swildu, grádu,</i> They deducted some from your salary, grade.

<p id=4305><form>didaksiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> amount deducted from grades or salary. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> make a deduction.

<p id=4306><form>didal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>thimble</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> use a thimble.

<p id=4307><form>didbul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> dead ball, when the ball in a ball game is not in play or when the game is at a stop due to a referee&apos;s call. <number>2</number> killed violently, dead (slang). <i>Didbul ka na, matúna ka,</i> Now you&apos;re dead, you thug, you. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> be a dead ball. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; a1]</itype> be a goner, dead.

<p id=4308><form>dídi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> suckle the breast (children&apos;s talk). <i>Mudídi na si Dyingdying,</i> Jingjing wants to take the titty now.

<p id=4309><form>dìdì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> cut a slit in s.t. <i>Gidìdían níyang sáku arun makakuhà siyag bugas,</i> He cut a slit in the sack so he could get some rice. <i>Dìdíi lang ang hubag ug gamay,</i> Cut a small incision into the boil.

<p id=4310><form>didikisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> dedication of a song or other entertainment to s.o. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> dedicate s.t. to s.o.

<p id=4311><form>didikit</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> dedicate a song, poem, entertainment to s.o. <i>Kining awíta ámung ididikit sa átung halangdun bisíta,</i> We dedicate this song to our honored guest. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> masturbate (humorous slang). <i>Nahugù siya sa hinubra níyang pagdidikit,</i> He got thin from masturbating too much (making too many dedications).

<p id=4312><form>didiyut</form> <xr>= <sc>diriyut</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>diyut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4313><form>didlayin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>deadline</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> set a deadline <corr sic="to to">to</corr> s.t.

<p id=4314><form>didtu</form> <number>1</number> there (far from speaker, far from addressee). <i>Didtu ibutang,</i> Put it over there. <i>Didtu níya ibutang,</i> She put it there. <i>Ug didtu siya, nagpaábut ni Maríya,</i> And there he was waiting for Mary. <number>1a</number> <formx><corr>{&mdash;|didtu} </corr>nga <corr sic="[noun-a]"><r>[<ix>noun</ix>]</r>-a</corr></formx> in that [noun] as opposed to other places. <i>Didtung baláya siya mamatay,</i> He died in that house. <number>2</number> there (at a point in time in the past). <i>Didtu ku makat-un sa paghigugma níya,</i> It was then I learned to love him. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;y|didtuy}</formx> there was, there were. <i>Didtuy táwu sa asíras,</i> There was s.o. there on the sidewalk.

<p id=4315><form>diduksiyun</form> <xr>= <sc>didaksiyun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4316><form>didúsu</form> <xr>= <sc>dudúsu</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>dúda</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4317><form>díga</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> ask for a definite answer to a proposal. <i>Digáhan ku siya sa ámung sábut,</i> I&apos;m going to ask for his final answer to our agreement. <number>2</number> speak to a woman about love. <i>Gidigáhan sa tigúlang ang dalága,</i> The old man declared his love to the girl. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> <pb n=214>lay one&apos;s cards (mahjong pieces) open to determine who wins. <i>Digáhan tikaw. Duha kuy king,</i> I&apos;ll see you. I&apos;ve got two kings. <pos>n</pos> action of asking for an answer, laying open the cards.

<p id=4318><form>dig-ab</form> <xr>= <sc>dug-ab</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4319><form>digámu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac2]</itype> prepare a meal. <i>Akuy digámu sa pamáhaw,</i> I&apos;ll prepare breakfast. <form>{-in-|dinigámu}</form> <pos>n</pos> prepared food.

<p id=4320><form>digása</form> <pos>n</pos> stiff cotton gauze fabric out of which butterfly-sleeve <ix>kamísa</ix>&apos;s and <ix>panyulítu</ix>&apos;s are made.

<p id=4321><form>digastu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for one&apos;s personal, not business, use. <i>Digastu ning dyípa, dílì dipasahíru<corr>,</corr></i> This jeep is for family use, not for passengers. <number>2</number> one who fails to get married and stays home doing chores (reserved for family use) (humorous). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; c16]</itype> become an old maid around the house.

<p id=4322><form>digkit</form> <xr>= <sc>díkit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4323><form>digmì</form> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>bignì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4324><form>dignidad</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dignity</tr>.

<p id=4325><form>dígù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> bathe s.o. <i>Nakadígù ka na ba sa irù?</i> Have you bathed the dog? <i>Digúun ku siya sa ákung mga haluk,</i> I will bathe him with my kisses. <number>2</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> be bathed in sweat, blood, etc. <i>Nadígù siya sa singut,</i> He is bathed in sweat. <form>{(&rarr;)|digù}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <formx>way {&mdash;|digù}</formx> not having had a bath. <i>Way digù ning batáa, pan-us,</i> This child smells. He hasn&apos;t had a bath. <number>2</number> medicinal preparation with which one bathes. <number>2a</number> one&apos;s favorite drink (slang). <i>&lsquo;Muinum kag tubà?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Inum? Mauy ákung digù,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Do you drink coconut palm toddy?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Do I drink toddy? I bathe in it.&rsquo; <form>{-un|díguun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> impurities on a newborn baby which are washed off by bathing. <number>2</number> convalescing patient about to take his first bath.

<p id=4326><form>dígum</form> <pos>n</pos> colored black all over.

<p id=4327><form>digwà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; c6]</itype> retch, vomit a small amount. <i>Midigwà aku sa kabahù,</i> I retched due to the foul odor.

<p id=4328><form>digwat</form> <xr>= <sc>ligwat</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4329><form>digyas</form> <xr>= <sc>duyas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4330><form>digyù</form> <pos>a</pos> small in size. <i>Digyù nga bátà,</i> A small child. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> become small. <i>Ang ayruplánu nagkadigyù samtang nagkalayù,</i> The plane got smaller as it got further and further away. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> break s.t. up into small pieces. <i>Gidigyù níya ang kík álang sa íyang mga anak,</i> She divided the cake up into small portions among her children. <form>{-um-|dumigyù}</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to run small. <i>Dumigyù silag kalíwat,</i> Their family tends to be small in stature.

<p id=4331><form>digyut</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>diyut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4332><form>dihà</form> <number>1a</number> there (near addressee, far from speaker). <i>Dihà ibutang,</i> Put it down right there. <i>Dihà tu nímu,</i> You had it. (It was there.) <number>1b</number> there (not far and not near). <i>Unsa man ang náa dihà sa unáhan?</i> What is that up there ahead? <number>1c</number> there (at a place just referred to in a narration). <i>Ug ang báka miluksu sa búlan, nag-unsa man siya dihà?</i> If the cow jumped over the moon what was she doing there? <number>1d</number> <formx>kumusta ka {&mdash;|dihà}</formx> How are you? <form>sábà {&mdash;|dihà}</form> <number>a</number> Shut up! <number>b</number> Stop your kidding. <i>Bà dihà. Kumidya ka man dà,</i> Come on, you&apos;re kidding. <number>1e</number> <formx>{&mdash;|dihà} nga <corr sic="[noun-a]"><r>[<ix>noun</ix>]</r>-a</corr></formx> in this part of the [noun] (as contrasted with other places). <i>Dihang dapíta siya ilubung,</i> He is buried in that place. <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;y|dihay}</formx> there was. <i>Dihay táwu nangítà nímu,</i> S.o. was looking for you. <formx>{&mdash;|dihà} ka lang, ra</formx> you stay there. <number>3</number> then (at a point not far the past). <i>Nag-ípun kami, ug dihà ku mahibalu kun unsay kalípay,</i> We lived together, and that&apos;s when I learned what happiness was. <i>Dihà pa siya makaamgu nga...<corr>,</corr></i> Only at that point did he realize that...<corr>.</corr> <form>{&mdash;|dihà} nga <r><ix>plus</ix> [<ix>clause</ix>]</r></form> when [so-and-so] happened. <i>Sa dihang miabut ang amahan, nangahílum sila,</i> When the father arrived, they became quiet. <form>dihàdihà</form> <number>1</number> instant, ready at all times. <i>Ang linabhan malimpyu sa dihàdihang gahum sa Tayid,</i> The instant power of Tide will clean the wash. <number>2</number> right then and there. <i>Dihàdihà dáyun,</i> Right then and there. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> do s.t. right then and there. <i>Dílì ka makadihàdihà ug dáwat sa báyad,</i> You cannot receive your payment right then and there.

<p id=4333><form>dihádu</form> <number>1</number> negligent, careless of one&apos;s things. <i>Dihádu siya sa íyang mga butang. Bisag ása lang byái,</i> He is very negligent with his things. He leaves them anywhere at all. <i>Dihádu siya nga magbantay sa bátà, mau nga magkahulughulug,</i> He is negligent in watching the child. That&apos;s why it keeps falling. <number>2</number> less-favored bet. <i>Ang dihádung tíkit mauy nakadaug,</i> The least-favored ticket won. <number>2a</number> unpopular, not much bought. <i>Ang simintu nga gíkan sa Danaw dihádu karun,</i> Danao-produced cement is not popular now. <number>3</number> guitar accompaniment to extemporaneous folk songs, sung in a set pattern, where beats are left out at the points where the words don&apos;t fit the music exactly. <i>Dihádung dúyug nga gawía ug magbalítaw,</i> Use a free accompaniment for the <ix>balítaw</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B]</itype> get to be negligent, less favored. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> play a guitar in a <ix>dihádu</ix> style.

<p id=4334><form>díhin gúli</form> needing a bath (slang&mdash;word play on pidgin Tagalog <ix>hindì lígù</ix>). <i>Nanimáhù siya, díhin gúli man gud,</i> He smells because he needs a bath.

<p id=4335><form>díhug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> rub, spread s.t. over an <pb n=215>area. <i>Líug nga dihúgan ug agwa,</i> Neck with perfume applied to it. <i>Ispirma ang idíhug sa plansa,</i> Rub wax over the iron. <number>2</number> <tr>annoint</tr>. <form>{-in-|diníhug}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.o. <tr>annointed</tr> to assume a God-ordained position.

<p id=4336><form>diin<sub>1</sub></form> <number>1</number> where (past)? <i>Diin man nímu ibutang ag ákung kálù?</i> Where did you put my hat? <formx>{&mdash;|diin} nga <corr sic="[noun-a]"><r>[<ix>noun</ix>]</r>-a</corr></formx> in which [noun] of several. <i>Diing siníha sila manan-aw?</i> Which movie did they go to? <number>2</number> which one of the several places or things. <i>Diin man íning duha íyang gipílì?</i> Which of these two did he select? <number>3</number> where (relative). <i>Mau nà ang lungsud diin misurindir ang mga sundálu,</i> That is the town where the soldiers surrendered. <form>diindíin</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125; a12]</itype> be at, go or travel to several places. <i>Nadiindíin (nahadiindíin) ku ug langyaw, wà kuy nakítang ingun,</i> I have travelled everywhere, but I have never seen the like. <i>Diindiínun kug dúaw básin pag makit-an ku si Bíbing,</i> I will travel any and everywhere so I might find Bebing. <i>Nagkadiindíin kug búlung nímu. Diin man ka?</i> I&apos;ve been everywhere looking for you. Where were you?

<p id=4337><form>diin<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the end of a movie, interview, stage-play. <i>Layù pa ba ang diin niíni?</i> Is it still long to the end? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> come to the end.

<p id=4338><form>diíni</form> <xr>= <sc>niíni</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>kini</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4339><form>dík</form> <pos>n</pos> word used to call pigs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> call a pig.

<p id=4340><form>dikabra</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>bára</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4341><form>dikakaw</form> <pos>n</pos> variety of croton (<ix>kalípay</ix>).

<p id=4342><form>dikampána</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bell-bottom pants</tr>. <number>2</number> bell-shaped sleeves. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> wear, make bell-bottom pants, bell-shaped sleeves.

<p id=4343><form>dikánu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dean</tr>.

<p id=4344><form>*diki, *dikì</form> <form>walay {&mdash;|diki}</form> <pos>a</pos> easy to please, not tending to have objection. <i>Way diking agálun,</i> An employer who is easy to please. <i>Wà kuy dikì kun kinsay íyang pangasaw-un,</i> I won&apos;t raise any objections to whoever he chooses for his wife. <form>dikìdíki, dikìdíkì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b6]</itype> put up a pretense of not liking s.t. <i>Nagdikidíki (nagpadikidíki) uruy, balubálu gustu,</i> He pretends he doesn&apos;t want to, when actually he does.

<p id=4345><form>díki</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dike</tr>.

<p id=4346><form>dikit</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> hip of a roof. <number>2</number> the material which covers the hip. <form>{-an|dikitan}</form> <xr>= <sc>dikit</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> cover the space between the upper edges of a roof and the hip.

<p id=4347><form>díkit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; c1]</itype> be close so as to touch, put s.t. close to touch it. <i>Nagdíkit ang masig ka áping níla samtang nagsáyaw,</i> Their cheeks touched while they were dancing. <i>Dikíta (idíkit) pagpahilúnà ang mga silya,</i> Place the chairs so that they are close to each other.

<p id=4348><form>diklamar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>declaim</tr>.

<p id=4349><form>diklamasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> declamation.

<p id=4350><form>diklarar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make a formal statement: declare, testify. <i>Midiklarar ang saksi nga kítà giyud níya,</i> The witness testified that he saw it. <i>Wà pa idiklarar nga pista upisyal,</i> It hasn&apos;t been declared as a public holiday.

<p id=4351><form>diklarasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> declaration, formal statement. <i>Diklarasiyun sa tistígus,</i> The witness&apos;s testimony. <i>Diklarasiyun sa gíra,</i> Declaration of war. <number>2</number> tax declaration on land. <i>Wà ku kabayri ang ákung diklarasiyun,</i> I haven&apos;t paid my land tax yet.

<p id=4352><form>diklim</form> <xr>= <sc>diklamar</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4353><form>diklímir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>declaimer</tr>.

<p id=4354><form>diklimisyun</form> <xr>= <sc>diklamasiyun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4355><form>dikstrus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dextrose</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> administer dextrose to s.o. <i>Kinahanglang dikstrúsun (dikstrúsan),</i> Dextrose must be administered to him.

<p id=4356><form>diksiyunaryu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dictionary</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> make a dictionary.

<p id=4357><form>dikta</form> <xr>= <sc>dikt&acaron;r</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4358><form>diktadur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dictator</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> be, become a dictator. <form>{-íya|diktaduríya}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dictatorship</tr>.

<p id=4359><form>diktadúra</form> <xr>= <sc>diktadur</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=4360><form>dikt&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> dictate for transcription. <number>2</number> dictate, impose one&apos;s will on. <i>Wà kay katungud sa pagdikt&acaron;r kinsay pilíun,</i> You have no right to dictate who to choose.

<p id=4361><form>dikulúris</form> <pos>n</pos> word of greeting among people who have gone through the <ix>kursilyu</ix>, as a sign of peace.

<p id=4362><form>díkun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>deacon</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a2]</itype> be, become a deacon.

<p id=4363><form>dikurar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> decorate. <i>Gidikurahan námù ang káru pára sa prusisiyun,</i> We decorated the carriage for the religious procession. <form>dikurasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> decoration. <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>dikurar</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4364><form>dikurisyun</form> <xr>= <sc>dikurasiyun</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>dikurar</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4365><form>dílà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>tongue</tr>. <i>Dílà ra ang way labud,</i> Thoroughly whipped (lit. only the tongue escaped welts). <form>balhibuun ug {&mdash;|dílà}</form> being a gossiper. <form>itumun ug {&mdash;|dílà}</form> having a black spot on the tongue as a sign of being a <ix>buyagan</ix> (a person whose praises inflict illness). <number>2</number> language. <form>{&mdash;|dílà} nga kaláyu</form> <pos>n</pos> Holy Spirit in the form of tongues of fire. <form>{&mdash;|dílà} sa irù</form> <xr>= <sc><corr sic="dilàdilà">dilàdílà</corr> sa irù</sc>.</xr> <form>dilàdílà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> reed of a wind musical instrument. <number>2</number> <formx>dilàdílà sa sapátus</formx> tongue of the shoes. <form>dilàdílà sa irù</form> name given to two species of hairy herbs with medicinal uses: <bio>Elephantopus mollis</bio> and <bio><corr>E. </corr>spicatus</bio>.

<p id=4366><form>diláab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> for a fire to be blazing. <i>Atup nga gidilaában sa káyu,</i> Roof that was licked by the flames that flared up. <number>2</number> for <pb n=216>emotions to become intense. <i>Nagdilaab ang mata ni Lasarus sa kapungut,</i> Lazarus&apos; eyes flamed with anger. <pos>n</pos> flaring of fire, emotions.

<p id=4367><form>dilabári</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. syrup used to rub against the gum of a teething baby (from the brand named Delabarre).

<p id=4368><form>dilamíta</form> <xr>= <sc>dinamíta</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4369><form>dilána</form> <pos>n</pos> wool, woolen. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> wear woolen clothing.

<p id=4370><form>dilantádu</form> <xr>= <sc>adilantádu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4371><form>dilantar</form> <xr>= <sc>adilantu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4372><form>dilantáwu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> pay in advance, make an initial partial amount. <pos>n</pos> advance or initial payment.

<p id=4373><form>dilantíra</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> toward the front of s.t. <number>2</number> having a frontage on a place where people pass. <i>Ang ílang balay dilantíra kaáyu sa kalsáda,</i> Their house has a good frontage on the road. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> get to have frontage, move toward the front. <form>{pa-|padilantíra}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> take a place at the front. <i>Padilantiráha (ipadilantíra) siyag lingkud,</i> Let her sit to the front.

<p id=4374><form>dilantu</form> <xr>= <sc>adilantu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4375><form>dilap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> for fire to catch on to s.t. <i>Nadilapan sa sugà ang ákung kílay,</i> The flames from the lamp singed my eyebrows.

<p id=4376><form>dilatar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13P; bc]</itype> <tr>delay</tr>. <i>Ayaw idilatar ang pagbáyad,</i> Don&apos;t delay payment.

<p id=4377><form>dílì</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <formx>dì</formx> <number>1</number> no, not (negates predicates with heads consisting of future verbs, nouns, adjectives, numerals, pronouns). <i>Dílì ku muadtu,</i> I won&apos;t go. <i>Dílì si Hwan, siya,</i> It wasn&apos;t John, him. <i>Dílì pula,</i> It&apos;s not red. <i>Dílì ingun nátù,</i> Supernatural being (lit. not like us). <number>1a</number> <ix>with second person pronoun and verb with mag- active affix or pag- plus passive form:</ix> don&apos;t ever do. <i>Dílì mu paghilabtan,</i> Don&apos;t ever, ever touch it. <i>Dì ka maglakaw,</i> Don&apos;t you leave. <number>1b</number> don&apos;t want, like. <i>Dì ka ba áni?</i> Don&apos;t you like this? <number>1b1</number> <formx>{&mdash;|dílì} ku bi</formx> expression used jokingly in accepting s.t. offered. (Lit. I don&apos;t want any, please let me have some.) <i>&lsquo;Gustu kag kík?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Dì ku bi&rsquo;,</i> &lsquo;You want any cake?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;No thanks, please.&rsquo; <number>1c</number> <formx>{&mdash;|dílì} ba</formx> <ix>tag question:</ix> Isn&apos;t it so? <i>Dílì ba human na man ni?</i> Wasn&apos;t this already done? <i>Muadtu ka, dì ba?</i> You&apos;re going, aren&apos;t you? <number>1d</number> <formx>{&mdash;|dílì} ba</formx> or, alternatively [so-and-so] is the case. <i>Manini ta, dì ba mangnayit klab,</i> Let&apos;s go to the movies or to a night club. <i>Pábu, dì ba ítik ang ákung ihátag,</i> I&apos;ll give him either a turkey or a duck. (see also <ix>dílì ba</ix> under <xr><ix>dílì</ix>, <ix>3</ix></xr>) <number>2a</number> <ix>following an interrogative plus pa:</ix> if not. <i>Ása pa man nà hipúsa dì anhà dihà sa paradur,</i> Where the hell are you going to put it if not in the cabinet. <i>Kinsa pa man diay dì ikaw?</i> Who else if not you? <number>2b</number> <formx>kun {&mdash;|dílì}</formx> <xr>= <sc>dílì</sc>, <bx>2a</bx>.</xr> <number>2c</number> <formx>{&mdash;|dílì} kay ... kun {&mdash;|dílì}</formx> not just ... but ... <i>Dì lang kay inum-ínum kun dílì ínum giyud,</i> Not just a drink, it was a spree. <i>Dì kay ikaw lang, kun dílì si Husi pud,</i> Not just you, Jose did, too. (Also <ix>without</ix> <foreign lang=ceb>kay</foreign> <ix>and/or</ix> <foreign lang=ceb>kun dílì: Dílì lang inum-ínum kun dílì ínum giyud.</foreign> <ix>or</ix> <foreign lang=ceb>Dílì lang inum-ínum, ínum giyud.</foreign>) <number>3</number> therefore, [so-and-so] was inescapable. <i>Namugus man, dílì gihátag lang nákù,</i> He insisted, so of course, I gave it to him. <form>{&mdash;|dílì} ba</form> don&apos;t you think the consequence will be. <i>Sígi hilabti nà dì ba latiguhun tika,</i> Go ahead, touch it. See if I don&apos;t hit you. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab3]</itype> refuse. <i>Midílì siya sa pagkanta,</i> She refused to sing. <i>Unsay gidilían nímu?</i> Why do you refuse? <form>mu rag {naka-|nakadílì}, {maka-|makadílì} ug bahù</form> refuse s.t. with all one&apos;s heart and soul. <i>Mu ra man kag nakadílig bahù sa trabáhung giuprisir nímu,</i> Why did you refuse absolutely the job you were offered? <pos>n</pos> <form>mu rag naghatud ug {&mdash;|dílì}</form> make one&apos;s visit short (from the notion that when a person asks for a woman&apos;s hand, if the parents refuse, they send the single word <ix>dílì</ix> to the door and the visit ends then and there). <i>Kadalì gud nímu. Mu ra ka mag naghatud ug dílì,</i> Why are you going so fast. Your visit was so short. <form>{(&rarr;)|dilì}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> prohibit. <i>Dì ku makagdilì nímu,</i> I cannot forbid you. <i>Ginadilì ang pagpangíhì dinhi,</i> It is forbidden to urinate here. <form>did-an <r>[<ix>subject</ix>]</r></form> may s.t. happen to [subject] (Lit. It is not forbidden for [subject] to ...). <i>Kusug manunglu, did-an ug siyay mamatay,</i> He sure likes to curse. I wish he were dead. <i>&lsquo;Paúlì kung Máma.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Did-an ka?&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;I&apos;m going home to Mother.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Who&apos;s stopping you?&rsquo; <form>padilìdílì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> pretend to refuse. <i>Nagpadilìdílì uruy, labun gustu,</i> She&apos;s putting on a show of refusing but she wants some. <form>{-um-|dumílì}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>dílì</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> object to doing s.t. <i>Nagdumílì na ang mga táwu pagbáyad sa tantung kamahal,</i> The people object to paying such an outrageous price.

<p id=4378><form>dilíbir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> deliver, bring s.t. s.w.

<p id=4379><form>dilibiri buy</form> <pos>n</pos> delivery boy.

<p id=4380><form>diligádu</form> <pos>n</pos> delegate to a convention. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be a delegate.

<p id=4381><form>diligar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> delegate work, responsibility (on or to). <i>Gidiligahan ka sa pag-atiman sa mga bátà,</i> You&apos;re entrusted with taking care of the children.

<p id=4382><form>diligasiyun, diligisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>delegation</tr>.

<p id=4383><form>dilihinsiya</form> <pos>n</pos> protection money demanded to avoid harm. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> collect protection money. <i>Hínay pag pamasahíru dúna pay mudilihinsya nátù,</i> We get only a few passengers, and to make matters worse, there <pb n=217>are people who mulct us. <number>2</number> ask money from parents (slang). <i>Mudilihinsya pa kung Pápa pára ipanini,</i> I&apos;ll ask Father for some money to go to the movies.

<p id=4384><form>dilikáda</form> <xr>= <sc>dilikádu</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=4385><form>dilikadísa</form> <pos>n</pos> good sense of propriety. <i>Way dilikadísa. Nagdigúma lang sa simbahan,</i> He has no sense of propriety. He just wears rubber shoes to church.

<p id=4386><form>dilikádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>perilous</tr>, in <tr>danger</tr>. <i>Dilikádu ang íyang kahimtang. Háyan mamatay,</i> His condition is serious. He will probably die. <number>2</number> needing careful handling. <i>Dilikádu ang súd íning kartun,</i> The contents of this cardboard box are fragile. <i>Dilikádu kaáyu ang kásu nga ímung giatúbang,</i> The case you are involved in is a delicate one. <number>3</number> <corr sic=finnicky>finicky</corr>, choosy about one&apos;s things or what one has about him. <i>Dilikádu ku sa pagkáun, pamisti, ug sa ákung mga butang,</i> I&apos;m choosy about my food, how I dress myself, about my things. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b5]</itype> be <tr>unsafe</tr>, in danger.

<p id=4387><form>dilikinti</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>touchy</tr>, likely to take offense easily. <i>Dilikinti. Dì makaagwanta ug kumidiya,</i> He&apos;s touchy. He can&apos;t take jokes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be touchy.

<p id=4388><form>dilinyadur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>draftsman</tr>, instrument for drafting. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be a draftsman.

<p id=4389><form>dilinyanti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>draftsman</tr>.

<p id=4390><form>dílir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>trader</tr>, <tr>dealer</tr> in goods. <number>2</number> dealer in card games or mahjong. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> get to be a dealer, the dealer.

<p id=4391><form>diliryu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>delirium</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146; a4]</itype> be in delirium. <i>Nagdiliryu (gidiliryu) siya,</i> He was in a delirium.

<p id=4392><form>dilitayim</form> <pos>n</pos> daily time record. <form>{&mdash;|dilitayim} ríkurd</form> <xr>= <sc>dilitayim</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4393><form>dilítu</form> <pos>n</pos> evidence of a crime. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> present as evidence.

<p id=4394><form>dilútu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>diligent</tr> in what one is doing. <i>Dílì siya dilútu sa íyang pagtuun,</i> He is not diligent in his studies. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc1]</itype> engage in s.t. diligently and religiously. <i>Dilutúhi ang patigáyun arun muuswag,</i> Run the business with industry so that it will prosper.

<p id=4395><form>dilyábi</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>garfish</tr>.

<p id=4396><form>dím</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dim</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> for lights to become dim.

<p id=4397><form>dimálas</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>bad luck</tr>. <pos>a</pos> unlucky. <i>Dimálas kaáyu nang tawhána,</i> That man is very unlucky. <form>{&mdash;|dimálas} lang</form> too bad, tough luck. <i>Dimálas ka lang. Wà giyuy musugut nímu,</i> Tough luck. Nobody accepted you. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a4S]</itype> be <tr>unlucky</tr>. <i>Nadimálas lang ang ákung kwarta nga niabay kug pusta nímu,</i> I had bad luck with my money when I joined in your bet. <i>Gidimalas giyud ku run,</i> I am very unlucky. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|dimalasun}</form> <pos>a</pos> bringing bad luck.

<p id=4398><form>dimanda</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> <number>1</number> sue s.o. in court. <i>Gidimanda siya kay wà mubáyad,</i> She was sued because she wouldn&apos;t pay. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a demand. <i>Gidimandáhan ang Israil sa pagsíbug,</i> They demanded that Israel withdraw. <pos>n</pos> <tr>demands</tr>. <i>Ang dimanda sa mga radikal,</i> The demands of the radicals.

<p id=4399><form>dimangga</form> <pos>n</pos> variety of crotons (<ix>kalípay</ix>) with mango-like leaves, lanceolate green to yellowish blotches and a red midrib.

<p id=4400><form>dimánu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> turn right. <i>Mudimánu ta pag-abut sa iskína,</i> We turn right when we reach the corner.

<p id=4401><form>dimánu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> powered by hand machine.

<p id=4402><form>dímas</form> <xr>= <sc>rímas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4403><form>*dimáu</form> <form>walà, dílì {magka-|magkadimáu}</form> be all wrong, incorrect. <i>Wà magkadimáu ímung ági,</i> Your work is all wrong. <i>Ug dílì magkadimáung pagkatahì, átung ipausab,</i> If she sewed it all wrong, we will have her do it again.

<p id=4404><form>dimdim</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> experience a certain feeling for the first time. <i>Gustu kung mudimdim sa katam-is sa ímung ngábil,</i> I would like to taste the sweetness of your lips. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> taste a liquid. <i>Dimdími ring tubà,</i> Take a taste of this toddy.

<p id=4405><form>dimírit</form> <pos>n</pos> demerit in military training. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> give demerits. <i>Mudimírit ang kumandanti ug walay tupi ang kadíti,</i> The commandant gives demerits to cadets who need a haircut. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get a demerit.

<p id=4406><form>dimisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> resignation from a position. <i>Ang dimisiyun sa mga mimbru sa gabiníti,</i> The resignation of the cabinet members.

<p id=4407><form>dimitir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c2]</itype> <tr>resign</tr>, quit a job. <i>Mudimitir (magdimitir) ku pagkamaistra,</i> I will resign from my teaching job.

<p id=4408><form>dimitudu</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. done by s.o. according to the book; methodical. <i>Kanang íyang sinayawan dimitudu gayud,</i> He dances by the numbers.

<p id=4409><form>dimúdu</form> <tr>so</tr>, <tr>therefore</tr>. <i>Giingnan kang dílì magsábà. Dimúdu maghílum ka,</i> You were told not to make noise. So, keep quiet.

<p id=4410><form>dimukrasya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>democracy</tr>.

<p id=4411><form>dimukrata</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>democrat</tr>. <number>a</number> a believer of the principles of democracy. <number>b</number> a member of the former Democratic Party of the Philippines. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56]</itype> be a member of the Democratic Party.

<p id=4412><form>dimukratika</form> <xr>= <sc>dimukratiku</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=4413><form>dimukratiku</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>democratic</tr>, allowing people freedom of action.

<p id=4414><form>dimul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> have a little taste of s.t. (slang). <i>Mudimul kug gamay ánang ímung tubà,</i> Let me have a taste of your palm toddy. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> obtain s.t. from s.o. (slang). <i>Mudimul kung Nánay ug písus ipanini,</i> I&apos;m <pb n=218>going to get one peso from Mother for the movies. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>dímul</sc>, <i>2</i>.</xr>

<p id=4415><form>dimul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bad luck</tr> (slang). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a]</itype> bring bad luck to s.o., be unlucky.

<p id=4416><form>dimul<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> in music, a change from one key to another or from a major chord to the minor chord. <i>Lisud duyúgang kantáha daghang dimul,</i> The accompaniment of the song is difficult, it has so many changes in chords. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; c1]</itype> change the key or from major to minor chords in musical accompaniment. <i>Dihà sa kúrus idimul,</i> Change chords at the refrain of the song.

<p id=4417><form>dímul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> play a musical instrument with the fingers. <i>Maáyu siya mukaskas ug mudímul usab,</i> He strums chords well and plays notes as well. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> swipe, steal (slang). <i>Kinsay midímul sa ákung bulpin?</i> Who swiped my ball point pen? <i>Gidímul ang tanan, hasta ang karsúnis dunut,</i> Everything was stolen, even his worn out pants.

<p id=4418><form>dimungkug</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <ix>expression of disgust or dismay</ix>: darn! (euphemism for <ix>dimunyu</ix>). <i>Dimungkug! Níay bisítag wà tay sud-an,</i> Darn! We don&apos;t have a thing to eat, and here we have visitors! <number>2</number> term of address used as a mild reprimand with affectionate overtones. <i>Dimungkug nímu uy. Namíyà ka man lang!</i> You little devil! You just left me at the party! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> say <ix>dimungkug</ix> to s.o.

<p id=4419><form>dimunstradur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>demonstrators</tr>, participants in a public show of opinion. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> be a demonstrator.

<p id=4420><form>dimunstrasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> display of athletics or gymnastics. <number>2</number> <tr>strike</tr>, public show of opinion. <number>3</number> <tr>demonstration</tr>, display of how s.t. is done or works. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b3]</itype> demonstrate, give a show of opinion. <i>Nagdimunstrasiyun na sad sa iskuylahan. Unsa na puy gidimunstrasiyunan run?</i> They are having a demonstration again at the school. What are they demonstrating about this time?

<p id=4421><form>dimunstrit</form> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>dimunstrasiyun</sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr>

<p id=4422><form>dimuntris</form> <xr>= <sc>dimungkug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4423><form>dimunyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>demon</tr>, <tr>devil</tr>. <i>Unsang dimunyúha ang nasulud sa ímung úlu?</i> What sort of devil has gotten into your head? <number>2</number> person or thing regarded as evil, cruel, etc. <i>Hubug ka na sad dimunyúha ka,</i> You&apos;re drunk again, you devil. <number>3</number> curse word used as an expression of extreme frustration or anger at s.o. <i>Dimunyu. Ímu na sang gibálì nà,</i> Damn you! You broke it again! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be, become a devil in one&apos;s looks or manners, etc.

<p id=4424><form>dimusdímus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> shower s.o. or s.t. with kisses. <i>Midimusdímus siyag haluk sa íyang anak,</i> She showered kisses on her child.

<p id=4425><form>dinágum</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>dágum</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4426><form>dinamíta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dynamite</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> dynamite s.t. <form>dinamitíru</form> <pos>n</pos> one who uses dynamite, most commonly a dynamite fisherman. <form>dinamitáhan</form> <pos>n</pos> fish caught by dynamite.

<p id=4427><form>dingag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> be carelessly inattentive in doing s.t. <i>Nagdingag ka lang nga nagbantay sa tindáhan. Mau nga gikawátan,</i> You were not watching the store carefully. That&apos;s why you were robbed. <form>{-un|dingagun}</form> <pos>a</pos> carelessly inattentive.

<p id=4428><form>dingas</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>careless</tr>, not keeping one&apos;s mind on what one is doing. <i>Dingas kaáyu siyang milabang. Diriyut hiligsi,</i> She wasn&apos;t watching what she was doing when she crossed the street. She was nearly run over. <number>2</number> natural <corr sic=phenomena>phenomenon</corr> which makes its appearance at an unusual time (poetic usage). <i>Usa ka dingas nga ulan,</i> An unseasonable rainshower.

<p id=4429><form>díngat, díngaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> look all around in restlessness, curiosity. <i>Mudíngat lang ang nawung sa bukidnun inighilugsung sa syudad,</i> The mountaineers look everywhere in wonderment when they come to the city. <i>Dílì magdíngat sa nawung sa simbahan,</i> Don&apos;t keep looking around when you are in church. <form>{(&rarr;)|dingat}</form> <pos>a</pos> inattentive and looking in every direction.

<p id=4430><form>dingding<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>wall</tr>. <number>2</number> side covers of any box-like thing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> enclose, make into a wall.

<p id=4431><form>dingding<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for a woman to be delicately refined. <i>Sáma kadingding sa usa ka búlak,</i> As delicate as a flower. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be, become delicately refined.

<p id=4432><form>dinghal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c16]</itype> let one&apos;s tongue hang out, esp. when panting. <i>Nagdinghal ang irù tungud sa kaínit,</i> The dog&apos;s tongue is hanging out because of the heat. <pos>a</pos> always having the tongue hanging out. <i>Dinghal nga kulangù,</i> An idiot with his tongue hanging out.

<p id=4433><form>dingíli</form> <xr>= <sc>danghili</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4434><form>dinguldingul, dinguldíngul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; b(1)]</itype> pretend not to notice, hear. <i>Magpadinguldíngul (magdinguldíngul) kun sugúun,</i> She pretends not to hear when we tell her to do s.t.

<p id=4435><form>dinhà</form> <xr>= <sc>dihà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4436><form>dinhi</form> <number>1</number> here (near speaker and hearer). <i>Dinhi ta magtindug,</i> Let&apos;s stand here. <i>Dinhi siya higdà,</i> He slept here. <i>Nía ba siya dinhi?</i> Is he here? <form>{&mdash;|dinhi} nga <r>[<ix>noun</ix>]</r></form> in this part of the [noun] (as contrasted with others). <i>Dinhing bungtúra matupà ang ayruplánu,</i> It was on this hill that the plane crashed. <number>2</number> <formx><corr sic="-y">{&mdash;y|dinhiy}</corr></formx> there was (were) here. <i>Dinhiy táwu nangítà níya,</i> <pb n=219>There was s.o. here looking for him. <number>3</number> <formx>sa {&mdash;|dinhi}</formx> in former times. <i>Sa dinhi, sa dátù pa na sila, ...</i> In former times, when they were rich, ...

<p id=4437><form>diníru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>money</tr>, s.t. to be spent. <i>Daghan siyag diníru,</i> He&apos;s got lots of money. <number>2</number> full payment in cash. <form>mutsu {&mdash;|diníru}</form> having lots of money. <i>Mutsu diníru ku run,</i> I&apos;m rich today. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> get hold of money. <i>Makadiníru ta ánà,</i> We can get money from that. <i>Unsay átung dinirúhun, wà man kuy pangítà?</i> What money could I have when I have no job? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; bc1]</itype> pay cash. <i>Ug ímung idiníru (dinirúhun), bubaratu giyud,</i> If you pay cash, it&apos;s cheaper.

<p id=4438><form>dintist, dintista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dentist</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a]</itype> become, make into a dentist.

<p id=4439><form>dintistri</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dentistry</tr>.

<p id=4440><form>dintru</form> <xr>= <sc>kamísa dintru</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4441><form>dinuminasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> denomination of money. <number>2</number> denomination of a religious sect.

<p id=4442><form>díp</form> <pos>n</pos> dip in ballroom dancing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> execute a dip.

<p id=4443><form>dipalíta</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> affording a square hit. <i>Ang lagsaw dipalíta kaáyu diri nákù,</i> The deer is where I can hit it squarely. <number>2</number> be hit squarely. <i>Ang Manílà dipalítang pagkaigù sa bagyu,</i> Manila was hit squarely by the storm. <number>3</number> enormous in quantity or intensity. <i>Dipalíta ang káun sa pista sa íla,</i> The food was available in huge quantities at their house during the fiesta. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> be hit squarely. <i>Ug madipalíta gánì kag kaigù, mamatay ka,</i> If you are hit squarely, you&apos;ll die. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; c1]</itype> get to be enormous in quantity.

<p id=4444><form>dipapil</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> doing things in a pedantic way, strictly according to what is written. <number>2</number> notorious in some vice. <i>Palahúbug nga dipapil,</i> A professional drunk. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> do s.t. strictly according to what is written. <i>Kining kantáha dipapila giyud, ayg ridúha,</i> Sing this strictly according to the notes. Don&apos;t go singing your own version.

<p id=4445><form>dipara, diparal, diparar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> <tr>notice</tr>, become aware of s.t. <i>Hidiparahan ku siyang nangilù nímu,</i> I noticed him winking at you. <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>2</number> pay attention to, mind. <i>Walà ku magdiparar sa íyang mga bagulbul,</i> I did not pay attention to his grumblings. <number>3</number> watch over, take care. <i>Diparaha ang binlad nga dílì kan-un sa manuk,</i> Watch the corn that the chickens don&apos;t eat it. <number>4</number> focus one&apos;s attention on (literary usage). <i>Gidiparal ku ang bag-u kung kalibútan,</i> I put my attention to this world that was new to me.

<p id=4446><form>dipartamintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>department</tr>, division of an office.

<p id=4447><form>dipásit</form> <xr>= <sc>dipusitu</sc>, <ix>v 1, 2, 3, 4</ix>; <ix>n 4</ix>.</xr>

<p id=4448><form>dipdip</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cut s.t. close to the base. <i>Dipdípi ang tingkuy,</i> Cut the hair at the nape short. <i>Ug dipdípun ang sagbut háyan mamatay,</i> If you cut the grass short, it will die.

<p id=4449><form>dipi</form> <xr>= <sc>dipyí</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>pyí</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4450><form>dip-ig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> put s.t. with some height close to s.t. else so that it is touching or nearly touching. <i>Ayaw kug dip-ígig lingkud,</i> Don&apos;t take a seat right next to me. <i>Idip-ig ang lamísa sa bungbung,</i> Move the table against the wall.

<p id=4451><form>dipiktádu</form> <xr>= <sc>dipiktúsu</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>dipiktu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4452><form>dipiktu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>defect</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> the thing that&apos;s <tr>wrong</tr>. <i>Ang nakadipiktu nímu kay mugib-ap ka lang dáyun,</i> What&apos;s wrong with you is that you give up right away. <form>{-su|dipiktusu}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>defective</tr>, have s.t. wrong with it. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a]</itype> be, <tr>become defective</tr>. <i>Laina ang dunut nga mangga kay madipiktúsu unyà ang ubang maáyu,</i> Separate the rotten mangoes because they might spoil the good ones.

<p id=4453><form>dipindi</form> it depends on whether [so-and-so] is the case. <i>Dipindi ug dì muulan, muadtu ta,</i> It depends. If it doesn&apos;t rain we will go.

<p id=4454><form>dipind&icaron;r<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> take sides in an argument, defend in a court case. <i>Dikampanilya giyud ang mudipind&icaron;r nákù,</i> A first-rate lawyer will defend me. <i>Wà kuy dipindihan ánang awáya,</i> I won&apos;t take sides in this quarrel. <number>2</number> uphold one&apos;s honor. <i>Dipindihi ang ímung pagkababáyi,</i> Defend your chastity. <number>3</number> defend, protect. <i>Kining pistúla ákung idipind&icaron;r sa ákung kinabúhì,</i> I&apos;ll defend my life with this pistol.

<p id=4455><form>dipind&icaron;r<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> depend on s.o. for maintenance or support. <i>Kun maminyù nà, dì na mudipind&icaron;r sa mga ginikánan,</i> When one is married, he mustn&apos;t depend on his parents for support. <i>Mauy ákung gidipindihan ang íyang sáad sa pagtábang,</i> I was depending on the help he had promised.

<p id=4456><form>dipinsa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> instrument for defending. <number>2</number> barrier that serves to protect a structure. <i>Dipinsa sa awtu,</i> Bumper of the car. <number>2a</number> pilings against a wharf. <number>3</number> argument prepared in defense. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> defend, protect. <i>Gidipinsáhan ku lang ang ákung anak,</i> I was protecting my child. <number>2</number> <itype>[b]</itype> provide with a protective structure. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> defend with an argument. <i>Abugádu nga midipinsa níya,</i> The lawyer that defended him.

<p id=4457><form>dipirinsiya</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>different</tr> from what is expected. <i>Dipirinsiya na run ang íyang panlíhuk,</i> Her ways are very different nowadays. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>difference</tr>. <i>Dipirinsiya ug dus písus ang prisyu dinhi kay sa didtu,</i> The price here is two pesos more than there. <number>2</number> <tr>quarrel</tr>. <i>Husáya ang inyung dipirinsiya,</i> Settle your quarrels. <number>3</number> <tr>defect</tr>. <i>Unsa may dipirinsiya nga dì mudágan?</i> <pb n=220>What&apos;s wrong with it that it won&apos;t run? <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B]</itype> be, become <tr>different</tr>. <i>Wà na magdipirinsiya ang pamisti sa babáyi ug laláki karun,</i> Women&apos;s and men&apos;s clothing don&apos;t differ any more. <number>2</number> <itype>[C; b3]</itype> <number>1</number> have a quarrel, <tr>misunderstanding</tr>. <i>Magkadipirinsiya giyud usáhay ang magtiáyun,</i> A married couple will always have petty quarrels at times. <number>3</number> <itype>[B]</itype> become <tr>defective</tr>. &dagger;

<p id=4458><form>dipísit</form> <pos>n</pos> deficit, shortage of money. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> have a deficit or shortage of money.

<p id=4459><form>dip-it</form> <xr>= <sc>dip-ig</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4460><form>dipiyi</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>piyi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4461><form>diplúma</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>diploma</tr>. <i>2</i> one&apos;s <tr>child</tr> (slang). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> <number>1</number> get a <tr>diploma</tr>. <number>2</number> have <tr>offspring</tr> (slang).

<p id=4462><form>diplumasíya, diplumasya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>diplomacy</tr>. <number>2</number> knack of saying s.t. tactful to smooth personal relations.

<p id=4463><form>diplumatiku</form> <pos>n</pos> diplomat.

<p id=4464><form>dipluy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> for troops to deploy.

<p id=4465><form>diprimíra</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>primíra</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4466><form>diprinsiya</form> <xr>= <sc>dipirinsiya</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4467><form>diprisisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>depreciation</tr> in value. <i>Walà lang diay diprisisiyun?</i> You mean you&apos;re not giving an allowance for depreciation? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b]</itype> give s.t. a lower rate.

<p id=4468><form>dipudáta</form> <xr>= <sc>alipáta</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4469><form>dipudipu</form> <xr>= <sc>lipulipu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4470><form>dípung</form> <xr>= <sc>gípung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4471><form>dipurt</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> deport. <i>Idipurt unyà ka ug dì ka kabayad sa buhis,</i> You will be deported if you don&apos;t pay your taxes. <form>{-asiyun|dipurtasiyun}, {-isyun|dipurtasyun}</form> <pos>n</pos> deporting of s.o.

<p id=4472><form>dipúsit</form> <xr>= <sc>dipusitu</sc>, <i>v1, 2, 3, 4; n4</i>.</xr>

<p id=4473><form>dipusitu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> place of <tr>depositing</tr> s.t. <i>Dì maabli ang dipusitu ug dì úras,</i> You can&apos;t open the vault at any odd time. <number>2</number> storage tank for water. <i>Dúnay kaugalíngung dipusitu ning baláya,</i> This house has its own water tank. <number>3</number> <tr>stomach</tr> (humorous usage). <number>4</number> amount deposited in a bank. <number>5</number> deposit on s.t. to be returned. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>deposit</tr> money in the bank. <number>2</number> turn over for safekeeping. <i>Gidipusitu níya ang aláhas sa káha di yíru,</i> He deposited the jewelry in the safe. <number>2a</number> store s.w. <i>Idipusitu ang mais sa kamarin,</i> Store the corn in the corncrib. <number>2b</number> deposit goods, not paid for in full with the loan company when payments cannot be met. <i>Idipusitu na lang nákù ang rilu hangtud makabakpi ku,</i> I will return my watch to the store until such time as I get my backpay. <number>3</number> put down a partial payment. <i>Pilay ímung gidipusitu sa makina?</i> How much of a down payment did you make on the sewing machine? <number>4</number> make a deposit on s.t. to be returned. <number>2</number> defecate (slang). <i>Túa pa sa kasilyas nagdipusitu.</i> He&apos;s still in the bathroom making his deposit. <form>dipusituhánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>dipusitu</sc>, <i>1, 2.</i></xr> <number><corr sic="3">2</corr></number> comfort room (slang).

<p id=4474><form>diputádu</form> <pos>n</pos> congressman. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a]</itype> become, make s.o. a congressman.

<p id=4475><form>dipwat</form> <xr>= <sc>ligwat</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4476><form>dirà</form> <xr>= <sc>niánà</sc>, <sc>dinhà</sc> (dialectal),</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>kanà</sc>, <sc>dihà<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=4477><form>dirámi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>leftover</tr> food. <number>2</number> grains spilled out of a sack at the place where sacks of grain are transported. <number>3</number> action of making things in sacks spill out so as to steal them. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> obtain leftover food, be left over. <i>Nakadirámi mig ígù námung gikaun,</i> We obtained enough leftovers for our dinner. <i>Ug madirámi na nà, dalì rang mapan-us,</i> If it is left over, it will get spoiled quickly. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> get clothes cast off. <i>Ug makadirámi mi sa ímung bisting biyà,</i> If we can get your castoff clothing. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> steal things in sacks by doing s.t. to make some spill out. <i>Kusug mudirámi sa kupras ang ubang kargadur,</i> Some longshoremen steal plenty of copra. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> steal part of revenues or goods being moved in trade. <i>Daghan kaáyu ang tinda nga gidirámi niánang tindíra,</i> That storekeeper stole lots of things.

<p id=4478><form>diri<sub>1</sub></form> <number>1</number> here, nearer speaker than interlocutor. <i>Día siya diri,</i> He is over here, by me. <i>Diri lingkud,</i> Sit over here. <i>Diri siya lingkud ganína,</i> He was sitting over here a while ago. <form>{&mdash;|diri} nga <r>[<ix>noun</ix>]</r>-a</form> in this [noun] here, as opposed to others. <i>Diri kung dapíta maigù,</i> I was hit in this place. <number>2</number> <formx>{-y|diriy}</formx> there was over here. <i>Diriy duha ka buuk ganíha,</i> There were two of them here a minute ago.

<p id=4479><form>diri<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> command given to a carabao to make him turn to the left. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> command the carabao to turn left.

<p id=4480><form>dirihir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>direct</tr> a business, tell s.o. how to do s.t. <i>Kumpaníya nga gidirihian sa usa ka Amirikánu,</i> Company directed by an American. <i>Pilikula nga gidirihian ni Bargas,</i> A movie directed by Vargas. <number>2</number> tell s.o. how to get s.w.

<p id=4481><form>diriksiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>direction</tr>, <tr>management</tr>. <i>Kumpaníya ubus sa diriksiyun sa usa ka Amirikánu,</i> Company under the management of an American. <number>2</number> <tr>instructions</tr> for doing s.t., to get to the place. <i>Tumána giyud ang diriksiyun,</i> Follow the directions. <number>3</number> <tr>direction</tr> to a place. <i>Unsay diriksiyun sa sakayan pagkasúgat ninyu?</i> What direction did the boat take when you met? <number>4</number> address. <i>Ang diriksiyun sa suwat,</i> The address on the letter. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> give directions to a place, to do s.t. <number>2</number> address a letter s.w.

<p id=4482><form>dirikta</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>frank</tr>, speaking to the point. <number>2</number> be <pb n=221>directly from, go directly to. <i>Radiyu nga ismágul dirikta gíkan sa Hapun,</i> Radios, smuggled directly from Japan. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5c]</itype> go straight to the point, be frank. <i>Diriktáha (diriktáhi) siyag sulti nga wà ka mahigugma níya,</i> Tell her frankly that you don&apos;t love her. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> go, take s.w. directly. <i>Mudirikta kug adtu sa iskuyláhan,</i> I will go directly to school. <i>Idirikta nà siya sa util,</i> Take her directly to a hotel. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> direct s.o. s.w. <i>Kinsay nagdirikta ninyu nganhi?</i> Who directed you here? <number>3a</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> direct traffic. <i>Gidiriktahan sa mga buy iskawut ang trápik,</i> The boy scouts directed the traffic. <form>{-minti|diriktaminti}</form> <number>1</number> <tr>directly</tr>, <tr>outright</tr>. <i>Sultíhi ku diriktaminti,</i> Tell me frankly. <i>Gidilì sa usa ka langyaw ang pagkampanya diriktaminti u indiriktaminti,</i> It is forbidden for foreigners to campaign directly or indirectly.

<p id=4483><form>diriktíba</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> board of directors, the governing body of s.t. <number>2</number> directive, general instructions. <form>hunta {&mdash;|diriktíba} n</form> <xr>= <sc>diriktíba</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4484><form>diriktu</form> <xr>= <sc>dirikta</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4485><form>dirikt&ucaron;r</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> director of a department. <number>2</number> director of a play. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a2]</itype> be, become director of a company or play.

<p id=4486><form>diriktúri, dirikturyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>telephone directory</tr>.

<p id=4487><form>diris</form> <xr>= <sc>tubli</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4488><form>díris</form> <pos>n</pos> strong, offensive odor of a <ix>singgawung</ix> (k.o. civet).

<p id=4489><form>dir-is</form> <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s monthly period. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be menstruating. <i>Gidir-is siya maung gisáput,</i> She is having her period. That&apos;s why she is moody.

<p id=4490><form>diritsu</form> <number>1</number> <tr>directly</tr>, <tr>straight</tr>. <i>Diritsu ngadtu sa syudad,</i> Going directly to the city. <number>2</number> directly after s.t. else. <i>Gíkan sa trabáhu, diritsu siyag kalígù,</i> From work he takes a bath directly. <form>hitsu {&mdash;|diritsu}</form> clothing purchased with the cost of the tailoring included in the price. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> do s.t. immediately. <i>Midiritsu siyag tindug,</i> He got up immediately. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> go, bring s.t. directly s.w. <i>Diritsúha nag kúhà,</i> Go get that directly. <i>Idiritsu siyag paúlì,</i> Bring her home directly.

<p id=4491><form>dirúsas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> the only thing that is wrong (humorous euphemism). <i>Mau nay nakadirúsas nímu. Masukù dáyun ka,</i> That&apos;s what&apos;s wrong with you. You get angry right away.

<p id=4492><form>Dis.</form> <pos>n</pos> an abbreviation for <ix>Disyimbri</ix> &lsquo;December&rsquo;.

<p id=4493><form>dís</form> <pos>n</pos> fixed desk of the type used in elementary schools, composed of a table top and a folding seat attached to the front.

<p id=4494><form>dis-a</form> <xr>= <sc>diin<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=4495><form>disapíyu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c1]</itype> fight a duel with a sword. <pos>n</pos> <tr>duel</tr>.

<p id=4496><form>dis-arma</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>disarm</tr>.

<p id=4497><form>disbár</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <number>1</number> not allow s.o. to take the bar examination. <i>Nadisbár siya kay nakapaanak,</i> He was not allowed to take the bar because he made a girl pregnant. <number>2</number> disbar a lawyer.

<p id=4498><form>disdi</form> from [such-and-such] a time on. <i>Disdi pa niadtu,</i> From that time on.

<p id=4499><form>disdis</form> <xr>= <sc>dìdì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4500><form>disgáyis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>disguise</tr>. <form>{pa-|padisgáyis}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> disguise oneself, s.o. <i>Nagpadisgáyis siyang párì,</i> He disguised himself as a priest.

<p id=4501><form>disgrasya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> accident, unfortunate in result. <i>Disgrasya ang íyang namatyan,</i> He died in an accident. <i>Disgrasya tung ákung paglakaw kay nakahibálag ku ug isnatsir,</i> I had bad luck when I took my walk because I ran into a purse-snatcher. <number>2</number> <tr>unexpected</tr>, <tr>unintended</tr>. <i>Disgrasya tung pagkadaúga nákù,</i> My winning was completely unexpected. <form>{&mdash;|disgrasya} nga malíngin</form> very much unexpected, for s.t. to have happened which had a very remote chance of happening. <i>Nakagurdu kug primíru primyu sa swip-istik. Disgrasyang malíngin!</i> I won the first prize in the sweepstakes. How very unexpected that was! <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B123(1)6; b6]</itype> meet with an accident. <i>Nakadisgrasya (nadisgrasya) ang dyip,</i> The jeep met with an accident. <number>1a</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> for s.t. to turn out unhappily. <number>1b</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> get lost. <i>Nadisgrasya ang tanan níyang swildu sa súgal,</i> He lost all his money in gambling. <number>2</number> <itype>[a3b2]</itype> have s.t. happen to one unexpectedly. <i>Palit ug tíkit básig disgrasyahan kag gurdu,</i> Buy a ticket, you might just win. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> bring a woman into disgrace by making her pregnant. <form>{-da|disgrasyada}</form> <pos>n</pos> woman who has been disgraced by having a child out of wedlock. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> get disgraced. <form>{-du|disgrasyadu}</form> <pos>a</pos> accident-prone. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be accident-prone.

<p id=4502><form>disgustádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> disliking s.o. <i>Disgustádu ku sa ímung naasáwa,</i> I dislike the person you married. <number>2</number> be fed up with a situation. <i>Disgustádu ku niíning kinabuhía,</i> I&apos;m fed up with this life.

<p id=4503><form>disgustáwu</form> <pos>a</pos> doing s.t. one dislikes doing. <i>Miadtu ku píru disgustáwu tung pagkaadtúa,</i> I went, but I didn&apos;t want to.

<p id=4504><form>disgustu</form> <pos>n</pos> ill will between two or more persons. <i>Ang ílang disgustu mahitungud sa yútà misangkù sa hukmánan,</i> Their quarrel over the land ended in court. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C1; b3]</itype> be on bad terms.

<p id=4505><form>disgwápa, disgwápu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> spoil one&apos;s good looks (humorous slang). <i>Nadisgwápa na lang hinúun nang artistáhun mung nawung sa pagpamaligyag úling,</i> It&apos;s a shame that a person with the face of a movie actress <pb n=222>should be selling charcoal. It makes you look so ugly.

<p id=4506><form>disi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146; b6]</itype> be greasy such as to make one&apos;s appetite disappear. <i>Nagdisi ang plátung gihugásag way sabunsábun,</i> The plates are all greasy because they were washed without soap. <i>Nagdisi nga samad,</i> A wound which makes one lose one&apos;s appetite.

<p id=4507><form>dísi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> resist efforts vehemently. <i>Bísag giunsa námug gúyud ang bábuy, mudísi giyud dílì musunud,</i> No matter how much we pulled the pig, it resisted and would not follow.

<p id=4508><form>disibi</form> <xr>= <sc>risibi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4509><form>disidídu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>determined</tr>, bent on doing s.t. <i>Disidídu na giyud siyang mangasáwa,</i> He is really determined to get married. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> get to be determined to do s.t.

<p id=4510><form>disidir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> make up one&apos;s mind to do s.t. <i>Disidihi kanag palit,</i> Make up your mind to buy it.

<p id=4511><form>dísil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Diesel</tr>.

<p id=4512><form>disilya</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> turn left. <pos>n</pos> left direction.

<p id=4513><form>disimal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>decimal point</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> place or put a decimal point.

<p id=4514><form>Disimbri</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>December</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>abril</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4515><form>disimitru, disimitrus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>decimeter</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B256; c1]</itype> be a decimeter in dimension.

<p id=4516><form>dis-impikta, disimpikt&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> disinfect a place.

<p id=4517><form>Disimri</form> <xr>= <sc>disimbri</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4518><form>disimuladu</form> <xr>= <sc>dismular</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4519><form>dis-inpikta</form> <xr>= <sc>dis-impikta</sc>.</xr> <form>{-nti|dis-inpiktanti}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>disinfectant</tr>.

<p id=4520><form>disinti</form> <pos>a</pos> respectable, conforming to social standards. <i>Disinting pamisti,</i> Decent dress. <i>Disinting balay,</i> A presentable house. <i>Disinting ristawrant,</i> A decent restaurant. <i>Disinting trabáhu,</i> A respectable job. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> respectable in one&apos;s behavior.

<p id=4521><form>disintiríya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dysentery</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23P; a1]</itype> have dysentery.

<p id=4522><form>disintralisasiyun, disintralisisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>decentralization</tr>.

<p id=4523><form>disinuybi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>nineteen</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>disiutsu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4524><form>disinyu</form> <pos>n</pos> design of s.t. constructed.

<p id=4525><form>disiplína</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>discipline</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> discipline, punish. <i>Disiplináha nang ímung ulitáwu kay tingálig makurnir unyà,</i> Discipline your son before he is forced into a marriage. <form>{-da|disiplínada}</form> <xr>= <sc>disiplinádu</sc> (female).</xr> <form>{-du|disiplínadu}</form> <pos>a</pos> well-disciplined. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become well-disciplined. <form>{-ryan|disiplínaryan}</form> <pos>a</pos> be a strict disciplinarian. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be strict.

<p id=4526><form>disipulu</form> <pos>n</pos> disciple of Christ. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; a12]</itype> become a disciple of Christ.

<p id=4527><form>dis-iridar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> <tr>disinherit</tr>.

<p id=4528><form>disirt</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dessert</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> have dessert.

<p id=4529><form>disisayis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sixteen</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>disiutsu</sc>.</xr> <form>{&mdash;|disisayis} kartas</form> mahjong game with sixteen pieces (instead of the usual thirteen).

<p id=4530><form>disispirádu</form> <xr>= <sc>dispirádu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4531><form>disisyíti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>seventeen</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>disiutsu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4532><form>disisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>decision</tr>.

<p id=4533><form>disiutsu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>eighteen</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B5; c16]</itype> do s.t. on the eighteenth (of the month), reach the age of eighteen. <i>Mudisiutsu (madisiutsu) ku rung pitsa trayinta sa Uktubri,</i> I will be eighteen on the 30th of October. <i>Dibuhan ta ka ug magdisiutsu ka na,</i> I will give you a debut on your eighteenth (birthday). <i>Nagkadisiutsu ka na lang wà pa giyud ka gihápuy buut,</i> You are turning eighteen but still you are irresponsible. <i>Disiutsúhun (idisiutsu) na lang nátù ang átung parti,</i> Let&apos;s have our party on the eighteenth (of the month). <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; ac1]</itype> acquire or give eighteen (pesos, dollars, etc.). <i>Nakadisiutsu ku sa búwang,</i> I won eighteen (pesos) in the cockpit. <i>Ákung palitun ug ímung disiutsúhun (idisiutsu),</i> I&apos;ll buy it if you let me have it for eighteen pesos. <i>Nadisiutsuhan ta man ka,</i> I won eighteen (pesos) from you. <i>Nadisiutsuhan ku sa Tabuan, apan gamay ra ang ákung napalit,</i> I got rid of eighteen pesos, but I bought very little.

<p id=4534><form>disíyu</form> <pos>n</pos> plan which one intends to carry out. <i>Wà kuy disíyung magnigusyu ug sakyanan,</i> I do not have plans to invest in transportation.

<p id=4535><form>disk</form> <xr>= <sc>dís</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4536><form>diskans&acaron;r</form> <xr>= <sc>diskansu</sc>, <bx>v2</bx>, <number>2a</number>, <number>b</number>, <number>c</number>.</xr> <form>diskansádu, diskansáwu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> rested, having rest. <i>Diskansádu kaáyu ku human sa katúlug,</i> I am very well rested after my sleep. <number>2</number> relieved, free of pain, worry, suffering. <i>Diskansádu na ang masakitun kay nakatumar na ug tambal,</i> The patient is relieved because he has taken his medicine. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> <number>1</number> get rested. <number>2</number> get respite.

<p id=4537><form>diskansu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> front porch. <i>Adtu ta magpahayáhay sa diskansu,</i> Let&apos;s get a <corr sic=breathe>breath</corr> of fresh air on the front porch. <number>2</number> <tr>rest</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> add a front porch to a house. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> <tr>rest</tr>. <i>Mudiskansu kug kadiyut kay gihangákan ku,</i> I will rest for a while because I&apos;m out of breath. <number>2a</number> <itype>[AB; c2]</itype> give s.o. or s.t. a rest. <i>Nagdiskansu ku áring kabáyù,</i> I&apos;m giving my horse a rest. <number>2b</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> be free of, have a respite from pain or suffering. <i>Makadiskansu lang siyas bun-ug ug wà dinhi ang bána,</i> She won&apos;t get any respite from her beatings as long as her husband is around. <number>2c</number> <formx>{&mdash;|diskansu} sa dáyun</formx> <itype>[A2]</itype> <tr>die</tr> (lit. rest forever). <i>Pasaylua siya samtang dì pa siya mudiskansu sa dáyun,</i> Forgive him before he goes to his eternal <pb n=223>rest. <form>diskansuhánan, diskansuhan</form> <pos>n</pos> resting place. <form>diskansuhánan sa dáyun</form> cemetery (lit. final resting place).

<p id=4538><form>diskarga</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> unload, take out of a vehicle. <i>Idiskarga (diskargáha) ang mga malíta gíkan sa awtu,</i> Take the suitcases out of the car. <number>1a</number> defecate (slang). <i>Túa siya sa kasilyas nagdiskarga,</i> He&apos;s in the bathroom, defecating. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> have sexual intercourse (humorous). <i>Didtu ku sa pampaman magdiskarga,</i> I was in the red-light district, unloading. <number>2</number> <itype>[B23(1); c1]</itype> for a battery to become discharged. <i>Dì musíga ang mga sugà ug makadiskarga ang batiríya,</i> The lights won&apos;t shine if the battery loses its charge.&dagger;

<p id=4539><form>diskárids</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; a12]</itype> <tr>discourage</tr>. <i>Nadiskárids ku kay wà giyud ku makapuntus,</i> I got discouraged because I hadn&apos;t gotten a single point. <i>Gidiskárids ku siya pagkúhag abugasíya,</i> I discouraged him from taking up law.

<p id=4540><form>diskaril</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13B26; c16]</itype> <tr>derail</tr>, be derailed. <i>Mga tulisan ang nagdiskaril sa trín,</i> The bandits derailed the train. <i>Mudiskaril (madiskaril) ang trín,</i> The train will be derailed. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; b3(1)]</itype> faint (colloquial). <i>Nadiskaril siya pagkakità sa kalag,</i> She fainted when she saw the ghost.

<p id=4541><form>diskarni</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> butcher an animal, slaughter it and cut it up. <number>2</number> kill s.o. with a bladed weapon. <i>Madiskarni tikaw rung traydúra ka,</i> I&apos;ll slaughter you, you traitor. <number>3</number> eat all of s.t. (colloquial). <i>Gidiskarni sa mga bátà ang kík nga nahibilin,</i> The children ate up all of the leftover cake. <number>4</number> rape a woman (slang).

<p id=4542><form>diskás</form> <xr>= <sc>diskási<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=4543><form>diskási<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; b5c3]</itype> engage in a discussion about a particular topic. <i>Gidiskási ku siya báhin sa rilihiyun,</i> I discussed religion with him.

<p id=4544><form>diskási<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2C; c16]</itype> call off, take back a bet. <i>Idiskási (diskasíhun) níla ang ílang pusta kay dì mahinayun ang lumbà,</i> They will call off their bets because the race will not be held. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; c16]</itype> stop any activity for the while or call it quits. <i>Diskasíhun (idiskási) úsà nátù ang átung paggúna,</i> Let&apos;s take a break from our weeding.

<p id=4545><form>diskasyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>discussion</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> hold a discussion. <i>Nagdiskasyun mi sa klási mahitungud sa liksiyun,</i> We held a discussion in class about the lesson.

<p id=4546><form>diskitar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b28]</itype> find out s.t. by accident. <i>Nadiskitahan nga nawálà ang singsing,</i> It was discovered that the ring was stolen. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> check up on s.o. to see if he is doing anything wrong. <i>Diskitahun ku ang ákung mga anak ug dúna bay mga minalditu,</i> I check up on my children to see if they are naughty.

<p id=4547><form>diskrayib, diskribir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>describe</tr>. <i>Diskrayba (idiskrayib) ang langgam nga ímung nakítà,</i> Describe the bird you saw.

<p id=4548><form>diskubri</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> <tr>discover</tr>, find s.t. <i>Wà pay nakadiskubrig tambal sa kansir,</i> No one has found a cure for cancer yet. <i>Nadiskubri (hidiskubrihan) ang asáwa nga may laláki,</i> The wife was discovered with another man.

<p id=4549><form>diskumpiyar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> be suspicious, distrusting. <i>Ug mudiskumpiyar ka nákù, tagáan ta kag risíbu,</i> I&apos;ll give you a receipt if you distrust me. <form>diskumpiyáda</form> <xr>= <sc>diskumpiyádu</sc> (female)<corr>.</corr></xr> <form>diskumpiyádu</form> <pos>a</pos> suspicious and distrustful. <i>Diskumpiyádu ku ánang timbangána,</i> I don&apos;t trust those scales. <i>Diskumpiyádu siya sa pagbáhin sa kabílin,</i> He questions the division of the inheritance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b3]</itype> get to be suspicious and distrustful.

<p id=4550><form>diskuntintu</form> <pos>a</pos> discontented. <i>Diskuntintu ku íning kinabuhía,</i> I&apos;m discontented with this life. <i>Diskuntintu ku sa ímung ági,</i> I&apos;m dissatisfied with your work. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b3]</itype> be, become discontented, desiring for more.

<p id=4551><form>diskursu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>speech</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <corr><number>1</number> </corr><itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> deliver a speech. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give a scolding in such a way that the public can hear it. <i>A, nagdiskursu na pud nang tiguwánga,</i> Oh, the old woman is giving a speech (cussing out) again. <i>Ug magkasábà ka ayaw idiskursu,</i> If you give a scolding, don&apos;t do it so everyone can hear.

<p id=4552><form>diskusyun</form> <xr>= <sc>diskasyun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4553><form>diskutik</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr><corr sic="discotèque">discothèque</corr></tr>. <number>2</number> private party in which the house is made to look like a <corr sic="discotèque">discothèque</corr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> hold a <corr sic="discotèque">discothèque</corr> party.

<p id=4554><form>diskutir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; b35]</itype> discuss or argue with s.o. over a certain point. <i>Ang tíma nga ámung gidiskutir, gidiskutihan,</i> The subject we discussed.

<p id=4555><form>diskuwalipáyid</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> disqualify s.o. from participating in a sport, election, etc. <i>Nadiskuwalipáyid siya kay húgaw siyang midúwà,</i> He was disqualified because he played dirty. <i>Diskuwalipáyid nang kandidátu kay andir ids,</i> The candidate was disqualified because he was underage.

<p id=4556><form>diskuwintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>discount</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b7]</itype> give a discount. <i>Diskuwintúhan nákù nig gamay kay súkì man ta,</i> I&apos;ll give a little discount on this because you are a good customer. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> get a discount. <i>Diskuwintúhan (makadiskuwintu) ka basta daghang palitun,</i> You get a discount if you buy in quantities. <number>3</number> <itype>[b1]</itype> credit a certain amount owing s.o. to a debt he has. <i>Diskuwintúhan ang <pb n=224>ímung útang sa ímung suklì,</i> Your change will be credited to your debt.

<p id=4557><form>dismayar</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>dismáyu</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> get discouraged. <i>Wà siya madismayar bísag gitabángan sa mga sapían ang íyang kapárang,</i> He wasn&apos;t discouraged even though his opponent was helped by wealthy people.

<p id=4558><form>dismáyu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> <tr>faint</tr>, lose consciousness. <i>Nadismáyu siya kay naigù sa kutukutu,</i> She fainted because she was hit in the pit of the stomach.

<p id=4559><form>dism&icaron;s</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; bc1]</itype> dismiss a class. <i>Dúgayng gidismisan ang mga bátà,</i> The children were let out late. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> dismiss a case in court. <i>Idism&icaron;s (dismisun) unyà kining kasúha kay kúwang sa ibidinsiya,</i> This case will be dismissed because there is insufficient evidence. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> dismiss from an office. <i>Gidism&icaron;s ang pulis kay nanguliktag tung,</i> The policeman was fired for collecting protection money.

<p id=4560><form>dismísal</form> <pos>n</pos> honorable dismissal issued by a school to an outgoing student, indicating he is clear of all obligations, financial or otherwise.

<p id=4561><form>dismular</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> hide s.t. by drawing attention away from it. <i>Mikatáwa siya arun pagdismular sa íyang kaúwaw,</i> She laughed to hide her embarrassment. <i>Ipaibabaw ang mga maáyu arun madismular ang mga latà,</i> Put the good ones on the top so that the rotten ones will be concealed. <form>dismuládu</form> s.t. done in such a way that the truth is concealed. <i>Dismuládu ang íyang pagpaningil kay nagpasángil siyang mangáyug tanum,</i> He hid his attempts to collect by pretending to ask for plants.

<p id=4562><form>dispalku</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>embezzle</tr>. <i>Gidispalkúhan níya ang kubransa,</i> He embezzled some of the money he collected. <pos>n</pos> amount embezzled. <form>dispalkadur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>embezzler</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; b6]</itype> become an embezzler. <form>dispalkadúra</form> <xr>= <sc>dispalkadur</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=4563><form>dispanta</form> <xr>= <sc>ispanta</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4564><form>dispasir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> manage to do s.t. not easy to do. <i>Kining ákung kítà dílì makadispasir sa ímung pagtuun,</i> With my salary I can&apos;t afford to pay for your tuition. <i>Dì na madispasir sa ákung láwas ang tanang trabáhu sa balay,</i> I don&apos;t have the strength to do all the household chores.

<p id=4565><form>dispatsadur</form> <xr>= <sc>dispatsir</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4566><form>dispatsadúra</form> <pos>n</pos> salesgirl in a bazaar or department store. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> be, become a salesgirl.

<p id=4567><form>dispats&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> get rid of s.t. <i>Dispatsaha (idispats&acaron;r) kining mga bátà. Sámuk kaáyu,</i> Get rid of these children. They&apos;re a nuisance. <number>2</number> discharge from a job. <i>Maáyung dispatsahun ang impliyádu nga dílì kamaung mutrabáhu,</i> Better get rid of an employee that doesn&apos;t know how to work. <number>3</number> kill, liquidate. <i>Gidispats&acaron;r ug hurut ang tistígus,</i> The witnesses were all liquidated. <number>4</number> sell s.t., esp. s.t. one must get rid of. <i>Idispats&acaron;r na lang nátù ang yútà kay umaw na,</i> Let&apos;s get rid of that piece of land because it has lost its fertility.&dagger;

<p id=4568><form>dispatsir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> dispatcher of public transportation. <i>Dispatsir sa trák,</i> The dispatcher at the bus station. <number>2</number> person who goes on a boat and takes over all the sleeping places and sells them to the passengers. <i>Pagparisirbag tihíras sa dispatsir,</i> Have the dispatcher get you a cot beforehand. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; b(1)]</itype> be, become a dispatcher of a public utility vehicle.

<p id=4569><form>dispatsu</form> <xr>= <sc>dispats&acaron;r</sc>.</xr>&dagger;

<p id=4570><form>dispidir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> bid farewell. <i>Mudispidir ku sa ákung mga amíga sa dì pa ku mularga,</i> I&apos;ll bid goodbye to my friends before I leave. <form>dispidída</form> <pos>n</pos> a farewell party. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> hold a farewell party. <i>Átù siyang dispididáhan iniglarga níya,</i> We&apos;ll give him a farewell party when he leaves.

<p id=4571><form>dispinsa<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> pantry, storeroom for foods. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b6]</itype> make a pantry.

<p id=4572><form>dispinsa<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>forgiveness</tr>, <tr>excuse</tr>. <i>Dispinsa lang úsà<corr sic=",">.</corr> Wà kuy ikahátag,</i> Forgive me. I have nothing to give you. <i>Nangáyù siyag dispinsag milakaw,</i> He asked to be excused and left. <number>2</number> dispensation in the church.

<p id=4573><form>dispinsaryu</form> <pos>n</pos> dispensary, place for treating small sicknesses, wounds.

<p id=4574><form>dispinsasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> dispensation in the church.

<p id=4575><form>dispinsisyun</form> <xr>= <sc>dispinsasiyun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4576><form>dispiráda</form> <xr>= <sc>dispirádu</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=4577><form>dispirádu</form> <pos>a</pos> in despair. <i>Dispirádu siya kay dúgay nang way trabáhu,</i> He is desperate because he has been without a job for a long time. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be in despair.

<p id=4578><form>dispiras</form> <xr>= <sc>bispiras</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4579><form>dispirinsiya, disprinsiya</form> <xr>= <sc>dipirinsiya</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4580><form>dispisiyar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>despise</tr>, <tr>scorn</tr>. <i>Ángay bang dispisyahan ang táwu tungud sa kakabus?</i> Should a person be despised on account of poverty?

<p id=4581><form>dispras</form> <pos>n</pos> mask for a masquerade or as part of a costume. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> wear a mask. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC12; c1]</itype> hold a masked party.

<p id=4582><form>dispuga</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. stitch where the thread is pulled back under itself, used in hemming, making buttonholes, and wherever a sturdy stitch is desired. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> sew a hem. <form>{-díra|dispugadíra}</form> <pos>n</pos> one who sews a hem. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> be a hemmer.

<pb n=225>

<p id=4583><form>dispunir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> take care of s.o.&apos;s financial obligations for him. <i>Wà kuy gidáng kwarta, Dispunihi ku úsà íni,</i> I didn&apos;t bring any money. Please take care of this for me.

<p id=4584><form>dispusisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>decision</tr>, judgment of what to do. <i>Unsay ímung dispusisiyun báhin sa yútà?</i> What do you think we should do about the land? <i>Wà kuy dispusisiyun nga ákù. Mag-agad ra ku sa ákung bána,</i> I don&apos;t make any decisions. I leave everything up to my husband. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> take a decision on s.t. <i>Ug ímu ning dispusisyunan karun, ikaw na,</i> If you make a decision on this, it is your responsibility.

<p id=4585><form>dispuwis</form> the next thing after that. <i>Hugási<corr sic=",">.</corr> Dispuwis lat-i,</i> Clean it. Then stew it.&dagger;

<p id=4586><form>distansiya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>distance</tr>. <i>Ang distansiya sa ílang balay gíkan sa karsáda,</i> The distance of their house from the street. <form>may {&mdash;|distansiya}</form> be somewhat far from s.t. <i>May distansiya ang ámù sa lungsud,</i> Our place is located at somewhat of a distance from the town. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BC; acP]</itype> be at a distance, at a distance from each other. <i>Sa nakadistansiya na siyag duha ka kilumitrus,</i> When he had gotten two kilometers away. <i>Distansyáhun nátù ang duha ka balay pagtúkud,</i> Let&apos;s build the two houses at a distance apart. <i>Idistansiya (ipadistansiya) ang ímung tihíras sa ákù,</i> Set your cot up at a distance from mine.&dagger;

<p id=4587><form>distiliríya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>distillery</tr>.

<p id=4588><form>distinádu</form> <pos>a</pos> destined by fate to s.t. <i>Distinádu siya sa pagkapubri,</i> She is destined to be poor.

<p id=4589><form>distinasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>destination</tr>. <i>Ása ímung distinasiyun. Sini u simbahan?</i> What is your destination. The movies or church?

<p id=4590><form>distínu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>destination</tr>, place one is headed for. <i>Ása man ang ímung distínu run, simbahan u sini?</i> What is your destination? The movies or church? <form>{pága|pága distínu}, pagadíru {&mdash;|distínu}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.o. who rides s.w. with the passage to be paid on arrival. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> assign s.o. s.w. for employment. <i>Túa ku madistínu sa Lutúpan,</i> I&apos;m assigned to work in Lutopan.

<p id=4591><form>distiyíru</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>exile</tr>. <i>Gidistiyíru si Risal sa Dapítan,</i> Rizal was exiled to Dapitan.

<p id=4592><form>distribuwir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>distribute</tr>, divide and give out in shares. <i>Wà pa námù idistribuwir ang mga rasyun,</i> We have not distributed the rations yet.

<p id=4593><form>distribyútur</form> <pos>n</pos> agent who sells a certain product in a place. <i>Distribyútur sa mga bulad,</i> A dried fish wholesaler. <i>Distribyútur sa mga traktúra,</i> Distributor of tractors. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a2b6]</itype> be, become a distributor.

<p id=4594><form>distrítu</form> <pos>n</pos> congressional or school district. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become a congressional district.

<p id=4595><form>distrusar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> destroy, cause physical destruction. <i>Ang súnug mauy midistrusar sa tibuuk syudad,</i> Fire destroyed the whole city.

<p id=4596><form>distrúsu</form> <pos>n</pos> physical destruction.

<p id=4597><form>distsards</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> remove s.o. from his position. <i>Nadistsards ang maistra kay hingabsin,</i> The teacher was discharged because she was always absent. <number>2</number> <itype>[B13; c1]</itype> for a battery to get discharged. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> discharge from a hospital, armed forces. <i>Nadistsards na ba siya sa uspital?</i> Has he been discharged from the hospital? <number>4</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> have discharge prior to labor. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> discharge papers. <number>2</number> vaginal discharge prior to labor.&dagger;

<p id=4598><form>disturb&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> bother, disturb. <i>Ayaw kug disturbaha kay natúlug ku,</i> Don&apos;t bother me. I&apos;m sleeping.

<p id=4599><form>disturbu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6P; a]</itype> <pos>n</pos> <tr>nuisance</tr>, s.t. that disturbs. <i>Disturbu kaáyu kining pagsígig íhì,</i> It is a nuisance to have to urinate all the time. <i>Nadisturbu ang ílang panimuyù tungud sa íyang pinaangkan,</i> The tranquility of their home was disturbed on account of her illegitimate child.

<p id=4600><form>disturnilyadur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>screwdriver</tr>.

<p id=4601><form>distursiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> electrical device which gives a grating effect to the sound of the electric guitar.

<p id=4602><form>dis-ug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB3; c]</itype> <number>1</number> move over, upward, or ahead; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Midis-ug (nadis-ug) siya sa ngilit sa katri samtang natúlug,</i> He moved to the edge of the bed as he slept. <number>2</number> improve, reach a higher level. <i>Dakù siyag tingúhà nga mudis-ug ang íyang kahimtang,</i> He had a strong desire to improve his situation.

<p id=4603><form>dis-úras</form> <pos>a</pos> very late at night, too late to be proper. <i>Dis-úras na kaáyu sa pagpangharána sa mga ulitáwu,</i> It was already very late when the young men serenaded. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B5]</itype> be very late at night.

<p id=4604><form>diswildu</form> <pos>a</pos> spending a lot, as if one had a salary.

<p id=4605><form>Disyimbri</form> <xr>= <sc>disimbri</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4606><form>disyirtu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>desert</tr>.

<p id=4607><form>dit.</form> <pos>n</pos> an abbreviation for <ix>ditiktib</ix> &lsquo;detective&rsquo;.

<p id=4608><form>dít</form> <pos>n</pos> date with a girl. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> have a date with. <i>Makigdít ku nímu,</i> I&apos;d like to ask you for a date. <i>Bísag kinsay íyang idít,</i> She will date anyone.

<p id=4609><form>dità</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. big tree with a light wood used for making wooden slippers, the bark of which is medicine against malaria: <bio>Alstonia scholaris</bio>.

<p id=4610><form>ditalyi</form> <pos>n</pos> details of an incident, etc. <i>Íyang gibutyag ang tanang ditalyi sa ílang rumansa,</i> She related the complete details of their <pb n=226>love-making.

<p id=4611><form>ditiktib</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>detective</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|ditiktib} aksiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> detective movie. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2b6]</itype> become a detective.

<p id=4612><form>ditirminasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>determination</tr>. <i>Ditirminasiyun pagtápus sa íyang pagtuun,</i> Determination to finish his studies.

<p id=4613><form>ditsu</form> <pos>n</pos> extemporaneous verse recited in the <ix>kulilísi</ix>, consisting of stanzas of four lines, at least two of which are rhymed, in a free meter. The participants in the <ix>kulilísi</ix> recite one or more stanzas and each person&apos;s recitation is so fashioned as to be a witty response to the preceding recitation and a challenge to the recitation following. The subject is usually courtship. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> recite <ix>ditsu</ix>&apos;s.

<p id=4614><form>díwà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> mind, soul. <i>Natúlug ang ákung mata, apan nagmata ang ákung díwà,</i> My eyes are asleep, but my mind is awake. <number>2</number> spirit that pervades s.t. <i>Ang díwà sa Pasku,</i> Christmas spirit. <i>Ang díwà sa íyang tugtug,</i> The spirit of his song. <form>diwanhun</form> <pos>a</pos> pertaining to the soul. <i>Diwanhun nga kauhaw,</i> Spiritual thirst.

<p id=4615><form>díwal</form> <xr>= <sc>diwalwal</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4616><form>diwalwal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB3(1)6; c1P]</itype> for the tongue to stick way out, cause it to do so. <i>Mudiwalwal ang dílà sa búang,</i> An idiot&apos;s tongue hangs out. <i>Idiwalwal (diwalwála) ímung dílà,</i> Stick out your tongue.

<p id=4617><form>diwánag</form> (word coined from <ix>díwà</ix> plus <ix>sánag</ix>) <pos>n</pos> inspiration, the light that animates the soul.

<p id=4618><form>diwáta</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. supernatural beings that are associated with certain places, esp. trees. <number>2</number> ceremony of offering food cooked with no salt to spirits to insure harvest, give thanks, diagnose an illness. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> perform a <ix>diwáta</ix> ceremony. <i>Diwatáhi ang lugar únà tarúkig balay,</i> Make an offering before you construct the house. <i>Sakit nga gidiwatáhan,</i> A sickness for which the <ix>diwáta</ix> ceremony was performed. <form>diwatahan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> medium who performs the <ix>diwáta</ix> ceremony. <number>2</number> one who believes in <ix>diwáta</ix> and the <ix>diwáta</ix> ceremony. <form>diwatíru</form> <xr>= <sc>diwatahan</sc>, <i>1</i>.</xr>

<p id=4619><form>diwindi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. small supernatural people, most commonly thought to live in the space between the roof and the ceiling. They do good to those to whom they show themselves, but are also said to play practical jokes. <number>2</number> a dwarfed person.

<p id=4620><form>díwit</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. cutlass fish: <i>Trichiurus spp.</i> <form>diwitdíwit</form> <xr>= <sc>díwit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4621><form>díya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>day</tr> (length of time). <i>Un díya aku didtu,</i> I was there one day. <i>Dus díyas,</i> Two days. <i>Midiya díya ang trabáhu run,</i> We work only half-day today. <number>2</number> pay for the day&apos;s work. <i>Walà kay díya madáwat karun kay walà ka mutrabáhu,</i> You won&apos;t receive any pay today because you did not report to work. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3S; b]</itype> <tr>earn</tr> a certain amount for a day&apos;s work. <i>Mudíya kug utsu písus,</i> I earn eight pesos a day.

<p id=4622><form>diyabítis</form> <xr>= <sc>dayabítis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4623><form>diyablu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>devil</tr>. <i>Usa ka diyablu mipakítà níya,</i> A devil appeared to him. <number>2</number> devil, said as a mild curse to s.o. <i>Kiat mung mga diyablúha mu,</i> You&apos;re being naughty, you little devils!

<p id=4624><form>diyakunu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ceremony</tr> with three priests officiating. <i>Diyakunung mísa,</i> <tr>Special mass</tr>. <number>2</number> priest that assists a high-ranking priest who says mass. <number>3</number> a <tr>layman</tr> elected by the congregation to help the minister in Protestant churches. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a2]</itype> become a <tr>deacon</tr> who aids in the mass or a deacon in a Protestant church.

<p id=4625><form>diyamanti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>diamond</tr>, not as fine in quality as the <ix>brilyanti</ix>.

<p id=4626><form>diyamitru</form> <xr>= <sc>dayamitru</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4627><form>diyána</form> <xr>= <sc>dayána</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4628><form>diyaryu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>daily paper</tr>.

<p id=4629><form>diyaryu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>diary</tr>.

<p id=4630><form>diyaryu<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for <tr>ordinary</tr>, <tr>casual</tr> wear. <i>Dúna siyay aláhas pára diyaryu ug láin sab tung pára ispisyal,</i> She has jewelry for daily wear and other jewelry for special occasions. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; c1]</itype> wear, use s.t. for daily, casual wear.

<p id=4631><form>díyas</form> <xr>= <sc>díya</sc>, <i>n 1</i> (plural).</xr>

<p id=4632><form>diyatilis</form> <xr>= <sc>byatilis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4633><form>diyíta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>diet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> go on a diet.

<p id=4634><form>diyù</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>half centavo</tr>. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>small</tr> in amount. <i>Diyù nga súkà,</i> A little vinegar. <number>2</number> small in size. <i>Diyung bátà,</i> A small child. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a2]</itype> be little, make s.t. little. <i>Ug madiyù na ang túbig,</i> When there is little water left. <i>Diyua pag-asin,</i> Just put a little salt in it. <form>diyùdiyù</form> <xr>= <sc>diyutdiyut</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>diyut</sc>.</xr> <form>{paka-|pakadiyù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> <tr>humble</tr> oneself before s.o., consider s.t. little. <i>Nagpakadiyù aku sa íyang atubángan,</i> I humbled (lit. lowered) myself before him. <i>Gipakadiyù ba nà nímung usa ka galun?</i> Do you consider a gallon little? <form>{-g-|digyù}</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>digyù</sc>.</xr> <form>diriyù, dariyù</form> <xr>= <sc>diriyut</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>diyut</sc>.</xr> <form>{maka-|makadiyù}, {ka-|kadiyù}</form> just a second. <i>Migawas siyag kadiyù,</i> He went out for a second. <form>{ma&N;-(&larr;)|mananíyù}, {tag-(&larr;)|tagdíyù}</form> costing a half a centavo. <form>{tag-(&larr;)|tagdíyù}, {tagi-|tagidiyù}, {tinagi-|tinagidiyù}</form> <xr>= <sc>tagidiyut</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>diyut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4635><form>díyung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> <corr><number>1</number> </corr><tr>close</tr> the eyes to a slit. <i>Midíyung ang íyang mga mata sa kasúlaw,</i> His eyes squinted in the light. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> for a light to be, become <tr>dim</tr>. <i>Midíyung (madíyung) ang sugà kay wà nay gás,</i> The light grew dim because the kerosene was all gone. <pb n=227><number>2a</number> for the sky to get overcast during the day. <i>Nidíyung ang kalangítan,</i> The sky became overcast.

<p id=4636><form>diyus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>God</tr>. <i>Anak sa Diyus,</i> Son of God. <form>{pur-|purdiyus}</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>{pur-|purdiyus}</sc>.</xr> <form>way {&mdash;|diyus}</form> <number>1</number> atheist, nonbeliever. <number>2</number> godless, full of sin. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become very successful in a certain endeavor. <i>Nadiyus siya sa nigusyu,</i> He became very successful in business. <form>diyusdíyus</form> <pos>n</pos> false gods. <form>{-in-|diniyus}</form> <number>1</number> honest, according to God&apos;s precepts. <number>2</number> earnestly with honest effort. <i>Diniyus ang íyang pagtuun,</i> She studied with complete seriousness. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> do s.t. honestly. <i>Gamay kag ginansiya ug magdiniyus kag nigusyu,</i> You won&apos;t have a good profit if you do business honestly. <number>2</number> do s.t. with complete earnestness. <i>Dinyusi (dinyusa) pagsag-úlu ang liksiyun,</i> Memorize the lesson earnestly. <form>{maki-|makidiyus}</form> <pos>a</pos> God-loving, fond of worshipping God. <form>{-nun|diyusnun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> pious, living according to God&apos;s precepts. <number>2</number> divine. <i>Bátang diyusnun,</i> The Holy Infant. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to be pious. <form>padiyusdiyusnun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> pretend piety.

<p id=4637><form>diyúsa</form> <pos>n</pos> goddess.

<p id=4638><form>diyusísis</form> <pos>n</pos> diocese.

<p id=4639><form>diyut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>small</tr> in size. <i>Diyut nga bátà,</i> A tiny child. <pos>n</pos> <tr>half-centavo</tr> coin. <form>way {&mdash;|diyut}</form> penniless. <form>makadiyut, makariyut</form> <number>1</number> to be done for a short time. <i>Makadiyut lang ku ngadtu,</i> I will just go there. <number>2</number> was done for a short time. <i>Makadiyut lang kung niadtu,</i> I just went there for a short time. <form>{ka-|kadiyut}, kariyut</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>makadiyut</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> done a second ago. <i>Kadiyut (kariyut) lang siya nga nanáug,</i> He just left a second ago. <form>{naka-|nakadiyut}, nakariyut</form> <xr>= <sc>makadiyut</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr> <form>{(&larr;)|díyut}</form> <xr>= <sc>diyut</sc>.</xr> <pos>n</pos> <form>{tag-(&larr;)|tagdíyut}, {ma&N;-(&larr;)|maníyut}</form><corr sic=","></corr> coin worth half a centavo. <form>diyutdiyut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> do s.t. many times at small intervals. <i>Nagdiyutdiyut siyag pangíhì,</i> He keeps urinating every few minutes. <i>Gidiyutdiyutan ku níyag pangáyug ámut,</i> He kept asking me for a contribution every few days. <form>{-ay(&larr;)|diyútay}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> few, small in amount. <i>Diyútayng kwarta,</i> Little money. <number>2</number> small in size. <i>Diyútayng bátà,</i> A small child. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a2]</itype> get to be little, make s.t. little. <i>Diyutáya ang asin,</i> Just use a little salt. <i>Nagkadiyutay na ang túbig,</i> The water is getting to be less and less. <form>{paka-ay(&larr;)|pakadiyútay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> consider s.t. little in amount. <i>Gipakadiyútay ba nímu ang usa ka galun?</i> Do you consider a gallon to be a small amount? <form>diriyut, dariyut <r>[<ix>subjunctive verb</ix>]</r></form> <number>1</number> [so-and-so] almost happened. <i>Diriyut ku hiligsi,</i> I was almost run over. <number>2</number> s.t. of little importance. <i>Diriyut lang tung ílang gikaawáyan,</i> They quarrelled over nothing. <form>tagdiyútay</form> <xr>= <sc>tagidiyut</sc>.</xr> <form>{-g-|digyut}</form> <pos>a</pos> small (plural). <i>Umúla sa digyut nga búla,</i> Form it into small balls. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> divide s.t. into small shares. <form>{-um-g-|dumigyut}, dumaligyut</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to run small. <i>Dumigyut (dumaligyut) ang ílang kalíwat,</i> Their family tends to be small in stature. <form>{tagi-|tagidiyut}</form> <pos>a</pos> in small amounts at a time. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; abc]</itype> [do] a little at a time. <i>Tagidiyútag palit,</i> Buy it little at a time. <i>Tagidiyúti ug sábud ang mga manuk,</i> Feed the chickens a little at a time. <i>Itagidiyut kini ug timpla,</i> Mix it in a little at a time. <form>{tinagi-|tinagidiyut}</form> <xr>= <sc>tagidiyut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4640><form>diyuy</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>half-centavo</tr> copper coin. <form>{ma&N;-(&larr;)|maníyuy}</form> <corr><pos>a</pos </corr>priced at half centavo.

<p id=4641><form>Dr.</form> <pos>n</pos> abbreviation for <ix>duktur</ix>.

<p id=4642><form>Dra.</form> <pos>n</pos> abbreviation for <ix>duktúra</ix>.

<p id=4643><form>drágun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dragon</tr>. <number>2</number> name of one of the suits in mahjong. It consists of three sets of four identical pieces, each set a different color: red (<ix>dágir</ix>), green (<ix>bulbul</ix>), and white (<ix>ispíhu</ix>). <form>{-is|drágunis}</form> dragons (plural).

<p id=4644><form>dram<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>drum</tr>, a percussion instrument. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> play the drum.

<p id=4645><form>dram<sub>2</sub>, drám</form> <pos>n</pos> drum, a container for oil, gasoline, etc. <i>Lima ka dram nga gasulína,</i> Five barrels of gasoline.

<p id=4646><form>dráma</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put on a play or stage a <tr>broadcast</tr>. <i>Gidráma níla ang kamatáyun ni Risal,</i> They dramatized Rizal&apos;s death. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put on an act, pretend s.t. to <tr>mislead</tr>. <i>Ayaw kug dramáhi ánang ímung paghilakhílak,</i> Don&apos;t put on an act pretending to cry in front of me. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>drama</tr> on stage, radio or <asc>TV</asc> broadcast. <number>2</number> act put on to fool s.o.

<p id=4647><form>dramátik</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dramatic</tr>, full of emotional action. <i>Dramátik nga panagkítà,</i> An emotional meeting. <i>Dramátik nga lílas,</i> A dramatic film. <form>{&mdash;|dramátik} intrans</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dramatic entrance</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make a dramatic entrance.

<p id=4648><form>dramaturga</form> <xr>= <sc>dramaturgu</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=4649><form>dramaturgu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>actor</tr> on stage or in a radio or <asc>TV</asc> drama. <number>2</number> <tr>playwright</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> be, become an actor, playwright.

<p id=4650><form>drámir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>drummer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a2]</itype> be, become a drummer.

<p id=4651><form>drams</form> <pos>n</pos> set of <tr>drums</tr>.

<p id=4652><form>dráp</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> drop a course. <i>Pila ka libru ang ímung drápun (idráp)?</i> How many courses are you planning to drop? <number>2</number> kick s.o. out of a course. <i>Ákù na lang idráp (drápun) nang palaabsin,</i> I&apos;m just going to kick that habitual absentee out of my course.

<p id=4653><form>drap-awut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>drop-outs</tr> from school. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b4]</itype> drop out from school. <i>Gidrap-awtan mig ubay-ubay,</i> Quite a number of students dropped out on us.

<p id=4654><form>drápir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>medicine dropper</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> use a medicine dropper.

<pb n=228>

<p id=4655><form>drayib</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> <tr>drive</tr> a motor vehicle. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> drive a ball in tennis or pingpong. <i>Idrayib (drayba) ug kusug ang pingpung,</i> Slam the pingpong ball. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> drive a basketball. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> be the active partner in sex play (slang). <i>Lamì ba ug ang babáyi mauy mudrayib?</i> Is it fun if the woman is on top? <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> drive in tennis, pingpong. <number>2</number> action of driving a tennis, basketball. <form>draybir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> driver, chauffeur. <number>2</number> the sexual partner who is on top (slang). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> have as a driver. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; a12]</itype> be a driver.

<p id=4656><form>dráyir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dryer</tr> for hair, copra, etc. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c16]</itype> <tr>dry</tr> by machine. <i>Drayíra (idráyir) ang kupras ug ting-úwan,</i> Dry the copra in the machine during the rainy season.

<p id=4657><form>dri</form> short for <xr><sc>diri<sub>1, 2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=4658><form>dríbul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>dribble</tr> a ball. <pos>n</pos> action of <tr>dribbling</tr>.

<p id=4659><form>dríl<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>drill</tr>, repetitive exercise in school, in athletics, etc. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> do a drill.

<p id=4660><form>dríl<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a coarse linen or cotton cloth with a diagonal weave, used for work clothes, etc.

<p id=4661><form>dripwud</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>driftwood</tr> used for ornamental purposes.

<p id=4662><form>drísing rum</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dressing room</tr>.

<p id=4663><form>drísir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dressing table</tr> with a mirror.

<p id=4664><form>drismíking</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dressmaking</tr>, course or business of making dresses.

<p id=4665><form>drisrihirsal</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>final rehearsal</tr> of s.t. to be performed. <i>Dris rihirsal sa píi,</i> Final rehearsal of the <asc><abbr expan="Physical Education">P.E.</abbr></asc> performance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; c1]</itype> hold a final rehearsal of a play, an operetta, etc.

<p id=4666><form>dristukil</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dressed up</tr> for a purpose, usually more than necessary (colloquial). <i>Dristukil siya kay mag-aplay sa trabáhu,</i> She&apos;s all dressed up because she is applying for a job. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> be dressed to kill.

<p id=4667><form>drú</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> hold a <tr>lottery</tr> drawing. <i>May drú sa Duminggu,</i> They will hold the drawing on Sunday. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>draw</tr> a card. <number>3</number> <itype>[AC; a]</itype> draw a revolver. <i>Diriyut mi magkadrú. Púsil giyud untà tu,</i> We nearly drew our guns on each other. It would have been a gunfight. <pos>n</pos> drawing of lottery, cards.

<p id=4668><form>drúwing</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>draw</tr> a picture. <i>Gidrúwing níyang ákung dagway,</i> He drew my face. <number>1a</number> <formx>dílì {ma-|madrúwing}</formx> words can&apos;t describe. <i>Dílì madrúwing ang íyang kalípay,</i> Words cannot describe her happiness. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put eyebrow pencil on. <form>{-ánan|druwingánan}</form> <pos>n</pos> drawing table, board.

<p id=4669><form>drúwir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>drawer</tr>, <tr>desk</tr>, <tr>bureau</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, put a drawer.

<p id=4670><form>du</form> <pos>n</pos> the note <tr>do</tr>. <form>way {&mdash;|du}</form> have no knowledge of music.

<p id=4671><form>dù</form> short for <ix>undù</ix> or <ix>dudù</ix>.

<p id=4672><form>duas</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>exposed</tr> to everybody&apos;s view, to the elements. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be exposed to public view, to the elements. <i>Nagduas ang dughan sa baylarína,</i> The dancer&apos;s breasts were bare. <i>Naduas ang mga tanum sa kaínit sa adlaw,</i> The plants lay exposed under the heat of the sun. &dagger;

<p id=4673><form>dúaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2b2]</itype> pay a <tr>visit</tr>. <i>Duáwun nímu ang ímung trátu?</i> Are you going to see your girl friend? <form>{&mdash;|dúaw} ang katulúgun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> fall asleep (literary). <i>Wà siya duáwa sa katulúgun,</i> He did not fall asleep. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> go s.w. and see how things are. <i>Duáwa ang kábaw ug nainitan ba,</i> Take a look at the carabao to see if it is in the sun. <form>{-um-r-/l-|dumudúaw/dumulúaw}</form> <pos>n</pos> visitor.

<p id=4674><form>dúay</form> <xr>= <sc>dul-ay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4675><form>duay-ay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3(1); b6c1]</itype> for the head to hang limp. <i>Nagduay-ay ang úlu sa manuk pagkaigù sa bulang,</i> The cock&apos;s head hung limp after it was struck with the gaff.

<p id=4676><form>dubdub</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>burn</tr> s.t. by putting a torch to it. <i>Dubduban ang pánit sa kanding arun makúhà ang balhíbu,</i> They singe the goat&apos;s skin to get the hair off. <i>Dubduban nátù ang mga uhut,</i> Let&apos;s burn off the rice stalks.

<p id=4677><form>dubla</form> <pos>v</pos> <corr><number>1</number> </corr><itype>[AC; c]</itype> do two things in rapid succession or simultaneously to a recipient; for two agents to do the same thing in succession to a recipient. <i>Midubla kug suntuk sa pátid,</i> I boxed him and then kicked him. <i>Nagdubla mig tíru sa liyun,</i> We both fired at the lion. <i>Human na siya kasab-i. Ayaw idubla ang ímu,</i> He has gotten his scolding. Don&apos;t you do it, too. <number>2</number> <tr>toll</tr> the church bell for the dead, done with two bells in a set rhythm, or toll the bells in the same way at eight <asc>P.M.</asc> <pos>n</pos> tolling of the church bells at eight <asc>P.M.</asc>

<p id=4678><form>dubli</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>double</tr>, twice as much. <i>Dubli ang báyad basta istranghíru,</i> You pay double if you&apos;re a foreigner. <form>{&mdash;|dubli} u</form> <pos>n</pos> letter w. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB6; a1]</itype> double s.t., be doubled. <i>Mudubli ku sa ímung swildu ug takus ka,</i> I&apos;ll double your salary if you&apos;re worth it. <i>Mudubli ang abut kun gamítan ug abúnu,</i> The yield doubles if fertilizer is applied. <i>Nagdubli man kag báhin,</i> You have a double share. <form>{&mdash;|dubli} antsu</form> <pos>n</pos> cloth of extra width. <i>Dus mitrus paígù kay dubli antsu man,</i> Two meters are enough because it is extra-wide cloth. <form>{&mdash;|dubli} bista</form> <pos>n</pos> bifocals. <form>{&mdash;|dubli} dus</form> <pos>n</pos> twenty-two caliber rifle, pistol (slang). <form>{&mdash;|dubli} kára</form> <pos>n</pos> not living up to one&apos;s word of honor. <i>Dubli kárang pulitiku. Dúru kung kampanya níya piru wà ku pasudlag trabáhu,</i> He&apos;s a two-faced politician. I worked like hell for him, but he didn&apos;t give me a <pb n=229>job.

<p id=4679><form>dubudúbu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B24C3]</itype> be about the same in capacity, condition, age. <i>Mudubudúbu mig panuígun kay nagdúngan man mi pagkapuwit,</i> We could be of the same age because we were in first grade together. <i>Magdubudúbu lang ning ámung kinitáan,</i> We have about the same income. <form>{ka-|kadubudúbu}</form> <pos>n</pos> people of about the same age.

<p id=4680><form>dubuk</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for fish not to be fresh. <number>2</number> tending to get sick easily. <i>Dubuk kaáyu kug láwas. Dì ku kaagwantas tun-ug,</i> I am susceptible to illnesses. I can&apos;t take drafts. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B]</itype> get old or spoiled. <i>Nadubuk kay wà aysi,</i> It did not keep because it wasn&apos;t put on ice. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> for the body to be badly bruised due to severe maulings. <i>Gitabangan siya hangtud nadubuk ang láwas,</i> They ganged up on him and mauled him until his body was badly bruised.

<p id=4681><form>dúbul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sleeping equipment good for two. <i>Maglála kug banig nga dúbul,</i> I&apos;ll weave a double-bed-sized mat. <number>2</number> doubles, a game with two persons on a side. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c3]</itype> be s.o.&apos;s partner in doubles. <i>Makigdúbul aku nímu sa tínis,</i> I&apos;ll be your tennis partner for doubles. <number>3</number> <ix>in phrases</ix>: <form>{&mdash;|dúbul} bádi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>a</number> k.o. tongue-shaped cookie consisting of two cookies with a filling. <number>b</number> a pregnant woman (humorous). <form>{&mdash;|dúbul} bid</form> double bed. double ... <form>{&mdash;|dúbul} dayis</form> a method of determining the dealer in mahjong with two dice. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> determine mahjong dealer with two dice. <form>{&mdash;|dúbul} dik</form> double-decked bed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> construct a double-decked bed, put a double-decked bed s.w. <form>{&mdash;|dúbul} krus</form> double cross. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> double-cross. <i>Gidúbul krúsan (gidúbul krus) siya sa íyang trátu,</i> His fiancee double-crossed him. <form>{&mdash;|dúbul} krúsir</form> <pos>n</pos> double-crosser. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> be a double-crosser. <form>{&mdash;|dúbul} parking</form> double parking. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> park double. <i>Ákù lang úsà idúbul parking,</i> I&apos;ll just park double for the while.

<p id=4682><form>dúbun</form> <pos>a</pos> very dark in hue; almost black. <i>Gwápa untà siya apan dúbun lang kaáyu sa kaitum,</i> She is pretty, only she is very dark. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; a]</itype> darken or blacken. <i>Ayaw dubúna pag-anyil ang linabhan,</i> Don&apos;t put too much bluing in the clothes.

<p id=4683><form>dúda</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>doubt</tr>. <i>Nagdúda kung muulan,</i> I doubt it will rain. <number>2</number> <tr>suspect</tr>. <i>Gidudáhan ku siya nga mauy nangáwat,</i> I suspect him to be the one who stole it. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> doubt. <i>Dakù ang ákung dúda nga makapasar ku,</i> I very much doubt that I can pass. <number>2</number> suspicion. <i>Dakù ang ákung dúda nga naglúib ka,</i> I am very suspicious that you are unfaithful. <form>dudúsu</form> <pos>a</pos> suspicious, doubting. <i>Dudúsu man gud siya sa íyang katakus,</i> He was doubtful of his ability. <i>Dudúsu ku ánang táwung ganíha rang naglabaylábay sa báy,</i> I am suspicious of that man. He&apos;s been going back and forth in front of the house. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be <tr>suspicious</tr>.

<p id=4684><form>dudhu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>thrust</tr> s.t. at s.o. that he doesn&apos;t want, give s.o. s.t., imposing it on him. <i>Ngánung nagdudhu ka pa man nákug tubà nga wà kuy gustu?</i> Why do you thrust toddy at me when I don&apos;t want any? <i>Gidudhu ang bungì ngadtu sa dalága,</i> She tried to force the hairlipped boy on the girl. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3P]</itype> push s.o. into a bad situation. <i>Ang ímung pagkapalahúbug mauy makadudhu (makapadudhu) nímu sa kaparútan,</i> Your drunkenness has thrust you into your misery.

<p id=4685><form>dùdù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>press</tr> s.t. hard over s.t. <i>Idùdù sa linúgaw ang asin nga binatu,</i> Press the chunk of salt onto the porridge. <number>2</number> <tr>force</tr> s.t. on s.o. <i>Dùdúig bibirun ang bátà,</i> Press a bottle to the child&apos;s lips. <i>Idùdù giyud ang kwarta ug dílì siya mudáwat,</i> Force the money on him if he refuses to accept it. <number>3</number> dip, <tr>dunk</tr>. <i>Idùdù ang kaling sa súkà,</i> Dunk the dried anchovies into the vinegar.

<p id=4686><form>dúdung</form> <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>dung</bx> <number>1</number> term of address for a male of the same age or younger than the speaker. <number>2</number> nickname popular for boys. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> call s.o. <ix>dúdung</ix>.

<p id=4687><form>dudúsu</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>dúda</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4688><form>d&umacracu;g</form> <xr>= <sc>dulug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4689><form>dugà, dúgà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> juice, <tr>sap</tr> from a plant, juice coming from inside meat. <i>Dugà sa agridulsi,</i> Calomondin juice. <i>Ang dugà sa alipáta makabúta,</i> The sap from the <ix>alipáta</ix> tree can blind you. <i>Karning nalútù sa íyang dúgà,</i> Meat cooked in its own juices. <number>2</number> oozings from infections. <number>3</number> semen (humorous euphemism). <i>Wà nay dugang tigúlang,</i> An old man with no more sperm. <number>4</number> a man&apos;s children (humorous). <i>Kinsay mubuhì sa ímung dugà kun patay ka na?</i> Who will raise your children when you are gone? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P]</itype> exude sap or juice. <i>Nakadugà na ba ang hubag?</i> Has any pus come out of the boil? <form>{-un(&rarr;)|dugaun}</form> <pos>a</pos> juicy.

<p id=4690><form>dug-ab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> <tr>belch</tr>. <i>Nakadug-ab na ba ang bátà?</i> Has the baby burped? <pos>n</pos> belch.

<p id=4691><form>dugámis</form> (coined from <ix>dugà</ix> and <ix>tam-is</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>honey</tr>, sweet juice (literary). <i>Dugámis sa mangga,</i> Sweet juice of the mango. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12S3]</itype> drip with sweet juice. <i>Kansang ngábil nga nagdugamis sa kabatan-un,</i> Whose lips are dripping with the honey of youth.

<!-- TODO: Missing partial example removed -->

<p id=4692><form>dúgang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB2S4; c]</itype> add to s.t., <tr>increase</tr> in amount. <i>Magdúgang ba tag palit?</i> Shall we <pb n=230>buy more? <i>Nagdugang (nagkadugang) ang kasakit,</i> Her illness is getting worse. <i>Dugángi ang ákung báhin,</i> Add to my share, please. <i>Pilay idúgang?</i> How many shall we add? <pos>n</pos> s.t. given in addition. <i>Dúgang kasayúran,</i> Additional information. <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;|dúgang} sa</formx> in addition to. <i>Dúgang pa niánà, pubri siya,</i> Furthermore, he is very poor. <form>{paki-|pakidugang}, {paki-(&larr;)|pakidúgang}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> ask for more. <i>Nagpakidugang (nagpakidúgang) pa siyag kan-un kay gigútum pa,</i> He asked for more food because he was still hungry. <form>{ig-r-|igdudúgang}, {ig-l-|igdulúgang}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. to add to s.t. <i>Balas nga igdudúgang sa abúnu,</i> Sand to be added to the filler.<!-- <i>Nagdugang ang kabúang sa</i>-->

<p id=4693><form>dugap</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>intervene</tr>, take part in others&apos; affairs uninvited. <i>Midakù ang áway kay gidugapan sa ugángan,</i> The quarrel got worse because the mother-in-law joined in. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c]</itype> do s.t., usually unnecessary, as a sideline to one&apos;s main business. <i>Gidugapan níyag panlabáda ang súhul sa íyang bána,</i> She took in wash as an addition to her husband&apos;s salary.

<!-- TODO: verify ellipsis near Sa nagkadugay na -->

<p id=4694><form>dúgay</form> <corr><pos>a</pos> </corr><number>1</number> taking a <tr>long time</tr>. <i>Dúgay nga intirbiyu,</i> A lengthy interview. <i>Dúgay ang kaayuhun sa sangla,</i> It takes long for leprosy to heal. <i>Dúgay siyang nag-ílis (mag-ílis),</i> It took (takes) her long to change. <number>2</number> <tr>late</tr>. <i>Dúgay ang ámung paniudtu,</i> Our lunch was late. <i>Dúgay ming natúlug,</i> We went to sleep late. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|dúgay} na</formx> long ago. <i>Dúgay na nà,</i> That was long ago. <i>Dúgay nang nalútù ang sud-an, dúgay nang pagkalútù sa sud-an,</i> The food has been ready for some time. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B3(1); b3c1]</itype> take a long time. <i>Dì siya madúgayng pirma,</i> He doesn&apos;t take long to sign. <i>Ug madúgay pa kining sakíta, ...</i> If this sickness lasts much longer ... <i>Wà madúgay, namatay siya,</i> It didn&apos;t take long before she died. <i>Dì ku magdúgay dinhi,</i> I won&apos;t stay here for long. <i>Dì ka makadúgayg tubag,</i> You may not take long to answer. <i>Dugáya (idúgay) ug tágù,</i> Put it away for a long time. <i>Unsay gidugáyan ninyug isturya?</i> Why are you talking so long? <number>1a</number> <itype>[B4]</itype> last long. <i>Dílì magdúgay kining klasíha sa sapátus,</i> This type of shoes doesn&apos;t last long. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> get to be late, delayed. <i>Ug mudúgay tag adtu, mudúgay sag paúlì,</i> If we go late, we&apos;ll come home late. <i>Nadúgay ang suwat,</i> The letter was delayed. <number>3</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> <formx>{&mdash;|dúgay} na</formx> get to be a long time. <i>Sa nadúgay na níyang trabáhu didtu,</i> After he had worked there for a long time <i>... Sa nagkadugay na,</i> As time went on ... <form>dugaydugay</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> taking some time. <number>2</number> somewhat late. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|dugaydugay} na</formx> some time ago. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|dugayan}</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to take long to do things. <i>Dugayan siyang sugúun,</i> He takes long to do things he is told to do. <form>{gi-un(&rarr;)|gidugayun}, {ka-un(&rarr;)|kadugayun}</form> <pos>n</pos> length of time. <form>{hi&N;-|hinúgay}</form> it&apos;s been long enough now. <i>Hinúgay na niánang ímung paghilakhílak,</i> You&apos;ve been crying long enough now. (Stop it.) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b]</itype> keep doing s.t. too long and too much. <i>Ayaw ug hinugáyi ug lisùlísù ang siradúra,</i> Don&apos;t keep turning that lock. <form>{ka-an|kadugáyan}</form> the long run. <i>Sa kadugáyan maáyu ra nà,</i> In the long run it will surely get better.

<p id=4695><form>dugbak</form> <pos>a</pos> for s.t. firm to be thoroughly <tr>rotten</tr>. <i>Dugbak nga káhuy,</i> A piece of wood completely rotted. <i>Dugbak na kaáyu ang patay,</i> The body was in an advanced state of decomposition. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> <tr>rot</tr>.

<p id=4696><form>dugdug</form> <xr>= <sc>dalugdug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4697><form>dughan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>chest</tr>, <tr>breast</tr>. <i>Ipahigdà ang bátà sa íyang dughan,</i> Lay the child on its chest. <i>Bugdu nga dughan,</i> A full bosom. <number>2</number> breast, as seat of emotions. <i>Mikúba ang ákung dughan,</i> My heart beat rapidly. <number>2a</number> <formx>sakit ang {&mdash;|dughan}</formx> be deeply worried about some situation. <i>Nagsakit ang ákung dughan ánang batáa kay dì magtuun,</i> I&apos;m worried about that child because he doesn&apos;t study. <number>3</number> part around the chest of a garment. <i>Guut ang dughan sa ákung sinínà,</i> My dress is narrow around the chest. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> hit in the breast. <form>{-un|dughanun}</form> <pos>a</pos> full-breasted, buxom. <form>{-un|dughanun} ug tiyan</form> <pos>a</pos> pot-bellied (humorous).

<p id=4698><form>dughang</form> <xr>= <sc>dugsak</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4699><form>dughit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>poke</tr> at things high up to dislodge them. <i>Dughíta na lang ang búnga, ayawg sak-a,</i> Knock the fruits down with a pole, don&apos;t climb up after them. <form>{(&rarr;)|dughit}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pole</tr> to poke things down.

<p id=4700><form>dughù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> poke at s.t. that is up high with a pole. <i>Dughúa ang kisami arun muhílum ang tagatáas,</i> Thump on the ceiling so the people upstairs will quiet down. <i>Dughúi kug tambis,</i> Knock some fruits down for me. <number>2</number> <itype>[A123P; a12]</itype> get infested with bedbugs. <i>Dughuun ka (ang átung silya) kun adtu ka manini sa barátu,</i> You (our chairs) will get infested with bedbugs if you go to cheap moviehouses. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pole</tr> to poke with. <number>2</number> <tr>bedbugs</tr>, lice in furniture (so-called from their propensity to bite <corr sic="("></corr>from beneath). <form>{-un|dughuun}</form> <pos>a</pos> infested with bedbugs.

<p id=4701><form>dughù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small black poisonous snake.

<p id=4702><form>dugkal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>dig</tr> up the earth with a pole or bar and, by extension, with a spade. <i>Dugkálun ang yútà nga dì madáru,</i> They dig the earth up with a pole where they can&apos;t plow. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> thrust at, <tr>strike</tr> with a long <pb n=231>pointed instrument. <i>Gidugkal níya sa sundang ang punúan sa káhuy,</i> He thrust a machete into the tree trunk. <pos>n</pos> pole to pry the earth up with.

<p id=4703><form>dugmak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <tr>stab</tr>. <i>Punyal tung gidugmak nákù,</i> It was a knife that I was stabbed with. <form>{-in-an(&rarr;)|dinugmakan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stab wounds</tr>.

<p id=4704><form>dugmil</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> <tr>roll</tr>, <tr>wallow</tr> in dirt, sand, sugar and the like, cause s.t. to do so. <i>Nagdugmil ang anay sa lápuk,</i> The sow wallowed in the mud. <i>Nadugmil sila sa salà,</i> They wallowed in sin. <i>Idugmil ang ságing sa asúkar,</i> Roll the banana fritters in the sugar. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for an animal to <tr>gather</tr> stuff to give birth on. <i>Nagdugmil ang anay kay taliának na,</i> The sow is gathering material because she is going to deliver. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>crumple</tr>, <tr>rough</tr> s.t. up vigorously to the point of mangling it. <i>Hastang nakadugmil sa úsu sa táwu,</i> My! How the bear mangled the man!

<p id=4705><form>dugmù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> <tr>fall</tr> forwards with the knees hitting the ground first. <i>Nadugmù ku sa nagbansiwag nga gamut,</i> I tripped and fell on the root that was sticking out.

<p id=4706><form>dugmù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ANC; b5]</itype> <tr>wrestle</tr>, <tr>fight</tr> with grappling. <i>Gidugmù (gidugmúan) sa asáwa ang babáyi sa íyang bána,</i> The wife fought with her husband&apos;s mistress.

<p id=4707><form>dugmuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>crush</tr> into small pieces or powder. <i>Nadugmuk ang súpas sa garapun,</i> The crackers in the jar got all broken to pieces. <i>Dugmúka ang pasáyan úsà iságul,</i> Crush the shrimps before you put them in. <number>2</number> <tr>change</tr> a bill. <i>Dugmúka nang dyasingku,</i> Please change this fiver. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. crushed into bits. <number>2</number> the little pieces of bread and pastry left over when baked goods have been cut for sale. <form>sulting {&mdash;|dugmuk}</form> statement not worth giving credence. <i>Ayaw tuhúi kanang mga tabì. Púru nà sulting dugmuk,</i> Don&apos;t believe that gossip. They&apos;re just stories.

<p id=4708><form>dugmun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>rags</tr>. <number>2</number> things gathered by an animal to prepare its bed for giving birth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> lie down in the midst of disorder. <i>Didtu siya magdugmun sa suuk,</i> He lay down in the dirt in the corner. <number>2</number> spread rags for an animal to give birth on. <i>Nagdugmun ang anay kay taliának na,</i> The sow gathered stuff because she was about to give birth. <number>3</number> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> get enmeshed in a net. <i>Sa pagdasmag, ang isdà madugmun sa báling,</i> In lunging, the fish enmeshes itself in the net.

<p id=4709><form>dugnas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B23(1); b6]</itype> for the leaves of annuals which yield roots or vegetables to wither when the crop has been gathered or is ready for gathering. <i>Mudugnas (madugnas) na gánì ang dáhun sa úbi, kanà panglihun na,</i> When the leaves of the yam die out, it means the tubers are ready for gathering.

<p id=4710><form>dug payit</form> <pos>n</pos> dogfight between fighter planes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c3]</itype> engage in a dogfight.

<p id=4711><form>dugsak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> thrust s.t. long at s.t. with force. <i>Dugsáka ang halu sa bangag,</i> Thrust a pole at the monitor lizard in the hole. <i>Idugsak ang ísi sa íhu,</i> Thrust the harpoon into the shark. <pos>n</pos> thrust with s.t. long. <i>Dì pa madutlan sa usa ka dugsak,</i> You can&apos;t pierce it with one thrust.

<p id=4712><form>dugsang</form> <xr>= <sc>dugsak</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4713><form>dugsib</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> set fire to s.t. with a burning torch. <i>Dugsíbi ang ílang balay,</i> Set fire to their house.

<p id=4714><form>dugsù</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish.

<p id=4715><form>dugtà</form> <pos>a</pos> worn out to shreds, rotten and badly decomposed, completely decayed. <i>Dugtang banig,</i> A mat worn to shreds. <i>Dugtang láwas sa patay,</i> Completely decayed body of the corpse. <i>Dugtang balay,</i> A house that is rotted through. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b3]</itype> get completely rotten, or worn out. <i>Gidugtáan siyag tulu ka buuk karsúnis, wà gihápun kaswilduhi,</i> He has worn three pairs of pants to shreds, and he still hasn&apos;t received his pay.

<p id=4716><form>dugtung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> join end to end. <i>Dugtúnga ang duha ka kadína,</i> Join the two chains together. <i>Dugtúnga ang duha ka lamísa arun dúna kay kahigdáan,</i> Put two tables end to end so you have s.t. to sleep on. <i>Idugtung ring tabla niánà,</i> Join this piece of wood to the end of that one. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> link with a structure or opening. <i>May pultahan nga nagdugtung sa duha ka lawak,</i> There is a door connecting the two adjacent rooms. <i>Ang duha ka línaw dugtúngun sa usa ka kanal,</i> The two ponds will be linked together by a canal. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> unite, link together. <i>Ang kaminyúun sa duruha nagdugtung sa duha ka bantúgang bánay,</i> The marriage of the two joins the two famous families. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> say s.t. after s.o. else has spoken. <i>Ang íyang kasábà gidugtúngan níyag maymay,</i> He added a piece of advice after he scolded me. <number>3</number> <itype>[A23C23]</itype> overlap into the succeeding period, season. <i>Ang ámung mais mudugtung sa sunud sanggì,</i> Our corn will last into the next harvest. <i>Ang duha ka sanggì magdugtung,</i> The product from one harvest lasts to the next. <number>3a</number> <itype>[C]</itype> <formx>{&mdash;|dugtung} ang hunàhúnà</formx> have similar opinions on s.t. <i>Nagdugtung ang ámung hunàhúnà báhin niánà,</i> Our opinions coincide on that point. <number>3b</number> <formx>{&mdash;|dugtung} ang dálan</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c13]</itype> for people estranged to be reconciled. <i>Nagbúlag sila ug walà na magkadugtung <pb n=232>ang ílang dálan,</i> They separated and each went his separate way. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a piece that joins another piece. <i>Háin man ag dugtung áning kayril?</i> Where is the other piece of this watch chain? <number>2</number> the continuation of s.t. foregoing. <i>Kadtung awáya dugtung sa ílang lális,</i> That fight is the continuation of their quarrel. <number>3</number> installment of s.t. that appears in a series. <i>Atangi ang dugtung,</i> Read the next installment. <number>4</number> the knot which joins two ends of a rope or chain. <i>Ang dugtung lig-un,</i> The knot is strong. <form>{&mdash;|dugtung} ug púsud</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>siblings</tr>. <i>Ayaw mu pag-áway kay dugtung ra mug púsud,</i> Don&apos;t quarrel. You are brothers (of the same umbilical cord). <form>{&mdash;|dugtung} ug tinái</form> one&apos;s husband or wife (humorous). <i>Nía na ang ímung dugtung ug tinái,</i> Your wife is here. <form>{-in-an(&rarr;)|dinugtungan}</form> <pos>n</pos> place two things are joined. <form>{ka-|kadugtung}</form> <xr>= <sc>dugtung</sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr>

<p id=4717><form>dugù</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>blood</tr>. <i>May dugù siyang Katsílà,</i> He has Spanish blood. <number>2</number> blood from menstruation. <i>Kusug kug dugù human kakuhái,</i> I have been having profuse menstruation since my miscarriage. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|dugù} sa láki</formx> semen (euphemism). <number>4</number> the part of one&apos;s being that supplies aggressiveness and vitality. <i>Misúruk ákung dugù,</i> My blood boiled. <form>{&mdash;|dugù} sa {&mdash;|dugù}</form> one&apos;s offspring. <form>{-ng|dugung} putì</form> <number>a</number> semen (euphemism). <number>b</number> white discharge after menstruation. <number>c</number> people of the white race. <form>batan-un nga {&mdash;|dugù}</form> <number>a</number> young people. <number>b</number> having youthful drive and aggressiveness. <i>Ang batan-un níyang dugù nagtukmud níya sa pagpakasalà,</i> Her youthful drive led her to sin. <form>bug-at ang {&mdash;|dugù}</form> having a strong antipathy toward s.o. <form>hínay, lúya, patayg {&mdash;|dugù}</form> slow, lacking in vitality and aggressiveness. <form>ínit ug {&mdash;|dugù}</form> hot-tempered. <form>ísug ug {&mdash;|dugù}</form> brave, courageous. <number>b</number> having smelly blood during menstruation. <number>c</number> for traits to be dominant. <form>kúlang ug {&mdash;|dugù}</form> having low blood pressure. <form>subra ug {&mdash;|dugù}</form> having high blood pressure. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> bleed. <i>Wà na magdugù ang samad,</i> The wound isn&apos;t bleeding any more. <i>Nadug-an ang ákung sinínà,</i> My shirt got blood on it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> give money. <i>Wà siya mudugù sa dihang gipangayúan,</i> He did not give any money when he was asked. <i>Tihik kaáyu. Mudugù pay úhung,</i> He is stingy. It is easier to squeeze money out of a rock. (Lit. A mushroom will bleed sooner.) <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|dugù} ang balatían, kasingkásing</formx> <number>a</number> be deeply touched by s.t. sad. <number>b</number> have hurt feelings. <number>4</number> <itype>[a4b6]</itype> menstruate. <i>Gidugù siya, maung salaptun,</i> She is menstruating; that is why she is easily angered. <i>Labhi ang dinug-an,</i> Wash the clothes you got menstrual blood on. <form>{(&larr;)|dúgù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> have heavy bleeding. <i>Magdúgù kag makuháan ka,</i> You will bleed heavily if you have a miscarriage. <form>{-in-(&larr;)|dinúgù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <xr>= <sc>dúgù</sc>.</xr> <form>{ka-(&larr;)|kadúgù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> get blood all over one. <form>dugùdugù, {-in-an|dinuguan}</form> <pos>n</pos> dish prepared from the blood and the innards of a pig. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> prepare, eat blood dish. <form>{ka-(&larr;)|kadúgù}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> blood relative. <number>2</number> <tr>compatriot</tr>. <i>Daghan sa átung kadúgù ang namatay sa gíra,</i> Many of our compatriots died in the war. <form>{ma-(&larr;)|madúgù}</form> <pos>a</pos> place that emits blood profusely when cut. <i>Madúgù ang líug ug mauy masámad,</i> The neck bleeds profusely if it is wounded. <form>{san-(&larr;)|sandúgù}</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>sandúgù</sc>.</xr> <form>{tali&N;-|talinúgù}</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>talinúgù</sc>.</xr> <form>{-un|duguun}</form> having a lot of blood. <i>Duguung isdà ang mangkù,</i> The mackerel is a fish with lots of blood. <form>{-un(&larr;)|dugúun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bloody</tr>, covered with blood. <number>2</number> involving bloodshed. <i>Dugúung bugnù,</i> A bloody battle.

<p id=4718><form>dúguk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> go, be attracted to a specific thing, most often in great numbers. <i>Mudúguk ka sa kumbira bísag walà imbitaha?</i> Will you attend the banquet even if you&apos;re not invited? <i>Way taga Rid Krus nga midúguk sa nasunúgan,</i> No one from the Red Cross visited the burnt-out area. <i>Dugúkun (dugúkan) ang íyang tindáhan sa mga táwu,</i> People flock to his store. <i>Gidúguk (gidugúkan) ang artista sa íyang mga pans,</i> The fans crowded around the actor. <form>{pa-|padúguk}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> attract people to come to a specific thing. <pos>n</pos> s.t. to attract s.t. s.w. <i>Padúguk sa isdà,</i> S.t. to bring the fish near. <i>Barátug baligyà ágig padúguk,</i> Goods sold cheap as a loss leader. <form>{-an|dúgúkan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> longitudinal spar which serves as the centerpiece or main member to which crosspieces are attached. <i>Dugúkan sa talabánug,</i> Centerpiece of the kite. <i>Dugúkan sa batugánan,</i> Post to which sticks are attached for fowls to perch on. <number>1a</number> chassis for a vehicle. <number>2</number> <tr>backbone</tr>. <number>3</number> plot of a story, main subject of an article. <form>{-l-un(&rarr;)|dulugukun}</form> attractive, drawing s.t. to come to it. <i>Búwak nga dulugukun sa alibangbang,</i> Flowers that attract butterflies.

<p id=4719><form>dúgung</form> <pos>n</pos> dugong, k.o. sea cow.

<p id=4720><form>dugus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>honey</tr>, <tr>nectar</tr>. <i>Dugus sa gugma,</i> The sweetness of love. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> put honey on s.t. <form>{ka-(&larr;)|kadúgus}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> get honey all over it. <form>dugusdugus</form> k.o. mealy bug, covered with whitish substance, which infests plants, so called because it exudes a nectar-like substance. <form>dugusnun</form> <pos>a</pos> honey-like.

<p id=4721><form>dugwà</form> <xr>= <sc>digwà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4722><form>dugwat</form> <xr>= <sc>ligwat</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4723><form>duha</form> <ix>numeral</ix> <tr>two</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tulu</sc>.</xr> <form>{-y|duhay} nawung</form> <xr>= <sc>dubli kára</sc>.</xr> <form>duruha</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>two</tr>. <form>tagurha</form> two at a time. <i>Tagurhay sulud áning mga kahúna,</i> Each of these boxes has two in it. <form>igtagurha</form> one&apos;s second cousin. <form>magtagurha</form> be second cousins. <form>tinagurha</form> by two&apos;s. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do by <pb n=233>two&apos;s. <i>Magtinagurha silag linya,</i> They will line up in two&apos;s. <form>{ika-|ikaduha}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>second</tr>. <form>walay ikaduha</form> without equal. <i>Bakákun nga walay ikaduha,</i> A liar without peer. <form>kalúha</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>kalúha</sc>.</xr> <form>kaluhaan, kaluwaan, kawhaan</form> <tr>twenty</tr>.&dagger;

<!-- TODO: account for variant giduhàduháan below -->

<p id=4724><form>duhadúha</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>doubtful</tr>, <tr>unlikely</tr>. <i>Duhadúha nga muabut siya,</i> It&apos;s unlikely that he will arrive. <number>2</number> <tr>suspicion</tr>. <number>3</number> <tr>hesitation</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc3]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>doubt</tr>. <i>Nagduhadúha silang mabúhì siya,</i> They doubt he will live. <number>2</number> <tr>suspect</tr>. <i>Mau nà siyay ákung giduhàduháan (giduhaduháan) nga kawatan,</i> That is the man I suspect of being a thief. <number>3</number> <tr>hesitate</tr>, not do s.t. because of doubts. <i>Ayaw na pagduhadúha. Palita dáyun,</i> Do not hesitate. Buy it immediately. <form>maduhaduháun, maduhàduháun</form> <pos>a</pos> full of doubts, suspicions.

<p id=4725><form>duhal</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> somewhat mentally retarded. <number>2</number> not careful in doing things. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> become mentally retarded. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> be careless. <i>Ug duhalan mug dala nang kwartáha, háyan mawálà,</i> If you carry that money around carelessly, you&apos;re likely to lose it. <form>duhalduhal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> treat s.o. without proper care or without respect. <i>Giduhalduhalan lang níya ang ákung súgù,</i> She didn&apos;t take my orders seriously.

<p id=4726><form>duháwit</form> (coined from <ix>duha</ix> and <ix>áwit</ix>) <pos>n</pos> duet, in singing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1C]</itype> sing a duet.

<p id=4727><form>dúhig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> apply liquid or viscous substances to a surface. <i>Duhígig lána ang agtang,</i> Rub the forehead with coconut oil. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a3]</itype> smear one&apos;s reputation. <i>Nadúhig ku sa kaúlaw sa ímung gibúhat,</i> I am besmirched with shame for what you have done. <form>{(&rarr;)|duhig}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> s.t. applied. <number>2</number> <tr>applicator</tr>.

<p id=4728><form>duhiras</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P]</itype> do, attend to many things with haste under pressure. <i>Magduhiras mig silbi kun daghang mangáun,</i> We will be rushing about serving when there are lots of customers in the restaurant.

<p id=4729><form>duhiraw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> grope, walk uncertainly. <i>Nagduhiraw siya sa dálan tungud sa kangitngit,</i> He groped his way because it was dark. <number>2</number> <itype>[B4]</itype> be, become delirious. <i>Magduhiraw siya kun hilantan,</i> She becomes delirious when she has a high fever. <pos>a</pos> having wandering thoughts. <i>Ang mga duhiraw wà makakat-un,</i> The scatterbrain did not learn.

<p id=4730><form>dúhul</form> <xr>= <sc>túnul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4731><form>d&umacracu;k</form> <xr>= <sc>dúluk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4732><form>dukà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146; a4b6]</itype> be drowsy and have one&apos;s head nod. <i>Nagdukà (gidukà) aku sa sinihan,</i> I felt drowsy in the movie. <i>Gidukaan lang sa tuntu ang ákung klási,</i> The fool was drowsy in my class. <pos>n</pos> <tr>drowsiness</tr>. <form>{(&larr;)|dúkà}</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. click beetle, the head of which droops and clicks when its back is held.&dagger;

<p id=4733><form>dukandukan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> totter, move with uncertain faltering steps. <i>Ang dukà mauy nakadukandukan (nakapadukandukan) sa ákung linaktan,</i> I was so sleepy I was tottering instead of walking.

<p id=4734><form>dukduk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> pound s.t. repeatedly. <i>Dukdúka ang áhus úsà iságul,</i> Pound the garlic before you put it in. <i>Ayaw idukduk nang ímung kúmù sa lamísa,</i> Don&apos;t pound your fist on the table. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> for males to masturbate (slang). <pos>n</pos> s.t. to pound with.

<p id=4735><form>dukduk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> fowl cholera. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be affected with fowl cholera.

<p id=4736><form>dúki</form> <pos>n</pos> duke. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a2]</itype> become a duke.

<p id=4737><form>dukìdukì, dukìdúkì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> ransack s.t. in search of s.t. <i>Nanukìdukì ang makililímus sa mga basúra kun unsay makit-an,</i> The beggar ransacked the garbage can to see what he could find. <number>1a</number> investigate, question in detail. <i>Ang syinsiya nagdukìdukì sa makaingun sa kansir,</i> Science is searching for the cause of cancer. <i>Gidukìdúkì siya sa pulis,</i> The police questioned him in detail. <number>2</number> tinker with. <i>Ákung dukìdukíun ning rilu básig muandar,</i> I&apos;ll tinker with this watch in hopes that I can get it to run. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> putter around, do small odds and ends, unimportant things. <i>Unsay íyang gidukìdukían sa kusína?</i> What is she puttering around <corr sic="with in">within</corr> the kitchen? <form>{ma-un|madukìdukiun}</form> <pos>a</pos> inquisitive, inquiring deeply. <form>{pa&N;-|panukìdukì}</form> <pos>n</pos> investigation, research.

<p id=4738><form>dukiruk</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> gate crasher, attending affairs uninvited, horning in on getting things where one has no right to them. <number>2</number> playing around with women. <i>Dukiruk nà siya kaáyu. Hayan dì mangasáwa,</i> He just plays around. It&apos;s unlikely he will get married. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> play around with women. <form>{pa&N;-|panukiruk}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> attend uninvited, horn in on some distribution one has no right to. <i>Nanukiruk siya sa panghátag rilip,</i> He horned in on the distribution of relief clothing.

<p id=4739><form>dukísa</form> <pos>n</pos> duchess. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a2]</itype> become a duchess.

<p id=4740><form>dukla, duklà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b6]</itype> come upon, catch s.o. unaware. <i>Naduklahan sila nga nagháluk,</i> They were caught kissing.

<p id=4741><form>duklap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146]</itype> be slow, lethargic. <i>Nagduklap ang buta nga naglakaw,</i> The blind man walked slowly with hesitation. <i>Nagduklap ang nigusyu run,</i> Business is slow these days.

<p id=4742><form>duktrína</form> <pos>n</pos> doctrine. <form>{&mdash;|Duktrína} Kristiyána</form> <pos>n</pos> rudiments of the Roman Catholic religion.

<p id=4743><form>duktur</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> doctor, physician. <number>2</number> title of a physician. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|duktur} láway</formx> a folk healer that treats by application of saliva. <number>4</number> <formx>{&mdash;|duktur} rural</formx> rural doctor. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B16; a2P]</itype> be, become a doctor. <i>Maduktur kag magtuun ka,</i> You <pb n=234>will become a doctor if you study. <i>Magduktur siya damag,</i> He hopes to be a doctor. <i>Ang dakù níyang hílig sa pagpanambal muy nakaduktur (nakapaduktur) níya,</i> His great inclination to treat sick people made him a doctor. <i>Duktúrun (paduktúrun) ku ang ákung pangánay,</i> I&apos;ll have my eldest child become a doctor. <i>Mau nang uspitála ang íyang giduktúran,</i> That is the hospital where he works as a doctor. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> doctor information. <i>Dukturan nátù ang mga ansir arun makahandrid ka,</i> We&apos;ll doctor the answers so you get a hundred. <number>3</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> be treated by a physician. <i>Gidukturan na siya piru wà maáyu,</i> He was treated by a physician but he didn&apos;t get well. <form>{(&rarr;)|dukt&ucaron;r}</form> <xr>= <sc>duktur</sc>, <ix>n</ix> <bx>1</bx>, <ix>v</ix>.</xr> <form>{pa-|paduktur}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> have a doctor treat s.t. <i>Magpaduktur ku ning ákung ubu,</i> I&apos;m going to the doctor for my cold. <i>Padukturi siya kay nagkaluspad,</i> Have a doctor treat her because she is getting pale. <i>Wà tay kwartang ipaduktur,</i> We have no money to get medical treatment. <form>{paka-|pakaduktur}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> pretend to be a doctor, treat like a doctor. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> strive to become a doctor.

<p id=4744><form>duktúra</form> <xr>= <sc>duktur</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=4745><form>dukù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1P]</itype> bow the head, bend over. <i>Mudukù lang siyag kasab-an,</i> He just bows his head if they cuss him out. <i>Idukù (dukua, ipadukù, padukua) ang ímung úlu arun makaagi ka,</i> Bend over so you can pass. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A23]</itype> <formx>{&mdash;|dukù} ug paalut</formx> <tr>submissive</tr>, allowing people to do whatever they want to one without complaint. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for plants to bend. <i>Sanga nga nagdukù tungud sa daghang búnga,</i> A branch weighted down with fruit. <i>Nagdukù na ang humay,</i> The rice is nearly ripe now (lit. the stems are bent with grains). <form>{(&larr;)|dúkù}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> be bent over one&apos;s work in extreme concentration. <i>Magdúkù tag tuun kay tís ugmà,</i> Let&apos;s engross ourselves in our studies, because we have a test tomorrow. <form>padukùdúkù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> pretend to be working seriously. <i>Magpadukùdúkù siyag makinilya ug bantayan,</i> She pretends to be busy with her typing if s.o. watches her.

<p id=4746><form>dukul</form> <pos>v</pos> <xr>= <sc>dakul</sc>.</xr> <pos>n</pos> stone used in fashioning clay pots. The stone is knocked on the inside at the same time as the outside is knocked with a paddle.

<p id=4747><form>dukumintu</form> <pos>n</pos> written document in proof of s.t. <i>Way dukumintu ang pagpalit ku sa yútà,</i> There was no document made when I bought the land. <form>{&mdash;|dukumintu} sa pálit</form> <pos>n</pos> deed of sale. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> prepare a document for s.t. <form>dukumintádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>documented</tr>.

<p id=4748><form>dukung</form> <xr>= <sc>dakul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4749><form>dukut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> get stuck in or to s.t. <i>Midukut (nadukut) ang trák sa lápuk,</i> The truck got mired in the mud. <i>Ang tíkug húmuk duktan ug pulug,</i> Dye sticks readily to that kind of reed. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> not move from a place, stick to a job. <i>Ngánung midukut ka ánang palahúbug? Bulagi,</i> Why do you stick to that drunkard? Break off from him. <i>Pastilan nakadukut níya sa íyang trabáhu!</i> My, how he concentrated on his work! <number>3</number> <itype>[B4; b6]</itype> for starchy foods to form a crust at the pot. <i>Midukut na ang nilung-ag,</i> The rice has formed a crust. <pos>n</pos> crust of boiled starches formed on the pot. <form>{<corr sic="(&rarr;)">(&larr;)</corr>|dúkut}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1456]</itype> stick to an intense degree. <i>Nagdúkut ang buling sa kwilyu,</i> The dirt is sticking terribly to the collar. <number>2</number> <itype>[C; ac]</itype> adhere to each other. <i>Magdúkut ang pinyátu,</i> The pieces of peanut brittle stick to each other. <number>3</number> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> be close to one another. <i>Nagdúkut silag lingkud,</i> They sat close to one another. <number>4</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for fire to catch to s.t. <i>Nagdúkut ang káyu sa atup,</i> The fire is spreading to the roof. <i>Naduktan ang silíngang balay,</i> The neighboring houses caught fire. <form>duktanan ug buling</form> tending to get dirty easily. <i>Ang puting sinínà duktanan ug buling,</i> White dresses get dirty easily.

<p id=4750><form>dula</form> <pos>a</pos> for animals to be shy and not allow anyone to approach them. <i>Lisud dakpun ang sunuy nga dula kaáyu,</i> It&apos;s hard to catch a rooster that is very shy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> be shy. <i>Nagkadula ang mga ungguy sukad napusilan ug usa,</i> The monkeys are becoming shier now that one of them was shot.

<p id=4751><form>dúlà</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; abc]</itype> <tr>play</tr>, play a game. <i>Ang bátà nagdúwà sa íyang tái,</i> The child is playing with its feces. <i>Makigdúlà aku nímug tínis,</i> I&apos;ll play a game of tennis with you. <i>Duláun nátù ang Píi run,</i> Let&apos;s make our <asc><abbr expan="Physical Education">P.E.</abbr></asc> class into a play session. <i>Ása man duláa ang inyung baskit?</i> Where will you hold your basketball game? <i>Ayawg dulái nang makinilya,</i> Don&apos;t play with that machine. <i>Dúgay nang wà sila nátù igdúlà,</i> We haven&apos;t played against them in a long time. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> stage a performance. <i>Makbit ang sunud nílang duwáun (idúwà),</i> The next thing they will put on is &lsquo;Macbeth&rsquo;. <number>3</number> <itype>[A]</itype> gambling, esp. in a table game. <i>Túa siya sa madyungan nagdúlà,</i> She is in the mahjong den, gambling. <number>4</number> <itype>[C13; b6]</itype> pull s.t. on s.o. <i>Nagkadúlà giyud ang ílang pagkahambugiru,</i> They tried to impress each other with their tall stories. <i>Giduláan níya si Nánay sa íyang paráyig ug gitugtan,</i> She pulled a fast one on Mama by playing up to her, and Mama allowed her to go. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>game</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>drama</tr>. <i>Dúlà sa kinabúhì,</i> <pb n=235>Drama of life. <form>{-an|dúlaan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>toy</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>musical instrument</tr>. <form>{-ánan|dulaánan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1, 2</number> <xr>= <sc>{-an|dúlaan}</sc>.</xr> <number>3</number> <tr>playground</tr>. <number>4</number> <tr>gambling den</tr>. <form>{ka-|kadúlà}</form> <number>1</number> <tr>playmate</tr>. <number>2</number> one whom one plays a game with.

<p id=4752><form>dulámug</form> <xr>= <sc>dalínug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4753><form>dúlang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> round wash <tr>basin</tr> dug out from a single piece of wood. <number>2</number> <tr>depression</tr> in the ground which fills with water when it rains like a <ix>dúlang</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make into a <ix>dúlang</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1; b5]</itype> become, make a depression which fills with water.

<p id=4754><form>dular<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>durar<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=4755><form>dular<sub>2</sub>, dúlar</form> <xr>= <sc>duliyar</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4756><form>dulaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>turmeric</tr>, an herb resembling ginger, the rootstock of which is used as a yellow-colored spice for stews: <bio>Curcuma longa</bio>.

<p id=4757><form>*dúlaw</form> <form>{gi-|gidúlaw}</form> <tr>know</tr> s.t. about s.t. <i>Wà kuy gidúlaw báhin sa makinilya,</i> I don&apos;t know anything about typing. <i>Way gidúlaw ang ginikánan nga nakigtában ang ílang anak,</i> The parents had no idea their children eloped.

<p id=4758><form>dul-ay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>spit</tr> up, for a baby to <tr>vomit</tr> up excess food taken in. <i>Ug iug-ug ang bátà, mudul-ay nyà,</i> If you shake the baby, he will spit up. <i>Idul-ay níya ang kináun,</i> She spits up what she had eaten. <pos>n</pos> material spit up by a baby. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|dul-ayun}</form> <pos>a</pos> tending to spit up.

<p id=4759><form>duldug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>squash</tr> and <tr>mash</tr> into fine pieces. <i>Iduldug (duldúga) ang patátas,</i> Mash the potatoes. <form>{-in-|dinuldug}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> dish of squash cooked in coconut. <number>2</number> any food which was squashed or mashed. <number>3</number> sweet soup made of any starchy food cooked in coconut milk.

<p id=4760><form>duldul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>kapok</tr> fiber or tree: <bio>Ceiba pentandra</bio>. The pods produce a cotton-like fiber which is used as furniture stuffing. There is a belief that insanity can be cured by shackling a person&apos;s ankles to a stock made of a kapok log. The person imprisoned with a kapok log may sit or lie down, but cannot stand or move, and often may be kept that way for years. <i>Duldul na lay kúwang nímu,</i> The only thing that can help you is a kapok stock. (I.e., you&apos;re crazy.)

<p id=4761><form>dulhug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; acP]</itype> go, bring s.t. <tr>downwards</tr>. <i>Sukad dinhi nagdulhug ang dálan,</i> From here on the road goes downhill. <i>Duna kuy dulhúgun sa syudad,</i> I have s.t. to go down to get in the city. <i>Idulhug (ipadulhug) ang mga pruduktu sa mirkádu,</i> Bring the crops down to the market. <i>Gidulhug (gipadulhug) níya ang íyang panan-aw gíkan sa úlu ngadtu sa tiil,</i> He let his gaze move over her from her head to her feet.

<p id=4762><form>duling</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>cross-eyed</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> get to be cross-eyed.

<p id=4763><form>dulipanus</form> <xr>= <sc>dalipanus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4764><form>dul-it</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> <tr>touch</tr> the tip or end of s.t. to s.t. <i>Dihay midul-it (nagdul-it) ug báraw sa íyang likud,</i> S.o. poked a dagger in his back. <i>Dul-ítun ta ning duha ka lamísa,</i> Let&apos;s join the two tables at their ends.

<p id=4765><form>duliyar</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dollar</tr>.

<p id=4766><form>dulsi</form> <pos>n</pos> candy, sweets, fruit preserves. <i>Dulsing nangkà,</i> Jackfruit preserves. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a26]</itype> make sweets, fruit preserves. <form>{-ra|dulsira}</form> <pos>n</pos> candy dish.

<p id=4767><form>dul-u</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> <tr>deliver</tr>, take s.w. <i>Idul-u ni ngadtu,</i> Bring this there.

<p id=4768><form>dulug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; ac]</itype> sleep together with s.o. <i>Dulúga ang mga bátà,</i> Have the children sleep together. <i>Dulgi siya karung gabíi,</i> Sleep with her tonight. <i>Ayaw idulug ang inyung bátà,</i> Don&apos;t have your baby sleep in the same bed with you. <form>{ka-(&larr;)|kadúlug}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bedmate</tr>.

<p id=4769><form>dul-ug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> help s.o. lift a load to carry it on his head or shoulders. <i>Kinsay nagdul-ug nímu sa usa ka sákung bugas,</i> Who helped you lift the sack of rice to carry on your back?

<p id=4770><form>dúluk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC12; b6]</itype> make a clearing and burn it off for agricultural purposes. <i>Nagdúluk ku sa baul nga tamnan sa mais,</i> I made a clearing for the field to plant corn.

<p id=4771><form>dulum</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> for a night to be dark and moonless. <i>Dulum ang gabíi kay patay ang búwan,</i> The night is dark because there&apos;s no moon. <number>2</number> for the atmosphere to be gloomy, dark. <i>Dulum ang kaugmáun sa táwung tapulan,</i> A lazy man has a gloomy future. <number>3</number> for the vision to be failing. <number>4</number> the moon of the third quarter. <i>Primírung dulum,</i> The first day of the third quarter. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b4]</itype> <number>1</number> get dark, gloomy. <i>Buklása ang hinayhay kay nadulum na ang lángit,</i> Bring the wash in because it has gotten overcast. <i>Nadulman mi sa dálan,</i> Darkness overtook us on the way. <number>2</number> for the eyesight to fail. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|dulum} ang pangísip, hunàhúnà</formx> get to be blind with rage, sorrow. <i>Nadulum (gidulman) ang íyang pangísip pagkahibáwu níya,</i> He became blinded with rage (sorrow) when he found out.

<p id=4772><form>dulun</form> <pos>n</pos> choking because of inability to swallow, difficulty in swallowing. <i>Ang dulun makamatay sa bátà,</i> A child can die if he eats s.t. he cannot swallow. <pos>a</pos> difficult to swallow. <i>Dulung kan-un ang amúti,</i> Sweet potatoes are hard to get down. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A123P; b4]</itype> get choked from inability to swallow. <number>2</number> <itype>[B146]</itype> for the throat to get choked up. <i>Magdulun kug mutan-aw ku sa íyang litrátu,</i> I get all choked up if I look at her picture.

<p id=4773><form>dúlun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>locust</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a4]</itype> be attacked by locusts. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> swarm s.w. like locusts. <pb n=236><i>Dulúnun (dulúnan) sa mga táwu ang maung salída,</i> People will flock to that particular show.

<p id=4774><form>dulúnà</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> boundary. <i>Kinahanglang may dulúnà ang átung pagkaamígu,</i> There must be limits to our friendship. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; c3]</itype> for pieces of land to be adjacent. <i>Nagkadulúnà mig yútà,</i> Our lands are adjacent to each other.

<p id=4775><form>dúlung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> front end of a vehicle. <i>Ang dúlung sa kutsi, sakayan,</i> The front part of the car, boat. <number>2</number> s.t. analogous to the front end of a vehicle, e.g. the anterior end of bamboo tie beams in a house. <form>{(&rarr;)|dulung}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B14; b5]</itype> go near. <i>Nagkadulung ang pista,</i> The fiesta is approaching. <i>Ang búkid nga íyang gidulngan (gidulung),</i> The mountain that he was approaching. <form>{pa-|padúlung}, {pa-(&rarr;)|padulung}</form> go to. <i>Padulung ba ni sa Lahug?</i> Does this go to Lahug? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> go to. <form>{pa&N;-|panúlung}</form> <pos>n</pos> bow of a ship.

<p id=4776><form>dul-ung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> go up to a place. <i>Nagdul-ung ang barku sa pantalan,</i> The boat was about to dock. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> deliver, take s.t. to a place. <i>Harbur paylut muy mudul-ung sa barku sa pantalan,</i> The harbor pilot steers the boat to the dock. <i>Idul-ung ning suwat sa íla,</i> Bring this letter to their house. <form>{hi-/ha-|hidul-ung/hadul-ung}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> reach a place. <i>Paghidul-ung ku sa balay nagdilaab na,</i> When I reached the house, it was in flames.

<p id=4777><form>dulurúsa</form> <xr>= <sc>dulurúsu</sc> (female).</xr> <form>mátir {&mdash;|dulurúsa}</form> the Virgin Mary after the death of Christ. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> have a devotion to the Mater Dolorosa. <i>Magdulurúsa ku ug magtúman ka sa ímung gustu,</i> If you do as you like, I will take up a devotion to the Mater Dolorosa (in hopes of saving you).&dagger;

<p id=4778><form>dulurúsu</form> <pos>a</pos> sad, sorrowful. <form>mistiryu {&mdash;|dulurúsu}</form> the Sorrowful Mystery, one of the Mysteries of the Rosary. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> become sad.

<p id=4779><form>dulut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> cut or pierce deeply. <i>Báraw nga midulut sa kasingkásing,</i> A knife that penetrated his heart. <i>Gidutlan ang abága ug bála,</i> A bullet penetrated into the shoulder. <number>2</number> penetrate. <i>Midulut ang tugnaw sa íyang kaunuran,</i> The cold penetrated his body. <i>Ang Kinatsilà dílì mudulut sa ákung úlu,</i> Spanish won&apos;t penetrate into my head. <number>3</number> affect s.o.&apos;s emotions. <i>Kinsang kasingkásing dílì dutlan sa íyang pakilúuy?</i> Whose heart wouldn&apos;t be moved by his pleas for pity? <number>4</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> have the stomach to eat s.t. <i>Dì ku makadulut ánang ngilngig,</i> I can&apos;t manage that greasy stuff. <pos>n</pos> depth of penetration. <i>Pilay dulut sa lansang?</i> How deep did the nail penetrate? <form>lalum ug {&mdash;|dulut}</form> <number>1</number> having lasting effect. <i>Lalum ug dulut kanang íyang tambag,</i> His advice penetrated deeply (had lasting effect). <number>2</number> have more to it than what is visible on the surface. <i>Lalum ug dulut nga mga púlung,</i> Words which have more to them than is at first apparent. <form>{&mdash;|dulut} sa bukug</form> deep-rooted, penetrating the bones. <i>Dulut sa bukug nga kayugut kang Krus,</i> Anger at Cruz felt to the depths of his bones. <i>Dulut sa bukug nga Nasyunalista,</i> Dyed-in-the-wool Nationalist. <i>Dulut sa bukug nga mananárì,</i> A rabid cockfighter. <form>{&mdash;|dulut} sa kasingkásing</form> coming from the heart.

<p id=4780><form>dúlut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> serve food to visitors. <i>Taglakin-an ang magdúlut sa bangkíti,</i> The relatives of the bridegroom will serve the visitors at the wedding banquet. <number>1a</number> make an offering of food in the <ix>diwáta</ix> ceremony or on All Souls&apos; Day. <number>2</number> bring happiness or sadness. <i>Gidulútan níyag usa ka matam-is nga pahíyum ang ulitáwu,</i> She gave the young boy a sweet smile. <i>Kagul-ánan lang ang idúlut mu sa ímung mga ginikánan,</i> You only give worries to your parents. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> food offered in the <ix>diwáta</ix> ceremony. <number>2</number> food offered at a tomb during All Souls&apos; Day. <number>3</number> food offered to visitors.

<p id=4781><form>dulyum</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tun shell of deep seas, edible and large in size.

<p id=4782><form>dúm</form> <xr>= <sc>dulum</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4783><form>dúma</form> <xr>= <sc>lagutmun</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>lagutum</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4784><form>dumágat</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> water from the bag of waters. <number>2</number> material that is inside a baby when it is born. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> for the bag of waters to break. <i>Nagdumágat (gidumagátan) na siya. Dì na madúgay magbúsug,</i> Her bag of waters has ruptured. She&apos;ll go into labor shortly.

<p id=4785><form>dumagsà</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>dagsà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4786><form>dumála</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>dala</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4787><form>dumalága</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>dalága<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=4788><form>dumálig</form> <xr>= <sc>dangílag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4789><form>dumaligyut</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>diyut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4790><form>dumánu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. dwarf coconut.

<p id=4791><form>dumar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> keep s.o. <tr>disciplined</tr>. <i>Maáyung mudumar ang ákung bána sa ámung mga anak,</i> My husband keeps our children well under control.

<p id=4792><form>dumay</form> <pos>a</pos> worn-out, but not badly so. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> get worn. <i>Gidumayan ka man kahà ning sinináa, ákù na lang ni,</i> If you consider this dress old, how about giving it to me?

<p id=4793><form>dumbay</form> <xr>= <sc>lumbay</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p id=4794><form>dumbul</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>bungdul</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A2C; b6(1)]</itype> play billiards or pool (slang).

<p id=4795><form>dumdum</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> go to a specific place for a purpose. <i>Nagdumdum ku sa maisan ug naunsa na,</i> I went to the cornfield to see what became of it. <i>Átung tagúan ug dumdúmun nátù unyà,</i> We&apos;ll hide it and come back for it later. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3]</itype> go to a usual place. <pb n=237><i>Ang manuk mudumdum sa batugánan,</i> The chicken finds its way to the roost. <i>Ang ákung labad sa úlu mudumdum káda palis,</i> My headache sets in every afternoon. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A12; a12b2]</itype> know how to go s.w., locate s.t. <i>Nakadumdum ka ba sa ámù?</i> Do you know your way to our house? <i>Dumdúmun nátù ang utlánan,</i> Let&apos;s locate the boundary. <i>Dì nákù madumduman,</i> I cannot locate it. <number>2b</number> <itype>[A3; b(1)]</itype> show s.o. the way. <i>Dumdúmi siya dinhi,</i> Show him how to get here. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> remember to do s.t. <i>Nakadumdum siyag hátag nákù,</i> He remembered to give me some. <number>4</number> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> think s.t. would happen. <i>Nákug kumidiya tu. Wà ku magdumdum nga tinud-un níya,</i> I thought he was joking. I didn&apos;t think he was really going to do it. <form>{hi&N;-/ha&N;-|hinumdum/hanumdum}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1236; b(1)]</itype> remember. <i>Hinumdumi ang ímung sáad,</i> Remember your promise. <form>{pahi&N;-/paha&N;-|pahinumdum/pahanumdum}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> remind. <i>Pahinumdumi siya,</i> Remind him. <pos>n</pos> reminder. <form>{ma-un|madumduman}</form> <pos>a</pos> not forgetting easily, not needing reminders. <form>{pa&N;-an|panumdúman}</form> <pos>n</pos> mind. <i>Wà sa ákung panumdúman ang ímung gisulti kanákù,</i> I did not implant your words in my mind. <form>{-l-un(&rarr;)|dulumdumun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> thanksgiving celebration in the form of a nine-day prayer during the planting and harvesting season. <number>2</number> any regularly observed religious celebration. <i>Dumdumun námù ang kamatáyun sa ákung inahan,</i> We regularly observe the anniversary of my mother&apos;s death with religious services.

<p id=4796><form>dumílì</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>dílì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4797><form>duminar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>dominate</tr>, hold control over. <i>Wà siya kaduminar sa íyang anak,</i> She was unable to exercise control over her son.

<p id=4798><form>Duminggu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Sunday</tr>. <i>Sa Duminggu na aku mubisíta nímu,</i> I will visit you on Sunday. <form>{&mdash;|Duminggu} dirámus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Palm Sunday</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|Duminggu} diglurya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Easter Sunday</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>birnis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4799><form>duminu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>domino</tr>. <number>1a</number> game of dominoes. <number>2</number> domino costume for masquerades. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2C; b(1)]</itype> play dominoes. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make a domino set. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get a domino set. <number>2</number> wear a domino costume.

<p id=4800><form>dumísing</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> get s.t. dirty by <tr>bespattering</tr> or <tr>besmearing</tr> it. <i>Nakadumísing na kug pulbus sa ákung nawung,</i> I smeared powder over my face. <form>{ka-|kadumísing}</form> <pos>v</pos> get dirt all over it. <i>Nagkadumísing ang bátà sa nilúgaw,</i> The child got porridge all over him.

<p id=4801><form>dumistik sáyans</form> <pos>n</pos> domestic science, <tr>home economics</tr> course.

<p id=4802><form>dumpaug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146; b6]</itype> stumble as one walks, as from drunkenness. <i>Daw hubug nga nagdumpaug ang linaktan,</i> He walked like a drunkard tottering.

<p id=4803><form>dumpil</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>fish corral</tr> that is set permanently in the sea.

<p id=4804><form>dumpu, dumpul</form> <xr>= <sc>pungdul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4805><form>dúmug<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; a]</itype> <tr>wrestle</tr> to the ground. <i>Nagkadúmug ang duha ka kábaw,</i> The two carabaos were engaged in combat trying to knock each other over. <i>Dumúgun ku siya. Mabuntug giyud siya nákù,</i> I&apos;ll wrestle him. I can get him down. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> perform coital activity (humorous). <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>dam-ag</sc>, <i>1, 2</i>.</xr> <form>{pa-|padúmug}</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. net into which the fish are driven such that they snag their gills.

<p id=4806><form>dúmug<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> dish made of ripe cooking bananas boiled in banana leaves with sugar and shredded coconut. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make <ix>dúmug</ix>. <form>{-in-|dinúmug}</form> <xr>= <sc>dúmug</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr>

<p id=4807><form>dum-ug</form> <xr>= <sc>dam-ag</sc>, <i>1, 2</i>.</xr>

<p id=4808><form>dúmul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c]</itype> put s.t. near the face or the face near s.t. <i>Nagkadúmul ang ílang duha ka ngábil,</i> They brought their lips to each other. <i>Ayaw idúmul ang butilya sa bàbà,</i> Don&apos;t put the bottle to your mouth.

<p id=4809><form>dumut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC3; b3(1)]</itype> hate s.t. enough to do s.t. against it. <i>Nagdúmut ang duha ka pamilya,</i> The two families are feuding. <i>Ang táwu nga ákung gikadumtan,</i> The person I hate with a vengeance. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> have one&apos;s mind set on doing or having s.t. <i>Náay sapátus nga ákung gidumtan. Karun na lang swildu,</i> There&apos;s a pair of shoes I want very much. I&apos;ll have it on payday. <pos>n</pos> hatred. <form>{(&larr;)|dúmut}</form> <pos>n</pos> hatred felt by people for each other. <form>madinumtánun, madulumtun</form> <pos>a</pos> full of vengeful hatred.

<p id=4810><form>dumyang</form> <xr>= <sc>damyang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4811><form>dun<sub>1</sub></form> title before Christian names, used to address or refer to rich gentlemen, esp. those of Spanish blood. <pos>n</pos> rich landowner. <i>Mga dun nga walay kalúuy sa saup,</i> Rich landowners that have no pity for their tenants. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> call s.o. &lsquo;don&rsquo;.

<p id=4812><form>dun<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>karun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4813><form>dún</form> <xr>= <sc>dúlun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4814><form>dúna</form> <xr>= <sc>adúna</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4815><form>dun-ag<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>lung-ag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4816><form>dun-ag<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>bun-ag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4817><form>dunar<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>donate</tr>. <i>Midunar ug lunà si Dun Ansilmu pára sa simbahan,</i> Don Anselmo donated a lot for the church.

<p id=4818><form>dunar<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>exist</tr>, remain for some time or forever. <i>Ang táwu dì mudunar sa kalibútan,</i> Man will not exist on earth forever.

<p id=4819><form>dunasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>donation</tr>.

<p id=4820><form>dúnat</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>doughnut</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2b6]</itype> have, make doughnuts.

<p id=4821><form>dunat intir</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>one-way street</tr>.

<p id=4822><form>*dundi</form> <ix>used only in the phrase:</ix> <i>Nupuydi katabuk dundi gabahà,</i> Can&apos;t have intercourse because the wife is menstruating. (Lit. You can&apos;t cross because the river is flooding.)

<pb n=238>

<p id=4823><form>dundun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for a surface to offer a braking effect to s.o. trying to walk over it. <i>Dundun kaáyung laktan sa baybáyun,</i> It is very difficult to walk on sand.

<p id=4824><form>dundun<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>dagundun<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=4825><form>dundúnay</form> <xr>= <sc>alisiwsiw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4826><form>dung</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>dúdung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4827><form>dúng</form> <xr>= <sc>dúlung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4828><form>dúngag</form> <xr>= <sc>dúgang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4829><form>dung-ag</form> <xr>= <sc>lung-ag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4830><form>dungálig</form> <xr>= <sc>dangílag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4831><form>dúngan</form> <pos>a</pos> done or happening at the same time. <i>Dúngan kaáyu ang pag-alsa sa ílang mga tiil,</i> They lifted their feet very well in unison. <i>Dalugdug dúngan sa pagkílat,</i> Thunder together with lightning. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; c1]</itype> do s.t. together or at the same time. <i>Mudúngan ku nímug káun,</i> I&apos;ll eat (together) with you. <i>Magdúngan ang salída sa Risal ug Madyistik,</i> The show will be played simultaneously at the Rizal and Majestic theaters. <i>Ayaw dúngána pagdala dinhi,</i> Don&apos;t bring them both at the same time. <form>{(&rarr;)|dungan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> person about the same age as one (mostly used in expressions of anger). <i>Naghagsà ka lang nákù. Dì ku nímu dungan,</i> You used my name without a title. You&apos;re not my age, you know. <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;|dungan} sa</formx> together at the same time. <i>Dungan ka nákù sa pagkáun,</i> ha, Eat together with me. <form>{ka-|kadúngan}</form> <pos>n</pos> one who was together with s.o. at a certain time. <i>Kadúngan mi paggraduwar,</i> We graduated at the same time. <form>{tali-|talidúngan}</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>talirúngan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4832><form>dungandúngan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>temples</tr>.

<p id=4833><form>dungas</form> <xr>= <sc>duas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4834><form>dúngaw</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2SP; ab2b3]</itype> direct one&apos;s sight downwards. <i>Dungáwa intáwun ning nag-umbangul sa kasákit,</i> Look out of the window at the wretch moaning and suffering. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> scan reading matter to find s.t. <i>Gidúngaw nákù ang lista. Wà didtu ang íyang ngálan,</i> I checked the list, and his name wasn&apos;t there. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>dung-aw</sc>.</xr> <number>3a</number> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> be much shorter than s.o. (lit. be looked down on). <i>Dungawan na ku sa ákung anak,</i> My son towers over me.

<p id=4835><form>dung-aw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> be <tr>taller</tr> or <tr>higher up</tr> than s.t. else. <i>Pangpang nga nagdung-aw sa subà,</i> A cliff that towers over the river. <number>2</number> looking down on from an elevation.

<p id=4836><form>dungáwug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C3]</itype> be of the same age. <i>Magdungáwug mi kay dúngan mi pag-iskuyla,</i> We are of the same age since we went to school together. <form>{ka-|kadungáwug}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.o. of the same age with another.

<p id=4837><form>dungdung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>head covering</tr> of cloth or any flexible material. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> cover the head with s.t. flexible. <i>Dungdúngi ang bátà arun dílì mainitan,</i> Cover the child&apos;s head with a piece of cloth to protect it from the sun.

<p id=4838><form>dungdung<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> for the sky to be <tr>overcast</tr> and <tr>gloomy</tr>. <i>Ayaw ihayhay ang linabhan ug mudungdung (madungdung),</i> Don&apos;t hang the laundry out if the sky gets overcast.

<p id=4839><form>dunggab</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>stab</tr>. <i>Dunggábun ku ang huld-ápir,</i> I will stab the hold-up man. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> action of stabbing. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>dágir</sc>, <i>2</i>.</xr> <form>{-in-an(&rarr;)|dinunggaban}</form> <pos>n</pos> stab wound.

<p id=4840><form>dunggan</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>dungug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4841><form>dunggù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; ac]</itype> for a boat to come to shore, wharf. <i>Unsay inyung dunggúun didtu?</i> What are you pulling in to shore for? <i>Didtu níla idunggù ang barku sa Úpun,</i> They docked the ship in Opon. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> <formx>{&mdash;|dunggù} ang bisíta</formx> for menstruation to set in (slang). <form>dunggùdunggù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> go here and there in search of s.t. <i>Nagkadunggùdunggù kug panghulam,</i> I went all over the place looking for money to borrow. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|dungguan}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> for a boat to go to some port habitually. <form>{-ánan|dungguánan}</form> <pos>n</pos> place a boat docks.

<p id=4842><form>dunggut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cutting tool</tr> having a short, curved blade, the outer edge of which is sharp. It is attached to a pole and used to clear dried leaves off of banana and abaca plants. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> cut away the dried leaves of abaca and banana trees.

<p id=4843><form>dunghay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> for hair to be hanging down over s.t. <i>Nagdunghay ang lambúngay sa kabáyù,</i> The horse&apos;s mane hung down over his back. <number>2</number> for sweat to flow down like hair. <i>Nawung nga gidungháyan sa singut,</i> A face streaming with sweat.

<p id=4844><form>dungilù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; c16]</itype> hang limp from its base. <i>Nagdungilù na lang ang íya human sa ikatulung ráwun,</i> His penis is all drooping after the third time.

<p id=4845><form>dungkà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> light a lamp, cigarette and the like by putting fire to it. <i>Dungkái na ang parul,</i> Light the lantern.

<p id=4846><form>dungkà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b8]</itype> arrive at a door, dock<corr>.</corr> <i>Nagdungkà na sa pantalan ang barku,</i> The ship was moving into port. <i>Mauy hingdungkaan ku sa pulta ang makalilísang talan-áwun,</i> I came upon a gruesome sight at the door.

<p id=4847><form>dungkul</form> <pos>a</pos> person who doesn&apos;t give a tip (slang).

<p id=4848><form>dungluy</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B46; c1]</itype> <tr>droop</tr>. <i>Midungluy ang mga dáhun sa mga mais tungud sa ínit,</i> The leaves of the corn plants are drooping from the heat. <i>Karsúnis nga nagdungluy sa hayhayan,</i> The trousers that are hanging on the line. <i>Kun dunglúyun (idungluy) mu ang ímung úlu mu ra kag subù tan-áwun,</i> When <pb n=239>you let your head droop you will look sad. <number>2</number> <itype>[a4]</itype> for fowls to have the disease called <ix>dungluy</ix>. <pos>n</pos> sickness of fowl characterized by a drooping head and a hunched up body. <form>{(&rarr;)|dungluy}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>drooping</tr>.

<p id=4849><form>dungpul</form> <xr>= <sc>pungdul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4850><form>dungsul</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>sea cucumber</tr> with a hard outer edge, the waste of which (<ix>lukut</ix>) is eaten and which emits a purple-colored liquid when touched. It is used in a k.o. sorcery which makes persons bleed. <form>nawung ug {&mdash;|dungsul}</form> <tr>very ugly</tr>.

<p id=4851><form>dungù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1P]</itype> <tr>bow the head</tr>. <i>Namátì siya sa kasábà pinadungù ang úlu,</i> He listened to the scolding with his head bowed. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for plants to bend. <i>Nagdungù ang mga humay human sa hángin,</i> The rice plants were bent over after the wind storm.

<p id=4852><form>dungug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; a3b2]</itype> <tr>hear</tr>. <i>Nakadungug ka sa kasábà?</i> Did you hear the noise? <i>Wà nákù madungug ang íyang tawag,</i> I didn&apos;t hear him calling. <i>Ayawg sábà. Hidunggan ta unyà,</i> Don&apos;t make any noise. S.o. will hear us. <i>Hidunggan nákù ang ílang hunghung,</i> I overheard what they were whispering about. <number>2</number> <itype>[A23; a12]</itype> <tr>listen</tr>. <i>Dungga ra gud ku úsà,</i> Hear me out. <number>2a</number> heed one&apos;s requests. <i>Gidungug ang ákung pangalyúpù,</i> He heard my prayers. <number>2b</number> <formx>dì na mudungug ug tawgun</formx> be distantly related (won&apos;t heed if you call on them). <i>Paryinti mi apan dì na mudungug ug tawgun,</i> We&apos;re related, but very distantly. <pos>a</pos> <tr>audible</tr>. <i>Dungug kaáyu ang inyung tábì diri,</i> I can hear your chattering here. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> action of having heard s.t. <i>Sa ákung dungug, dus sintus lang tu,</i> The way I heard it, it was only two hundred. <number>2</number> reputation, honor. <i>Dungug sa pamilya,</i> The honor of the family. <i>Panalípud sa ímung dungug,</i> Defend your honor. <form>{(&larr;)|dúngug}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> be bruited about, widely known. <i>Gidúngug siyang pinaangkan,</i> It is widely known that she has had a child out of wedlock. <number>2</number> <itype>[C3]</itype> hear one another. <i>Magkadúngug pa mi ánang distansiyáha,</i> We can still hear one another over that distance. <number>3</number> <itype>[c4]</itype> hear from. <i>Dúgay na siyang walà igdúngug,</i> He hasn&apos;t been heard from for a long time. <number>4</number> <formx>{ig-|igdúngug}, dungga, walà {&mdash;|dungug}</formx> [such-and-such] a case has never been. <i>Wà igdúngug (dungga) nga may mamumúnù sa ílang pamilya,</i> There has never been a murderer in their family. <form>dinunggánay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C]</itype> for siblings or close kin not to communicate directly but rather to hear from each other through letters or from other people either because of distance or because of bad personal relations. <i>Nakigdinunggánay mi sa ámung igsúung bintahúsu,</i> We broke off relations with our brother who took advantage of us. <form>padungugdúngug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> say s.t. in s.o.&apos;s earshot to embarrass him or give him a hint. <i>Nagpadungugdúngug siyag pinaskúhan,</i> He talked about Christmas presents where I could hear him. <i>Gipadungugdúngug ku níya nga kawatan ku,</i> He let me overhear him calling me a thief. <form>{paka-|pakadungug}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> hear many things. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> cause s.o. to hear. <i>Duktur nga nakapakadungug ug bungul,</i> A doctor that enabled a deaf person to hear. <form>{pasi-|pasidungug}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>honor s.o.</tr> for an accomplishment. <i>Gipasidunggan ang mananáug,</i> The winner was given a victory celebration. <pos>n</pos> honor bestowed on one for his accomplishment. <form>pinasidunggan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>honoree</tr>. <form>panunggan</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> <tr>heed</tr> advice, instructions, and the like. <i>Gáhì ug úlu. Dílì manunggan ug tambag,</i> He&apos;s stubborn. He won&apos;t listen to advice. <form>dunggan, dalunggan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>ears</tr>. <number>2</number> ear-like projections on the end of sacks formed when the mouth of the sack is tied up. <number>3</number> <formx>ígù rang nakagunit sa {&mdash;|dunggan}</formx> just barely made the grade. <form>dalunggandalunggan, dalunggan sa amù</form> <xr>= <sc>layat</sc>.</xr> <form>dinalunggan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> shaped like the ear. <number>2</number> k.o. ear-shaped cookie. <form>dunggánan</form> <pos>a</pos> famed, widely honored. <form>{ig-l-(&larr;)|igdulúngug}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. to hear with. <form>kadunggánan</form> <pos>n</pos> honor. <form>madunggánun</form> <pos>a</pos> honorable. <form>{pang-|pangdungan}, {pan-|pandungan}</form> <pos>n</pos> sense of hearing.&dagger;

<p id=4853><form>dúnguk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> do, devote one&apos;s entire attention to s.t., do s.t. intently. <i>Nagdúnguk siyag tuun kay iksámin na,</i> She studied intently because it was exams time. <i>Gidungúkan níyag usa ka adlaw ang pagpanglaba,</i> She devoted an entire day to washing clothes.

<p id=4854><form>dúnguy</form> <xr>= <sc>dungluy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4855><form>dunluk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. acute <tr>chicken cholera</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> be afflicted with chicken cholera.

<p id=4856><form>dunluk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>heavy, continuous rain</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> for there to be a heavy, continuous rain. <i>Kadunlukun run kay ngitngit man,</i> It looks like we&apos;re going to get a heavy rain because it is so dark.

<p id=4857><form>dunsal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> thrust the end or tip of s.t. at s.t. or strike with it. <i>Lubut sa awtu ang midunsal sa pusti,</i> It was the hind end of the car that struck the post.

<p id=4858><form>dunsilya</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>virgin</tr>. <i>Sa taga Sibu pisù ray dunsilya,</i> The only virgins in Cebu are baby chicks. <number>2</number> too small in opening (like the vagina of a virgin). <i>Dunsilyag líab ning sinináa,</i> The neck opening in this shirt is much too small. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> turn out to be a virgin. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; a3]</itype> get oneself a virgin for intercourse. <number>3</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> consider an opening small. <number>4</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> break in a virgin. <i>Aku ang nakadunsilya ánang bayhána,</i> I broke in that woman.

<pb n=240>

<p id=4859><form>dunsul</form> <xr>= <sc>dungsul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4860><form>dúnul</form> <xr>= <sc>túnul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4861><form>dúnut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB12; a2]</itype> wear s.t. out, become worn out. <i>Dì ka makadúnut áning sinináa sa usa ka túig kay lig-un,</i> You can&apos;t wear this dress out in one year because it&apos;s strong<corr>.</corr> <i>Nadunútan kug upat ka pár nga sapátus sa usa ka túig,</i> I&apos;ve had four pairs of shoes wear out on me in one year. <number>2</number> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> <tr>spoil</tr>, <tr>rot</tr> slightly. <i>Nagkadunut na ang mangga,</i> The mangoes are going bad. <form>{(&rarr;)|dunut}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> worn-out. <number>2</number> somewhat <tr>rotten</tr>, <tr>spoiled</tr>. <number>3</number> lousy in situation. <i>Dunut ang ákung kapaláran,</i> I have a lousy fate in life. <number>4</number> for manners or personality to be evil, wicked. <i>Dunut nga kinaíya,</i> Bad in character. <number>5</number> <formx>{&mdash;|dunut} nga baráha</formx> <number>5a</number> lousy cards. <number>5b</number> unbelievable excuse. <i>Ayaw ku patuhúa ánang ímung dunut nga baráha,</i> Don&apos;t try to make me believe your improbable excuses.

<p id=4862><form>dunya</form> <number>1</number> title before Christian names for rich ladies, esp. those of Spanish blood. <number>2</number> names given to varieties of the ornamental plant, <ix>buyun</ix>. <form>{&mdash;|dunya} awrúra</form> white flower. <form>{&mdash;|dunya} imilda</form> pink flower. <form>{&mdash;|dunya} lílang</form> pink and white flower. <form>{&mdash;|dunya} lus</form> dark pink flower. <form>{&mdash;|dunya} tríning</form> red flower.

<p id=4863><form>dunyang</form> <xr>= <sc>damyang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4864><form>dupa</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> extend the arms out sideways. <i>Si Hisus nagdupa sa krus,</i> Jesus is nailed to the cross with his arms extended sideways. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> bar the way with outstretched arms. <i>Ngánung ímu mang giduphan ang pultahan?</i> Why are you barring the way with your arms outstretched? <number>2a</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> prevent an occurrence. <i>Dì maduphan ang pálit sa iliksiyun,</i> You can&apos;t stop vote-buying in the election. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> take over all of s.t. <i>Giduphan sa mga insik ang pamaligyag asúkar,</i> The Chinese have taken control over the sugar market. <number>3a</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> take s.o.&apos;s problems over for him. <i>Maduphan ra nákù ang ímung galastúhan,</i> I can take care of your expenses for you. <number>4</number> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> measure s.t. by fathoms. <i>Dupha ang písì,</i> See how many fathoms the rope is. <number>4a</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> pay, take out [so-and-so] many fathoms. <i>Duphi kini ug upat,</i> Take out four fathoms from the rope. <form>{pa-|padupa}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> punish s.o. by making him extend his arms. <i>Paduphun nátù ang pilyu,</i> We&apos;ll make the naughty boy stand with his arms stretched out. <pos>n</pos> <tr>fathom</tr>, the length from the finger tips of one hand to the finger tips of the other, measured with the arms outstretched.

<p id=4865><form>dup-ádik</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dope addict</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be, become a drug addict.

<p id=4866><form>dupang</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hives</tr>, itchy swellings caused by allergy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> get hives.

<p id=4867><form>duplikádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>duplicate</tr>, <tr>replica</tr>.

<p id=4868><form>duplikit</form> <pos>n</pos> duplicate key.

<p id=4869><form>dupung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. short-bodied and very venomous snake.

<p id=4870><form>duput</form> <pos>a</pos> working assiduously, with constant and careful attention. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b(1)]</itype> work diligently with attention. <i>Ug makaduput siya sa íyang pagtahì, hikalimtan ang káun,</i> When he is concentrated on his tailoring, he forgets to eat.

<p id=4871><form>durabli</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>durable</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; c1]</itype> be, make durable. <i>Durablíha paghímu ang baskit,</i> Make the basket durable.

<p id=4872><form>durádu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish.

<p id=4873><form>duranti</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>durable</tr>, <tr>long-lasting</tr>. <i>Ang maung mas duranti kay sa sída,</i> Denim is more durable than silk. <form>{&mdash;|duranti} sa</form> during the time that. <i>Duranti sa gúbat didtu ra mi sa bukiran,</i> We stayed in the mountains for the duration of the war.

<p id=4874><form>durar<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b4]</itype> last, remain for some time. <i>Mudurar pa ning sapatúsa ug duha ka búlan,</i> These shoes will last for two more months. <i>Ang gíra dì na makadurar ug dúgay,</i> The war cannot last much longer. <i>Gidurahan sila sa ílang mga binatunan,</i> Their maids stayed with them for some time.

<p id=4875><form>durar<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> plated with metal. <form>durádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>plated</tr>. <i>Durádug pláta,</i> Silver plated.

<p id=4876><form>duraw</form> <xr>= <sc>duldul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4877><form>durbil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>doorbell</tr>.

<p id=4878><form>durmilúna</form> <pos>n</pos> style of round earrings, single or bunched, that doesn&apos;t hang but hugs the lobe of the ear.

<p id=4879><form>durmituryána</form> <pos>n</pos> a girl that stays in a dormitory or lodging house for women.

<p id=4880><form>durmituryu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>dormitory</tr> or rooming house for students. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, put up a dormitory.

<p id=4881><form>*dúru<sub>1</sub></form> <form>{&mdash;|dúru} nga</form> [root referring to an action] do very hard<corr>.</corr> <i>Dúru níya (siya)ng káug mangga,</i> My! How he ate the mangoes. <i>Dúru níya (siya)ng kawut!</i> My! How he scratched. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; a12]</itype> do [verb] all the more. <i>Midúru hinúun siyag katáwa human buyaga,</i> He laughed all the more when he was admonished. <i>Durúha ang ímung tíngug kay dì mabátì,</i> Speak louder. I can&apos;t hear you.

<p id=4882><form>dúru<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>duldul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4883><form>dúrug</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> <tr>break up</tr>, <tr>crumble</tr> into small pieces. <i>Lamì ang ginamus kung madúrug na,</i> Salted fish that has fermented and broken up into fine pieces tastes good. <i>Nagkadurug na ang láwas sa patay,</i> The corpse has started to decompose. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>duldug</sc>.</xr> <form>{-in-|dinúrug}</form> <xr>= <sc>dinuldug</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>duldug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4884><form>duruha</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>duha</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4885><form>duruk<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b2c1]</itype> immerse, soak s.t. in a <pb n=241>liquid. <i>Duruka (iduruk) na ang linílas nga buli sa tinà,</i> Immerse the buri strips into the dye now.

<p id=4886><form>duruk<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> variety of pig that yields lean meat.

<p id=4887><form>dúrul</form> <xr>= <sc>duldul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4888><form>duryan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>durian</tr>. It is not grown except in Southern Mindanao and Jolo and not widely known.

<p id=4889><form>dus</form> <ix>number</ix> <tr>two</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|dus} pur {&mdash;|dus}</form> <pos>n</pos> two by two board. <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tris</sc></xr> for verb forms.

<p id=4890><form>dusáus, dusáhus, dusáwus</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; b6]</itype> for a baby to have its head crown in childbirth. <i>Mityábaw ang babáying gidusawúsan,</i> The woman screamed with pain as the baby started coming out.

<p id=4891><form>dusdus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> strike repeatedly with s.t. using a forward thrusting motion, usually said of a knife or s.t. small. <i>Nagdusdus ang kusiníra sa dukut sa kaldíru,</i> The cook is scraping off the rice crust in the pot. <i>Dusdusa ang tayà sa plantsa,</i> Scrape off the rust on the iron. <number>2</number> <itype>[A3; ac]</itype> shove, push s.t. close towards or against s.t. <i>Dusdúsa ang duha ka katri,</i> Push the two beds together. <i>Idusdus ang sulù sa balay sa putyúkan,</i> Shove the torch against the beehive. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> push one&apos;s way. <i>Midusdus ang mga táwu pag-abut ni Imilda,</i> The people pushed their way forward when Imelda arrived. <number>3</number> <itype>[A3; c]</itype> hand thrust s.t. at s.o. to force him to take it. <i>Midusdus siyag singku písus, apan wà nákù dawáta,</i> He tried to force the five pesos on me but I didn&apos;t take them. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> blunt-ended instrument for removing weeds with a thrusting motion. <number>2</number> action of thrusting in small strokes.

<p id=4892><form>dúsi</form> <ix>number or numeral</ix> <tr>twelve</tr>. <i>Dúsi písus,</i> Twelve pesos. <i>Dúsi ka apustulis,</i> Twelve apostles. <form>{&mdash;|dúsi} páris</form> <number>1</number> the Douzepers of Charlemagne. <number>2</number> elite organization of self-defense named after the Douzepers. <pos>v</pos> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tris</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4893><form>dusib</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> put a live ember or s.t. aflame to s.t. to set it afire or singe it. <i>Naugdaw ang balay nga íyang gidusiban,</i> The house that he set ablaze was burnt to the ground. <i>Íyang gidusiban ang pínung balhíbu sa manuk,</i> He singed the fine feathers off of the slaughtered chicken.

<p id=4894><form>dusil</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> set s.t. burning to s.t. <i>Dusilan ku nang bàbà mu ug mamalíkas ka,</i> I&apos;ll put a firebrand to your mouth if you cuss.

<p id=4895><form>dusína</form> <pos>n</pos> dozen. <i>Duha ka dusínang itlug,</i> Two dozen eggs. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26; b6]</itype> be a dozen. <number>2</number> <itype>[c16]</itype> buy s.t. by the dozen.

<p id=4896><form>*dusíngut</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>singut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4897><form>dusipil</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the devil, Lucifer. <number>2</number> s.o. wicked or malicious like Lucifer.

<p id=4898><form>duslak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> <number>1</number> stab s.t. light and long at s.t. <i>Duslaka nang irù arun mupaháwà,</i> Poke the dog so he&apos;ll move. <number>2</number> for a feeling to stab one. <i>Udiyung sa kamíngaw ang miduslak sa íyang dughan,</i> The arrow of loneliness stabbed his breast. <pos>n</pos> a thrust with s.t. long.

<p id=4899><form>duslib</form> <xr>= <sc>duslit</sc>, <i>1</i>.</xr>

<p id=4900><form>duslit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> set s.t. ablaze. <i>Duslíti ang mga sagbut nga ákung gitápuk,</i> Set the trash I piled up on fire. <i>Duslíti ang ribintadur,</i> Set off the firecrackers. <number>2</number> light s.t. <i>Muduslit ku áring ákung sigarilyu,</i> I&apos;ll light my cigarette. <number>3</number> <xr>= <sc>dusil</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4901><form>duslug</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>glutton</tr>, esp. one who never misses a fiesta. <i>Duslug kaáyu nang tawhána kay hái gánì tung kumbira, túa,</i> That man is a glutton because wherever there is a feast, he is sure to be there.

<p id=4902><form>dusmù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> fall flat on one&apos;s face. <i>Nadusmù siya sa simintu,</i> He fell flat on his face on the cement. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256; c6]</itype> crash or ram head-on against. <i>Nadusmù ang dyip sa pusti,</i> The jeep rammed into a post.

<p id=4903><form>dusmug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab2c]</itype> <tr>bump</tr>, crash into, usually in a horizontal direction. <i>Gidusmug siya sa kanding,</i> The goat butted him. <i>Ayaw idusmug nang dyip sa pusti,</i> Don&apos;t ram that jeep into a post.

<p id=4904><form>dusù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c2]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>push</tr>. <i>Idusù (dus-i) ang paradur sa wala,</i> Push the cabinet to the left. <number>1a</number> <tr>stab</tr>. <i>Dus-an tika run áning ayispik,</i> I&apos;ll stab you with this ice-pick. <number>2</number> <tr>endorse</tr>, pass papers forward to a superior for approval. <i>Wà pa idusù ang ákung apuwintmin ngadtu sa supirbaysur,</i> My appointment hasn&apos;t been endorsed to the supervisor yet. <number>3</number> <tr>hand over</tr> s.t. in payment of a large debt. <i>Kini lang bábuy ákung idusù pára sa ákung útang,</i> I will turn over this pig in payment of my debt. <number>4</number> <tr>haul</tr> in a truck. <i>Mudusù ka rug balas?</i> Are you going to haul sand now? <pos>n</pos> action of <tr>pushing</tr>, <tr>endorsing</tr>, <tr>paying</tr>, or <tr>hauling</tr>. <i>Pila ka dusù nga balas ang ímung gipahatud?</i> How many trucks full of sand did you have delivered?

<p id=4905><form>dusud</form> <xr>= <sc>dusù</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p id=4906><form>dus-ug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> shove s.t. heavy over. <i>Idus-ug níya ang makina tapad sa lamísa,</i> She&apos;ll shove the sewing machine next to the table. <i>Ayaw ku idus-ug kay wà nay lugar diri,</i> Do not push me. There is no more room here.

<p id=4907><form>dusul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>bulge</tr>, stick out with a bulge underneath. <i>Midusul na sa lagus ang ngípun sa bátà,</i> The teeth in the child&apos;s gums are about to push through. <i>Nagdusul ang ribulbir sa iláwum sa ímung sinínà,</i> Your revolver is bulging under your shirt. <i>Yútà nga gidusulan sa kamúti,</i> Soil bulging with sweet <pb n=242>potatoes.

<p id=4908><form>dút</form> <xr>= <sc>dulut</sc>, <sc>dúlut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4909><form>dútà</form> <xr>= <sc>yútà</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p id=4910><form>dutdut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>move close in</tr> through obstacles. <i>Mudutdut ta ngadtu sa intabládu,</i> Let&apos;s push our way forward near the stage. <number>1a</number> for troops to close in. <i>Gidutdut mi sa mga Hapun,</i> The Japs were closing in on us. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2C; ac]</itype> crowd close to s.o.; put, be crowded together. <i>Lisud basáhun kay nagdutdut ang mga litra,</i> It is difficult to read because the letters are crowded together. <i>Ayawg dutdúta ang táwung masukù,</i> Don&apos;t go too close to a person who is angry. <i>Ayaw dutdúta pagbutang ang lingkuránan,</i> Don&apos;t put the chairs too close. <number>3</number> <itype>[A3; c]</itype> stuff s.t. into an opening. <i>Dutdútig nuug ang lungag sa tangki,</i> Stuff a rag into the hole in the tank. <number>4</number> <itype>[A]</itype> deseed cotton by running it through a small wringer through which the fiber, but not the seeds, can pass. <pos>a</pos> crowded <tr>close</tr>, <tr>close together</tr>. <i>Kinabúhing dutdut sa Diyus,</i> A life close to God. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|dutdutan}</form> <pos>n</pos> wringer for deseeding cotton.

<p id=4911><form>dutù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>porcupine fish</tr>: <bio>Diodon spp.</bio>

<p id=4912><form>dut-uy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> press s.t. to s.t. else to leave a mark. <i>Nakadut-uy ka na sa mga papílis?</i> Have you thumbmarked the documents? <i>Ayawg idut-uy ang ímung kamut sa basà nga simintu,</i> Don&apos;t leave a hand mark in the wet concrete.

<p id=4913><form>dúug</form> <xr>= <sc>dul-ug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4914><form>duugduug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6]</itype> feel <tr>giddy</tr>, usually from a hang-over or nausea. <i>Nagduugduug ang íyang &umacracu; kay naigù gabíi,</i> He feels light-headed because he was very drunk last night. <pos>n</pos> feeling of light-headedness.

<p id=4915><form>duuk, dúuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>dunk</tr>, press s.t. under the water. <i>Planggánang ákung giduukan sa mga bulingun,</i> The basin in which I squashed the dirty clothes. <i>Idúuk ku nang úlu mu sa baril,</i> I&apos;ll dunk your head in that barrel.

<p id=4916><form>dúul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> go, put where s.t. is. <i>Ayaw siya duúla ug masukù,</i> Don&apos;t go to him if he is angry. <i>Idúul diri nang asin bi,</i> Please pass me the salt (put the salt here). <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> approach, come near. <i>Ang isdà dílì madúul run,</i> You can&apos;t get near (pay the price of) fish these days. <i>Langgam nga giduúlan sa iring,</i> A bird that the cat was coming near to. <number>1b</number> <itype>[C; ac]</itype> be, put close together. <i>Nagdúul ang ílang lingkuránan,</i> Their chairs are close together. <number>1c</number> <itype>[C; c1]</itype> be close in personal relationships. <i>Ang maáyung manidyir makigdúul sa íyang mga sákup,</i> A good manager is close to his staff. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ac5]</itype> approach s.o. with a request. <i>Lisud kaáyu siyang duúlun. Maíkug lang ta,</i> He is a difficult person to approach. I&apos;m ashamed to go ask him. <i>Ang ákung idúul níya? Manghangyù lang ku sa uban,</i> I would never approach her to ask for it. I will just ask s.o. else. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> have sexual intercourse (most frequently used euphemism). <i>Ang bána dílì paduúlun sa asáwa basta riglahun,</i> A husband is not allowed to have relations with his wife when she menstruates. <number>4</number> <itype>[A23; b6]</itype> for a child to let himself be approached by s.o. <i>Mudúul nyà siya nímu ug maánad na,</i> He will let you pick him up once he gets used to you. <form>{(&rarr;)|duul}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> near. <i>Duul na lang ang Pasku,</i> Christmas is near now. <i>Duul ra dinhi ang karsáda,</i> The road is near here. <i>Duul pang parinti ang igtagsa,</i> Your first cousin is still a close relative. <number>2</number> be almost [so-and-so] much. <i>Duul na alas dúsi siya maulì,</i> It was nearly twelve when she got home. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|duul} sa kusína, luwag</formx> close to s.o. in power. <i>Dì musayup ang aplikisyun kay duul ku sa luwag,</i> The application won&apos;t fail because I&apos;m close to s.o. in power. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; c]</itype> be, become near. <i>Ug maduul na ang bakasyun,</i> When vacation time is near. <i>Nagkaduul ang bagyu,</i> The storm is drawing nearer and nearer. <i>Iduul nà pagbutang sa kaláyu,</i> Put that near the fire. <number>2</number> <itype>[B2; b(1)]</itype> be nearly [so-and-so] much. <i>Dul-an (muduul) na sa usa ka gatus ang ganansiya,</i> The profit is nearly a hundred. <form>{pa-|padúul}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> allow s.o. or s.t. to approach one. <form>{pa-(&rarr;)|paduul}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> go, put near s.t. <i>Laksut siyag padul-an,</i> She is ugly if you get close. <i>Ipaduul ang sugà nákù,</i> Put the lamp near me. <form>{-g-|dug-ul}</form> near each other. <form>{ha-|haduul}</form> very near. <form>kinadul-an</form> closest.

<p id=4917><form>dúul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the air (&lsquo;breathing&rsquo;) roots of the <ix>pagatpat</ix> tree. <number>2</number> <tr>cork</tr>, so called because it is similar in substance to the air roots of the <ix>pagatpat</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> stop up with a cork.

<p id=4918><form>duum</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> put s.t. in the mouth and eat it hastily. <i>Giduum sa bátà ang tanang kindi arun dì makapanghátag,</i> The child tossed all the candy in her mouth so she would not have to share it. <number>2</number> eat s.t. which usually accompanies s.t. else to eat or drink all alone. <i>Nagduum lang mi sa kísu kay way pán,</i> We ate the cheese alone because we didn&apos;t have any bread. <i>Ayaw iduum nang pulbus litsi. Kutáwa,</i> Don&apos;t eat the powdered milk just like that. Mix it with water. <number>3</number> bribe. <i>Íla lang dum-an ang mga dagkung mamsà sa ílang kásu,</i> They just bribed the influential persons in their case.

<p id=4919><form>duun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> press, bear down heavily. <i>Kinsay nagduun pagsulat sa pawntinpin? Nadáut hinúun,</i> Who wrote bearing down on this fountain pen? Now it&apos;s broken. <i>Iduun <pb n=243>giyud ang kumagkù arun kláru ang támà,</i> Press the thumb hard enough to get a clear fingerprint.

<p id=4920><form>dúung</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>dunggù</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>dul-ung</sc>.</xr> <form>duungduung</form> <xr>= <sc>dunggùdunggù</sc>.</xr> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>dunggù</sc>.</xr> <form>{-um-r-|dumudúung}</form> <pos>n</pos> a transient s.w.

<p id=4921><form>duut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>put</tr>, <tr>push</tr> on to s.t. <i>Iduut ang ímung dunggan sa bungbung,</i> Put your ears to the wall. <i>Ímu kung giduut sa bungbung,</i> You pushed me against the wall! <number>2</number> <tr>press down</tr> on s.t. <i>Iduut ang lápis pagsuwat,</i> Bear down on the pencil when you write. <i>Iduut ang timbri,</i> Press the bell. <number>3</number> press s.o. to do s.t. <i>Ug dì siya nímu iduut, ása man nà siya mubáyad?</i> If you don&apos;t press him, do you think he&apos;ll pay? <number>4</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for fish to be in large schools, birds or insects to be in huge <tr>swarms</tr>. <i>Nagduut ang mga dúlun,</i> The locusts are in swarms. <i>Nagduut ang mga táwu nga misúgat sa Santu Pápa,</i> The people came in huge swarms to meet the Pope. <pos>n</pos> swarm of birds, insects, throng of people, school of fish. <form>{(&larr;)|dúut}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>swarm</tr> in huge numbers.

<p id=4922><form>duwa-</form> <xr><ix>see also</ix> <sc>dula-</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4923><form>duwahug</form> <xr>= <sc>bulahug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4924><form>duwáhut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>fasten</tr> s.t. with a pin or s.t. similar. <i>Duwahútig tukug ang papil nga giputus,</i> Fasten the wrapping paper with a twig.

<p id=4925><form>dúwal</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> drive with both the front and rear wheels. <i>Duwála arun makakáwas ang trák,</i> Put it into dual drive so the truck can get out. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> push or pull a vehicle over an obstacle or elevation. <i>Dílì makadaug nga mudúwal ang karabaw sa karumáta kay bug-at ang karga,</i> The carabao can&apos;t pull the cart over the elevation because it has a heavy load. <pos>n</pos> having front and rear-wheel drive.

<p id=4926><form>duwílu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>duel</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; b3c]</itype> have a duel.

<p id=4927><form>dúwit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>duet</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; c1]</itype> sing or play a duet.

<p id=4928><form>duy</form> <ix>short for</ix> <foreign lang=ceb>uduy</foreign> <ix>or</ix> <foreign lang=ceb>unduy</foreign>.

<p id=4929><form>dúy</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a4]</itype> for s.t. to happen at a very inopportune time. <i>Magdúy sag pangáyù ning anak kug wà kuy kwarta,</i> My child asks money from me when I am broke. <i>Dúyun man sag dimálas ning átung tindáhan inay pang gamay ra tag puhúnan,</i> My! Our store is beset with bad luck at the very time that we have very little capital.

<p id=4930><form>duyà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46]</itype> be <tr>nauseated</tr>. <i>Muduyà ang ákung ginhawaan ug makakaun kug ngilngig,</i> I feel nauseated when I eat greasy foods.

<p id=4931><form>dúyan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hammock</tr>. <i>Ayaw kug ihása. Úna ku nímu sa dúyan,</i> Don&apos;t try to fool me. I was not born yesterday. (I was in the cradle before you.) <form>{&mdash;|dúyan} sa dughan bra</form> (colloquial). <pos>v</pos> <number>1a</number> <itype>[AB16; a]</itype> rock s.o., oneself in a hammock. <i>Nagdúyan siya sa bátà,</i> She rocked the baby in the hammock. <i>Nagdúyan ug kusug ang bátà,</i> The child rocked back and forth hard. <i>Duyána siya,</i> Rock him. <number>b</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> put in a hammock. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> swing back and forth. <i>Mudúyan sa hángin ang mga búlak,</i> The flowers wave back and forth in the breeze. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> for an emotion to sway one. <i>Duyánun dáyun siya sa dì matúkib nga pagbátì,</i> He will be swayed by an incomprehensible feeling. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a hammock.

<p id=4932><form>duyas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B2]</itype> <tr>slip</tr>, lose one&apos;s footing. <i>Miduyas (naduyas) ang ákung tiil mau nga nabulásut ku,</i> I lost my footing. That&apos;s why I stepped into a hole. <number>2</number> <itype>[B6; b6]</itype> for s.t. to slip loose from the place it was put over or across. <i>Ilansang nang tabla kay nagduyas na sa nahimutangan,</i> Nail that board because it has slipped down from the place where it was put. <number>3</number> <itype>[B26; a]</itype> glance off and strike s.t. else. <i>Miduyas (naduyas) ang sundang pagtigbas ku sa káhuy,</i> The bolo glanced off the wood as I was cutting down the tree. <number>4</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> for words one didn&apos;t really mean to say to slip out of the mouth. <i>Naduyas ku pagsulti. Sikrítu man untà tu,</i> I let it out inadvertently. It was supposed to be a secret.

<p id=4933><form>duyduy</form> <xr>= <sc>duldul</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4934><form>duydúy</form> <pos>v</pos> <corr><number>1</number> </corr><itype>[A13; b6]</itype> go from place to place to look for s.o. or s.t. very much needed. <i>Nagduydúy kug pangítà ug kwarta,</i> I went from place to place to look for money. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> roam around aimlessly. <i>Nagduydúy lang ku nganhi,</i> I&apos;m just roaming around here aimlessly.

<p id=4935><form>dúyug</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>musical accompaniment</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; b]</itype> accompany s.o. with a musical instrument. <i>Duyúgi ku kay mukanta ku,</i> Accompany me. I&apos;m going to sing now. <number>1a</number> accompany, as if music. <i>Nagdúyug ang hagurus sa hángin ug ang ulan,</i> The rain and howling wind accompanied each other. <number>2</number> <tr>share</tr>, <tr>sympathize</tr> with s.o.&apos;s feelings, for two feelings to be in harmony. <i>Nagkadúyug ang duha ka kwanggul,</i> The two fools hit it off. <i>Ang kasubù nga giduyúgan sa tanang katilingban,</i> Sorrow which the whole community participated in. <i>Pag-antus dinuyúgan sa hinulsul,</i> Suffering accompanied by repentance. <number>2a</number> participate in an action and thus share the same feeling. <i>Mudúyug ku sa pag-ampù,</i> I will join in the prayers. <i>Mudúyug ku sa ímung trabáhu,</i> I will share your suffering and work with you. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> tune an instrument. <pb n=244><i>Duyúga ang sista,</i> Tune the guitar.

<p id=4936><form>duyum, dúyum</form> (from <ix>dulum</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>evening</tr>, <tr>night</tr> (dialectal). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125; b5]</itype> be, become evening or night.

<p id=4937><form>dúyung</form> <xr>= <sc>dúgung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4938><form>dwindi</form> <xr>= <sc>diwindi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4939><form>dwítu</form> <xr>= <sc>dúwit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4940><form>dy-</form> for words with <formx>dy-</formx> <xr><ix>see also</ix> <formx>y-</formx>.</xr>

<p id=4941><form>dya-</form> <form>dyasingku</form> <pos>n</pos> five-peso bill. <form>dyabayinti</form> <pos>n</pos> twenty-peso bill.

<p id=4942><form>dyà</form> <xr>= <sc>unyà</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p id=4943><form>dyáb</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <tr>jab</tr>, punch in boxing. <pos>n</pos> jab.

<p id=4944><form>dyába</form> <pos>n</pos> variety of <tr>cassava</tr>.

<p id=4945><form>dyablis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jobless</tr>, <tr>unemployed</tr>.

<p id=4946><form>dyáds</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>judge</tr> in court, of a contest. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> be a judge.

<p id=4947><form>dyadyis</form> <xr>= <sc>dyads</sc> (plural).</xr>

<p id=4948><form>dyag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>jog</tr>, run at a jog.

<p id=4949><form>dyag-aw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> to talk loud in a bad mood. <i>Nabuak ang básu maung midyag-aw si Máma,</i> The glass broke, and that&apos;s why Mama is ranting. <i>Nagdyag-aw siya kay naw&amacrgra; ang singsing,</i> He is ranting and raving because he lost his ring. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|dyag-awan}</form> <pos>a</pos> having a tendency to talk loud in a bad mood.

<p id=4950><form>dyáging</form> <xr>= <sc>dyag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4951><form>dyak</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>jack</tr>, <tr>knave</tr> in playing cards. <number>2</number> jack to raise s.t. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> raise s.t. with a jack. <i>Dyáki (dyaki) ang kutsi,</i> Lift the car with a jack. <number>2</number> strike with an upward thrust of the knee. <i>Gidyákan siya sa suwang,</i> He was kicked with the knee in the jaw. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> draw a jack.

<p id=4952><form>dyáki</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>briefs</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear briefs.

<p id=4953><form>dyakimpuy, dyakinpuy</form> <xr>= <sc>pík</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4954><form>dyákit</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>jacket</tr>. <number>2</number> jacket of a book. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear, make into a jacket.

<p id=4955><form>dyakpat</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jackpot</tr>, huge prize. <pos>a</pos> being financially very rewarding for the effort put into it. <i>Dyakpat kaáyu nang trabahúa nímu,</i> You got yourself a soft job with a huge salary. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> hit the jackpot, strike it lucky. <i>Nakadyakpat didtug barátu kaáyung radiyu,</i> I hit the jackpot by getting a very cheap radio. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2N; ab2]</itype> make a good marriage. <i>Midyakpat (nanyakpat) siyag byúdang sapían,</i> He managed to get a rich widow for himself.

<p id=4956><form>dyakstun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>game of jacks</tr>. <number>2</number> jack, jackstone used for playing jacks. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; b6(1)]</itype> play jacks.

<p id=4957><form>dyalusi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jalousies</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make jalousies.

<p id=4958><form>dyam</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jam</tr>, <tr>marmalade</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make jam.

<p id=4959><form>dyambul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; c1]</itype> <tr>jump ball</tr> in basketball. <pos>n</pos> action of tossing a jump ball.

<p id=4960><form>dyamburi</form> <pos>n</pos> boy scout <tr>jamboree</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> have a jamboree.

<p id=4961><form>dyáming</form> <xr>= <sc>dyamsisyun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4962><form>dyamp daspáyin</form> <xr>= <sc>dyamp dispáyin</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4963><form>dyamp dispáyin</form> <pos>n</pos> children&apos;s game of jumping over obstacles. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1C; a2]</itype> play jump-the-spine.

<p id=4964><form>dyampingkuy</form> <xr>= <sc>pík</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4965><form>dyampir</form> <pos>n</pos> a sleeveless dress for wearing over a blouse or sweater. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> wear, make into a jumper.

<p id=4966><form>dyamsisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> informal get-together, usually in the afternoon, with dancing and refreshments. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12C2; c1]</itype> have an informal dance party.

<p id=4967><form>dyamu</form> <xr>= <sc>yamu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4968><form>dyamuntris</form> <xr>= <sc>dimungkug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4969><form>dyanà</form> <xr>= <sc>kanà<sub>1</sub></sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p id=4970><form>dyandi</form> <pos>n</pos> rare ability, sparkle of genius. <i>May dyandi siya sa pag-áwit,</i> She has a rare talent for singing.

<p id=4971><form>dyángk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> drop a political candidate from a ticket. <i>Gidyángk si Ispína ni Sirhing pabur kang Búris,</i> Serging junked Espina in favor of Borres.

<p id=4972><form>dyangkimpuy</form> <xr>= <sc>pík</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4973><form>dyanitur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>janitor</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a2]</itype> become a janitor.

<p id=4974><form>*dyapan</form> <form>dyapandyapan, dyapanis</form> <xr>= <sc>ginamusginámus</sc>.</xr>
<xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>gamus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4975><form>dyapinis</form> <xr>= <sc>byatilis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4976><form>dyár</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jar</tr>. <i>Usa ka dyár nga pínat bátir,</i> A jar of peanut butter.

<p id=4977><form>dyás</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jazz</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> play jazz, play s.t. in jazz time. <i>Ang Dáhil sa Iyu nga idyás (dyasun)<corr sic=".">,</corr></i> <ix>Dahil sa Iyo</ix> played in jazz time.

<p id=4978><form>dyaski</form> <pos>a</pos> mild, half-affectionate <tr>oath</tr> used to curse s.o. <i>Nagkadúngan pa ang mga dyaski<corr sic=.>,</corr></i> The devils arrived at the same time.

<p id=4979><form>dyatilis</form> <xr>= <sc>byatilis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4980><form>dyíd</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jade</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> wear jade.

<p id=4981><form>dyikni</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>jitney</tr> transportation used before the war, light passenger trucks plying certain routes taking passengers for five centavos anywhere along the route. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> take a <ix>dyikni</ix>, make s.t. into a <ix>dyikni</ix>.

<p id=4982><form>dyiktin</form> <xr>= <sc>hiktin</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4983><form>dyíli</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jelly</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> cook, make into a jelly. <number>2</number> <formx>{(&rarr;)|dyili}</formx> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> eat jelly. <i>Dì ku mudyili kay gidilì nákù ang tam-is,</i> I will not eat jelly because I am not allowed to eat sweets.

<p id=4984><form>dyilirul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jellyroll</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make jellyrolls.

<p id=4985><form>dyilusi</form> <xr>= <sc>dyalusi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4986><form>dyím</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gym</tr>, <tr>gymnasium</tr>.

<p id=4987><form>dyimnastiks</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gymnastics</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> do gymnastics.

<p id=4988><form>dyimnasyum</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>gymnasium</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a gymnasium.

<p id=4989><form>*dyiniral</form> <form>{&mdash;|dyiniral} admisyun, {&mdash;|dyiniral} manidyir, {&mdash;|dyiniral} Makartur</form> <pb n=245><tr>general</tr> admission, manager, MacArthur, et al.

<p id=4990><form>dyíns</form> <pos>n</pos> thick long trousers for women. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear jeans, make into jeans.

<p id=4991><form>dyintul man</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>gentlemanly</tr>, for a man to be courteous. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> be, become gentlemanly in behavior.

<p id=4992><form>dyinuwin</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>genuine</tr>. <i>Lamì ang tubà kun dyinuwin nga tungug ang gamítun,</i> The toddy tastes nice if genuine mangrove bark is used. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> consider genuine.

<p id=4993><form>dyíp</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>jeep</tr>. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>dyipni</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> take a jeep or jeepney s.w.

<p id=4994><form>dyipni</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jeep</tr> made into a passenger vehicle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> ride a jeepney. <i>Makadyipni ta ngadtu,</i> We can get there by jeep.

<p id=4995><form>dyip-ut</form> <xr>= <sc>gip-ut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=4996><form>dyirk</form> <pos>n</pos> dance called &lsquo;the jerk&rsquo;. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; c1]</itype> dance the jerk.

<p id=4997><form>dyirman kat</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>crew cut</tr>, haircut with the sides shaved clean and only a little hair left on the top. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> cut hair in the crew cut style.

<p id=4998><form>dyirsi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jersey</tr>, a k.o. cloth of an elastic weave. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> wear jersey.

<p id=4999><form>dyíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>zero</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; b5]</itype> give a zero in school, not let an opponent get more than zero in games. <i>Nangdyíru ang taga Yúbi námù,</i> We got zero in our game against <asc><abbr expan="University of the Visayas">U.V.</abbr></asc> (Lit. The <asc>U.V.</asc> team gave us a zero.) <i>Nadyíru (nadyirúhan) ku sa mat,</i> I got a zero in Math. <number>2</number> <itype>[B3; c1]</itype> for a gauge to reach zero. <i>Ug mudyíru ang tirmumitru, maáyis na ang túbig,</i> Water will freeze when the thermometer reaches zero.

<p id=5000><form>dyís<sub>1</sub></form> <ix>number</ix> <tr>ten</tr>. <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>tris</sc></xr> <ix>for usage</ix>.

<p id=5001><form>dyís<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> odds of five to four in betting. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; a1c2]</itype> give 5 to 4 odds in betting. <i>Idyis (dyísan) lang nátù ang átung kuntra,</i> We will just give 5 to 4 odds in our bets to our opponent.

<p id=5002><form>dyisinuybi</form> <xr>= <sc>disinuybi</sc>.</xr> <ix>For words with</ix> <bx>dyisi-</bx> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>disi-</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5003><form>dyismus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tithe</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give one&apos;s tithe.

<p id=5004><form>dyít</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>jet plane</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; ac]</itype> take a jet plane.

<p id=5005><form>dyitplin</form> <xr>= <sc>dyít</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5006><form>dyíwil</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>jewel</tr> of a watch. <number>2</number> <formx>walay {&mdash;|dyíwil}</formx> having no money or no education. <i>Ayg súkul ánang way dyíwil,</i> Don&apos;t fight with that ignoramus.

<p id=5007><form>dyúbus</form> <pos>n</pos> any powdered dye.

<p id=5008><form>dyuditsu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ju-jitsu</tr>.

<p id=5009><form>dyúdu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>judo</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> apply judo to s.o. <i>Ákù bitaw siyang gidyúdu, haplà lagi,</i> I judoed him, and he fell flat. <form>dyudista</form> <pos>n</pos> one who does judo. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> become a judo expert.

<p id=5010><form>dyúk</form> <xr>= <sc>dúki</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5011><form>dyukbaks</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>juke box</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain a juke box.

<p id=5012><form>dyúkir</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> fond of making jokes. <number>2</number> one who goofed, made a ludicrous mistake. <i>Kadyúkir nímu. Ngánung gikandadúhan nímung yáwi sa kaban?</i> You goof. Why did you lock the key in the trunk? <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>joker</tr> card. <number>2</number> situation in mahjong where any one of three different pieces would let the person go mahjong.

<p id=5013><form>dyúlin</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>marbles</tr>. <number>2</number> game of marbles. <number>3</number> expression uttered when making a hole. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AC; a]</itype> play marbles. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b5]</itype> put a marble in a hole. <i>Dyulínun (dyulínan) ku ang síkan,</i> I will shoot for the second hole.

<p id=5014><form>Dyún</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>June</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>disimbri</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5015><form>dyunbráyid</form> <pos>n</pos> June bride.

<p id=5016><form>dyunsun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>outboard motor</tr>, so called after the brand name &lsquo;Johnson&rsquo;. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> take a motorboat.

<p id=5017><form>dyunyur</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> son who bears the father&apos;s name. <number>2</number> member of the Junior class. <number>3</number> <formx>ákung, íyang, <r>etc.</r> {&mdash;|dyunyur}</formx> my, his penis (colloquial). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> name a child after the father or call him &lsquo;Junior&rsquo;. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> have a baby boy (colloquial).

<p id=5018><form>dyús</form> <pos>n</pos> fruit or vegetable <tr>juice</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> drink juice.

<p id=5019><form>dyúti</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for guards, nurses, or the like to have duty. <i>Akuy nagdyúti dihang gikawátan ang budíga,</i> I was the one on duty when the warehouse was burglarized. <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s turn to have duty. <form>híbi {&mdash;|dyúti}</form> s.t. that can be used for heavy-duty work.

<p id=5020><form>dyúwil</form> <xr>= <sc>duwílu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5021><form>dyúwit</form> <xr>= <sc>dúwit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=5022><form>dyuy rayding</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1C; b6]</itype> go for a ride for pleasure. <i>Nagdyuy rayding mi didtu sa riklimisyun,</i> We went for a ride in the reclamation area. <pos>n</pos> ride.




</body>
</text>
</TEI.2>
