<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN" [

<!ENTITY larr       CDATA "&#x2190;"            -- leftwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY rarr       CDATA "&#x2192;"            -- rightwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY glots      CDATA "&#x0294;"            -- glottal stop -->

<!ENTITY amacr      CDATA "&#x0101;"            -- a with macron -->
<!ENTITY imacr      CDATA "&#x012B;"            -- i with macron -->
<!ENTITY umacr      CDATA "&#x016B;"            -- u with macron -->

<!ENTITY amacrgra   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0300;"    -- a with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY imacrgra   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0300;"    -- i with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY umacrgra   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0300;"    -- u with macron and grave -->

<!ENTITY amacracu   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0301;"    -- a with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY imacracu   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0301;"    -- i with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY umacracu   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0301;"    -- u with macron and acute -->

<!ENTITY Acaron     CDATA "&#x01CD;"            -- A with caron -->
<!ENTITY acaron     CDATA "&#x01CE;"            -- a with caron -->
<!ENTITY Icaron     CDATA "&#x01CF;"            -- I with caron -->
<!ENTITY icaron     CDATA "&#x01D0;"            -- i with caron -->
<!ENTITY Ucaron     CDATA "&#x01D3;"            -- U with caron -->
<!ENTITY ucaron     CDATA "&#x01D4;"            -- u with caron -->

<!ENTITY schwa      CDATA "&#x0259;"            -- schwa (turned e) -->
<!ENTITY N          CDATA "N"                   -- N symbol (as used in this dictionary) -->

]><TEI.2 lang=en>
<teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
        <titleStmt>
            <title>A Dictionary of Cebuano Visayan</title>
            <author>John U. Wolff</author>
        </titleStmt>
    </fileDesc>
    <profileDesc>
        <langUsage>
            <language id=en>English</language>
            <language id=en-US>English (United States)</language>
            <language id=ceb>Cebuano</language>
        </langUsage>
    </profileDesc>
</teiHeader>
<text>
<body>
<pb n=657>


<div1 type=Letter id=letter.m n=M>
<head>M</head>


<p id=11941><form>ma</form> <pos>n</pos> short for the vocative of <ix>máma</ix>, &lsquo;mother&rsquo;.

<p id=11942><form>má</form> <xr>= <sc>mala</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11943><form>m&amacrgra;</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> onomatopoetic word for the lowing sound of a cow or a water buffalo. <number>2</number> a cow or water buffalo (child&apos;s talk). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> low, produce a lowing sound.

<p id=11944><form>ma-<sub>1</sub></form> future verb affix. (<ix>Past</ix>: <bx>na-</bx>. <ix>Subjunctive</ix>: <bx>ma-</bx>.) <number>1</number> potential of the direct passive. (<ix>See</ix> <bx>-un<sub>1</sub></bx> for meanings of the direct passive. See <ix>maka-</ix> for meanings of the potential.) <i>Mapalit nà nímu bísag ása,</i> You can buy that anywhere. <i>Wà ku pa mabása,</i> I haven&apos;t had a chance to read it. <i>Uy! Dì man diay <pb n=658>ákù ning nadá nákung pitáka,</i> Heavens, I took s.o. else&apos;s purse by mistake. <number>2</number> potential of the instrumental passive. (See <ix>i-<sub>1</sub></ix> for meanings of the instrumental passive.) <i>Dì ni mabaligyà kay mahal da kaáyu ang prisyu,</i> You can&apos;t sell this because it&apos;s too expensive. <i>Wà pa nákù mahátag níya kay wà pa siya muabut,</i> I haven&apos;t had a chance to give it to him because he hasn&apos;t arrived. <i>Halá! Nabungat ra ba nákù ang sikrítu,</i> Oh God! I let out the secret. <number>3</number> <ix>active of stative verbs:</ix> may become [so-and-so]. <i>Ayaw nag hikápa. Magubà unyà nà,</i> Don&apos;t touch that. It might break. <i>Ilhan nga mulubad nang panaptúna ug mapula ang túbig,</i> You&apos;ll know the cloth runs if the water turns red. <i>Nawálà ang ákung singsing,</i> My ring got lost. <number>3a</number> <ix>with roots that refer to nonvolitional actions:</ix> [do]. <i>Matingála siya ug ngánu tu,</i> He will be amazed at why it should be so. <i>Wà ku mabaláka,</i> I am not worried. <i>Mah&umacracu;g unyà ka ug mabálì ang sanga,</i> You will fall if the branch breaks. <i>Ug matúlug na sila,</i> When they are asleep. <i>Mahadluk ku,</i> I am afraid. <i>Dì ka ba malúuy níya?</i> Don&apos;t you feel sorry for him? <number>3b</number> <ix>with nouns:</ix> become [so-and-so]. <i>Ug maduktur ka na,</i> When you get to be a doctor. <number>3c</number> <ix>with nouns which refer to a place:</ix> wind up in [such-and-such] a place. <i>Malangit kag maimpirnu ba?</i> Will you go to heaven or will you go to hell? <i>Mauspital giyud kag pasagdan lang nà nímung sakíta,</i> You&apos;ll end up in the hospital if you let your sickness go. <number>3d</number> with nouns referring to time: get to be [such-and-such] a time. <i>Ug maalas tris na gánì, mulakaw na ku,</i> If it gets to be three o&apos;clock, I&apos;ll leave. <i>Ug magabíi nag wà pa siya,</i> If it gets to be nightfall and he hasn&apos;t arrived. <number>3e</number> (only with the future) when [such-and-such] a time or season comes about. <i>Magkítà ra silag mapista,</i> They only see each other during fiestas. <i>Tábù dinhi ug maduminggu,</i> They hold market here on Sundays.

<p id=11945><form>ma-<sub>2</sub></form> <number>1</number> affix added to most adjective roots which do not refer to a measurement to form adjectives which mean &lsquo;very [so-and-so]&rsquo;. This formation is used in literary or formal styles. <i>Usa ka mapait nga pahíyum,</i> A very bitter smile. <number>2</number> added to some verbs to form adjectives meaning [do]ing, usually with a short penult. <i>Bátang mahilak,</i> A crybaby. <i>Matulug,</i> Of a sleepy sort. <i>Matawa,</i> Full of laughter.

<p id=11946><form>ma-ánun</form> alternant of <ix>ma-un</ix>, used with some bases in place of <ix>ma-un</ix>. <i>Masuk-ánun,</i> Tending to get irritated.

<p id=11947><form>máas</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>old</tr>, <tr>aged</tr>. <i>Bisan máas na siya tisar gihápung mulakaw,</i> He may be old, but he still walks erect. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> <tr>become old</tr>. <i>Kun mumáas na ang kalbásà dílì na maútan,</i> When a squash becomes too old, it is no longer good to eat.

<p id=11948><form>maáyu</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>áyu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11949><form>mabà</form> <xr>= <sc>mubù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11950><form>mabaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>shallow</tr>. <i>Mabaw ra kaáyu nang ímung pangatarúngan,</i> Your reasoning is very shallow. <i>Dì kalanguyan nang subáa kay mabaw,</i> You can&apos;t swim in that river. It&apos;s too shallow. <i>Ang baskit nga mabaw ug lubut diyútayg sulud,</i> A shallow basket holds little. <i>Mabaw nga panaksan,</i> Shallow bowl. <number>2</number> <ix>in set expressions:</ix> <form>{&mdash;|mabaw} ug lubut</form> <tr>sensitive</tr> or quick to anger. <i>Muhílak diay bísag kumidiya ra. Kamabaw nímug lubut uy,</i> Why did you cry when it was just a joke? How sensitive you are! <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|mabaw} ug salabútan</formx> <tr>unintelligent</tr>. <i>Dúgay siyang kasabut kay mabaw rag salabútan,</i> She doesn&apos;t understand readily because she is unintelligent. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b7c1]</itype> become shallow. <i>Imabaw (mabwa) lang pagkálut ang tamnan ug kamúti,</i> Just make the hole for the sweet potatoes shallow. <form>{hi-|himabaw}/{ha-(&rarr;)|hamabaw}</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>himábaw</sc></xr> <ix>under</ix> <xr><sc>babaw</sc>.</xr> <form>{-g-|magbaw}</form> <tr>shallow</tr> (plural). <form>{i-|imabaw}</form> <pos>n</pos> place above s.t. <i>Imabaw sa kaban nákù gibutang ang libru,</i> I put the book on top of the trunk. <form>{-in-|minabaw}, {-in-g-|minagbaw}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> do in a shallow way. <i>Kun minagbáwun lang ni nátù pagsabut ang giisplikar sa maistru, dílì giyud ta makapasar,</i> If you fail to understand (lit. understand shallowly) what the teacher explained, you won&apos;t pass. <form>{ka-(&larr;)|kamábaw}</form> <pos>n</pos> half brother, sister. <i>Kamábaw ku siya kay paríhu mig inahan,</i> He is my half brother because we have the same mother. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> be half brothers, sisters.

<p id=11951><form>mabdus</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>pregnant</tr>. <number>2</number> for rice grains to be in the panicle. <i>Mabdus na ang humay,</i> The rice grains are forming. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B26]</itype> get, make pregnant. <i>Mimabdus si Maríya kay hagithagitun kaáyu,</i> Maria got pregnant because she was flirtatious. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> carry in the womb. <i>Gimabdus nà siya pagkamatay sa íyang amahan,</i> He was in his mother&apos;s womb when his father died. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> for rice grains to form in the panicle. <number>3</number> <itype>[B1]</itype> for borrowed things to have been kept too long. <i>Dúgay kaáyu nímung giúlì ang ákung libru. Mimabdus na nà,</i> You kept my book too long (lit. so long that it got pregnant). <number>4</number> <itype>[B1]</itype> <formx>{&mdash;|mabdus} sa pasálig</formx> get fooled by assurances (lit. got pregnant because of promises). <i>Daghan nang mimabdus sa pasálig sa mga pulitiku,</i> Many people have been fooled by the politician&apos;s assurances. <form>{pa-|pamabdus}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c2]</itype> get s.o. pregnant. <i>Gipamabdus (gipamabdúsan) si Maríya ni <pb n=659>Pidru,</i> Pedro got Maria pregnant.

<p id=11952><form>mabgas</form> <xr>= <sc>malubgas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11953><form>mabúlu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. medium-sized tree of the primary forest, cultivated for its fruit. The wood is hard and used for furniture, the heartwood being nearly black: <bio>Diospyros discolor</bio>.

<p id=11954><form>mad-as</form> <pos>a</pos> land that has dried up. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> be, become dry land. <i>Nagmad-as ang pilapilan nga walà na makultibar,</i> The rice paddies are dry after being left uncultivated.

<p id=11955><form>mádil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fashion model</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> model s.t. <number>2</number> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> be a fashion model. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|madilun}</form> <pos>a</pos> having a body like a model.

<p id=11956><form>madrasta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>stepmother</tr>.

<p id=11957><form>madri<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>nun</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|madri} dipamilya</form> woman head of the family. <form>{&mdash;|madri} supiryúra</form> <tr>mother superior</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a]</itype> be, become a nun. <form>{paka-|pakamadri}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> pretend to be a nun, treat like a nun. <form>madrihun</form> <pos>a</pos> having ways or traits of a nun. <i>Madrihun kaáyug nawung bayhána, inusinti kaáyug dagway,</i> That woman is like a nun. Such an innocent face.

<p id=11958><form>madri<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> main frame of a door or window shutter. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> make a main frame of a shutter.

<p id=11959><form>madri kakaw</form> <pos>n</pos> small ornamental tree flowering profusely with pink or lavender blooms, used for firewood and fencing: <bio>Gliricidia sepium</bio>.

<p id=11960><form>madri míya</form> an exclamation of alarm, surprise, or disgust mainly by speakers who have been under Spanish influence. <i>Madri míya, tingálig mah&umacracu;g nang bátà,</i> My God! Watch out, the baby is going to fall. <i>Madri míya! Nabúhat nímu tu!</i> My God! You actually did that!

<p id=11961><form>madrína</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>godmother</tr>, the female sponsor at one&apos;s baptism, wedding, confirmation, or ordination. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B136; c1]</itype> be, become the <ix>madrína</ix>.

<p id=11962><form>madyik</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>magic</tr> involving supernatural powers. <number>2</number> <tr>sleight-of-hand</tr> trick. <i>Nalingaw ang mga bátà sa ákung madyik,</i> The children enjoyed my tricks. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; a2]</itype> <tr>practice magic</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>steal</tr> s.t. small. <i>Huy, kinsay nagmadyik sa ákung bulpin diri?</i> Hey, who swiped my ball point pen? <form>{-íru|madyikíru}</form> <pos>n</pos> magician.

<p id=11963><form>madyung<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sandspurs</tr>, k.o. coarse grass growing about <measure reg="30 cm">1&prime;</measure> that bears spikes with rows of round burrs, around &frac14;&Prime; in diameter. <number>2</number> the burrs of this grass. <form>{ka-|kamadyung}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> get sandspurs all over one.

<p id=11964><form>madyung<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mahjong</tr>. <pos>a</pos> win the mahjong set. <i>Pung! Madyung ku, Bingo!</i> I get mahjong! <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; a]</itype> play mahjong. <i>Dílì na lang ta magdúlag baráha. Madyúngun ta na lang ni,</i> Let&apos;s not play cards. Let&apos;s just play mahjong. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> win at mahjong. <i>Wà pa ku makamadyung,</i> I haven&apos;t gotten mahjong yet. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|madyungan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> mahjong den. <number>2</number> <tr>mahjong set</tr>. <number>3</number> piece needed to get &lsquo;mahjong&rsquo;. <i>Ang madyungan ni Turuy tris sirkulu,</i> Toroy is waiting for the three circle piece. <form>{-íru|madyungíru}, {<corr>-</cor>íra|madyungíra}</form> <pos>a</pos> mahjong addict.

<p id=11965><form>madyurit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>drum majorette</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a2]</itype> be a majorette.

<p id=11966><form>mag-</form> durative active verbal affix, future. (<ix>Past</ix>: <bx>nag-</bx> <ix>or</ix> <bx>ga-</bx>. <ix>Subjunctive</ix>: <bx>mag-</bx>.) <i>Magmata sila árung urása,</i> They are awake at this time. <i>Nagmata (or gamata) pa ba kahà sila<corr sic=",">?</corr></i> Do you think they are still awake? <i>Walà na sila magmata,</i> They are not awake any more. Verbs with <ix>mag-</ix>, <ix>nag-</ix> have the following meanings (as opposed to verbs with <ix>mi-</ix>, <ix>mu-</ix> &mdash; <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>mu-</sc></xr>): <number>1</number> action not necessarily intentional. <i>Walà siya magsulti,</i> He didn&apos;t say. <i>Walà ku maghátag níya ánang librúha,</i> I didn&apos;t give him that book. <number>2</number> durative action, action or state continuing in time. <i>Wà na siya maghilak,</i> He isn&apos;t crying any more. <i>Ug magtindug ang mga táwu sa atubángan, dì mi makakità,</i> If the people in front are standing, we won&apos;t be able to see. <number>2a</number> added to nouns. <i>Ug magkalayu na ang kakugnan háyag kaáyu ang lángit,</i> When the fields are ablaze, the skies light up. <i>Human sa púlù ka gutlù, ang puthaw magbaga,</i> After ten seconds the steel will glow. <number>3</number> <ix>added to verbs referring to a state:</ix> be in [such-and-such] a state. <i>Ug mag-abri ang pultahan, musulud giyud ang lángaw,</i> If the door is open, the flies are sure to come in. <i>Walà na magtuyuk ang ligid,</i> The wheel is no longer turning. <number>3a</number> <ix>added to adjectives</ix>: be [adj.]. <i>Magmalipáyun ta,</i> Let us be happy. <i>Mawà kay hitsúra ug magpula nang ímung nawung,</i> You will not look good if your face is all red. <number>3b</number> added to words referring to a state of the weather. <i>Atúa giyud siya sa dágat, magbálud kinig maglínaw,</i> He is at sea, whether it is wavy or calm. <i>Mag-ulan kag mag-ínit,</i> Rain or shine (lit. whether you are rainy or shining). <number>4</number> <ix>referring to an action which redounded on the agent:</ix> do [so-and-so] to oneself. <i>Mag-ílis pa ku,</i> I will change my clothes. <i>Gustu kung maglumus,</i> I want to drown myself. <number>4a</number> <ix>added to nouns:</ix> become a [so-and-so]. <i>Magpárì ku,</i> I will become a priest. <i>Magsirkadur tingáli ning bataána,</i> This child probably wants to become a trapeze artist. <number>5</number> referring to an action which two or more people did with each other. (Verbs with <ix>mag-</ix> of this sort always have penultimate stress.) <i>Didtu sila mag-ábut,</i> They met in that place. <i>Magsákay ta,</i> <pb n=660>Let us ride together. <i>Ug maglagyù pagkabutang ang mga balay,</i> If the houses are far apart from one another. <number>5a</number> <ix>with nouns:</ix> be in the [noun] relation. <i>Magkumpári kami ug akuy pakugúsun sa íyang anak,</i> We will be <ix>kumpári&apos;s</ix> if I become his child&apos;s godfather. <i>Mag-amígu lang ta,</i> Let&apos;s be friends.

<p id=11967><form>maga-</form> alternative form for <ix>mag-</ix> in meanings <ix>2, 2a, 3, 3a, 4</ix>. Words with <ix>maga-</ix> can substitute for the examples there given.

<p id=11968><form>Magahat</form> <pos>n</pos> pagan non-Cebuano peoples in the mountains (applies to pagans in Negros and in Mindanao). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be very touchy. <i>Ug napildi ka ug dakù magmagahat diay ka?</i> You are touchy just because you lost heavily?

<p id=11969><form>magalyánis</form> <pos>n</pos> downtown shopping district of Cebu (after the name of Magallanes Street, which formerly was the principal shopping street in Cebu).

<p id=11970><form>magang, mágang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[BN]</itype> for corn to flower. <i>Inigmagang sa mais, mugítib na ang lugas,</i> When the corn flowers, the grains begin to develop.

<p id=11971><form>magasin<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>magazine</tr>, <tr>periodical</tr>.

<p id=11972><form>magasin<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ammunition clip</tr> for automatic firearms.

<p id=11973><form>magay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>maguey</tr>, cultivated as a source of sisal fiber: <bio>Agave cantala</bio> or <bio>sisalana</bio>. <form>{(&larr;)|mágay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> make into sisal hemp. <form>magay mágay</form> <pos>n</pos> ornamental plant similar to the maguey but smaller in size: <bio>Sansevieria spp</bio>.

<p id=11974><form>magaya</form> <xr>= <sc>malagaya</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11975><form>Magindánaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Muslims</tr> of Cotabato and Zamboanga del Sur.

<p id=11976><form>magka-</form> <ix>durative active future for verbs referring to a state</ix>: be, becoming more and more [so-and-so]. (<ix>Past</ix>: <bx>nagka-</bx>. <ix>Subjunctive</ix>: <bx>magka-</bx>.) Verbs with this affix always have a stressed final syllable. <i>Imbis nga magkakusug, nagkahinay hinúun,</i> Instead of getting faster and faster, it was getting slower and slower. <i>Wà lagi magkaduul ang bapur nganhi, nagkalayù hinúun,</i> The boat is not coming nearer. It&apos;s actually getting further and further away.

<p id=11977><form>magka-(&larr;)</form> potential active verb affix, future. (Past: <bx>nagka-</bx>. Subjunctive: <bx>magka-</bx>.) Used with verbs referring to mutual actions (cf. <ix>mag-<sub>1</sub>, 5</ix>) but otherwise paralleling the potential meanings listed under <ix>maka-</ix>. <number>1</number> can [do] with each other. <i>Dì tang tanan magkasákay,</i> We cannot all ride together. <number>2</number> manage to [do] with each other. <i>Wà mi magkasábut,</i> We didn&apos;t manage to come to an agreement. <i>Nagkaábut sila sa tungàtúngà,</i> They met in the middle. <number>3</number> happen to [do] with each other. <i>Ug magkakítà gánì ang ímung babáyig asáwa,</i> If your mistress and your wife happen to run into each other.

<p id=11978><form>mag-l-</form> alternant of <ix>mag-r-</ix>, and usually in competition with it, but with some roots only <ix>mag-r-</ix> is frequent or the form with <ix>mag-r-</ix> has acquired a different nuance. <i>Magbalantay,</i> Watchman. <i>Magbuluhat ug mga mwiblis,</i> Furniture maker.

<p id=11979><form>maglalatik</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. folk dance in which half coconut shells are knocked to the rhythm of the accompanying music.

<p id=11980><form>magnisya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>milk of magnesia</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|magnisya} simpli</form> a half dose of milk of magnesia (as opposed to <ix>{&mdash;|magnisya} dubli</ix>, the full dose).

<p id=11981><form>magnit</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>magnet</tr>. <number>2</number> kissing scene (slang&mdash;from the notion that the faces come together as if magnetized). <i>Daghang magnit ánang salidáha,</i> There are plenty of kissing scenes in that movie. <number>3</number> <formx>syúgar {&mdash;|magnit}</formx> <tr>sugar magnate</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> pick up with a magnet. <number>2</number> <tr>swipe</tr>, <tr>steal</tr>, spirit away. <i>Kinsay nagmagnit sa ákung bálùn?</i> Who swiped my lunch? <number>3</number> <itype>[C]</itype> kiss one another usually in a show (slang). <pos>a</pos> won over. <i>Inigkanta nímu, magnit na silang tanan,</i> When you sing, they&apos;ll all be won over.

<p id=11982><form>mag-r-</form> <pos>n</pos> prefix added to verbs to form nouns which refer to one who does [verb] on a regular basis. <i>Magbabantay,</i> Watchman. <i>Magsusúlat,</i> Writer. <i>Magpapatigayun,</i> Businessman. <i>Magyuyutà,</i> Landowner or farmer. <i>Magbubúhat,</i> The Creator (God) or one who does.

<p id=11983><form>magsúun</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>*súun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11984><form>magtalisay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tree similar in shape and appearance to the <ix>talísay</ix>, but with smaller leaves and harder wood: <bio>Terminalia sp</bio>.

<p id=11985><form>mágu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>magi</tr>. <number>2</number> s.o. <tr>outstanding</tr>, <tr>expert</tr>. <i>Mágu sa kinablit,</i> A wizard at the guitar.

<p id=11986><form>mágù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tarsier</tr>.

<p id=11987><form>magus</form> <xr>= <sc>amagus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11988><form>máha</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to various puddings and confections. <form>{&mdash;|máha} blangka</form> pudding made of kernels of young corn and coconut milk or just plain milk. <form>{&mdash;|máha} diúbi</form> a pudding made of <ix>úbi</ix> and coconut milk. <form>{&mdash;|máha} riyal</form> candy made out of peanuts, milk, and sugar.

<p id=11989><form>mahal</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dear</tr>, <tr>expensive</tr>. <i>Mahal na kaáyu ang bugas karun,</i> Rice is very expensive now. <i>Magbáyad kag mahal sa ímung gibúhat,</i> You shall pay dearly for what you have done. <number>2</number> <tr>beloved</tr>. <i>Siya ang ákung mahal (minahal) nga bána,</i> He is my beloved husband. <number>3</number> blessed (address to saints). <i>Pasalamáti ang Mahal nga Birhin,</i> Give thanks to the Blessed Virgin. <number>4</number> <formx>{&mdash;|mahal} nga adlaw</formx> the days of the Lenten season. <number>5</number> <ix>in set phrases</ix>: very little, almost without. <form>{&mdash;|mahal} ug pahíyum</form> stingy with <pb n=661>the smiles. <form>{&mdash;|mahal} ug tíngug</form> weak-voiced. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; ab7]</itype> become expensive, go up in price. <i>Basta Amirkánu mupalit, mahalun giyug baligyà,</i> For an American the price is always jacked up. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> love. <i>Ang mga bayáni nagmahal sa ílang yútang natawhan,</i> Heroes love their native land. <i>Gimahal ku ikaw,</i> I love you. <form>{-in-|minahal}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>beloved</tr>, dear one. <form>{ka-an(&larr;)|kamahálan}</form> <pos>n</pos> majesty (address to royalty). <i>Matúman ang ímung gihangyù, kamahálan,</i> Your order will be fulfilled, Your Majesty. <form>{-l-un(&larr;)|malahálun}, {-un(&larr;)|mahálun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>precious</tr>. <form>{-un|mahalun}</form> <pos>a</pos> dear or costly kind. <form>{ma-in-un(&larr;)|mahinálun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>loving</tr>, <tr>affectionate</tr>.

<p id=11990><form>mahan</form> <xr>= <sc>man kahà</sc></xr> (dialectal). <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>man</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11991><form>maharlika</form> <pos>n</pos> the name given to the native nobles in pre-Hispanic times.

<p id=11992><form>máhay</form> <pos>n</pos> feelings of hurt and <tr>regret</tr> at what s.o. did. <i>Arun walay máhay apúran ta kamung tanan,</i> So there will be no hurt feelings, I&apos;ll give you each one. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3c5]</itype> have feelings of hurt. <i>Nagmáhay kung napalit ku tung sapatúsa,</i> I&apos;m sorry I bought those shoes. <i>Ikay ákung gimaháyan sa nahitabù,</i> I blame you for (lit. you are the reason I&apos;m regretting) what happened. <i>Gikamaháyan ta ka kay wà ka mudúaw nákù,</i> You hurt me because you did not pay me a visit. <form>walay {&mdash;|máhay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> there was nobody that felt bad, said in two situations: when people who attack on s.o. are beaten up instead (i.e., they cannot blame anyone but themselves), and when people who set on s.o. are unsuccessful (i.e., no one felt bad because they were successful).

<p id=11993><form>mahika</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>magic</tr>.

<p id=11994><form>mahiku</form> <pos>n</pos> word referring to an unknown location when asking or giving a location, usually used in anger. <i>Lupad ngadtu sa mahiku, animála ka,</i> Get out, I don&apos;t care where, you beast. <i>Ambut ásang mahikúha tu nákù ikabutang ang pisti nga hunsuy,</i> I don&apos;t know where the heck I left that blinkety-blank pipe.

<p id=11995><form>mahistrádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>judge</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be made, become a judge.

<p id=11996><form>mahugani</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mahogany</tr>.

<p id=11997><form>maigang</form> <pos>n</pos> medium to large tree of the primary forest, with fruit similar in flavor and taste to <ix>lungbuy</ix>: <bio>Eugenia polycephaloides</bio>.

<p id=11998><form>mailúku</form> <xr>= <sc>mamilúku</sc>.</xr>

<p id=11999><form>ma-in-un(&larr;), ma-in-ánun</form> alternant of <ix>ma-un</ix> used with some bases in place of <ix>ma-un</ix>. <i>Matinabángun,</i> Helpful. <i>Masinabtánun,</i> Full of understanding.

<p id=12000><form>mais</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>maize</tr>, the <tr>corn</tr> plant or any part of it. <number>1a</number> <formx>bugas {&mdash;|mais}</formx> <tr>corn grits</tr>. <i>Mahal na ang prisyu sa bugas mais karun,</i> The price of corn grits has increased. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> have corn grits as one&apos;s staple food. <i>Nagmais lang mi kay barátu man kay sa humay,</i> We had corn grits as our staple food because it is cheaper than rice. <form>{-an|maísan}, {ka-an|kamaísan}, {-al|maísal}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cornfield</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> have a cornfield. <form>maismáis</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> ornamental plant similar to the corn plant, and growing up to <measure reg="91 cm">3&prime;</measure>: <bio>Dracaena sanderiana</bio> and <bio><corr> D. </corr>fragrans</bio>. <number>2</number> folding knife with a handle that is made of sheet metal, molded into the form of an ear of corn. <number>3</number> name given to the largest species of flying fish (<ix>bangsi</ix>). <form>{-un|maísun}</form> <xr>= <sc>maismáis</sc>, <ix>3</ix>.</xr>

<p id=12001><form>maistra</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>female teacher</tr>. <number>1a</number> term of address or title for a teacher. <i>Nía na si Maistra Lúling,</i> Here is Mrs. Loling, the teacher. <number>2</number> education course. <i>Maistra ang gikúhang kursu ni Pirla,</i> Perla is majoring in Education. <form>{(&rarr;)|maistra}</form> <ix>voc.</ix> teacher, ma&apos;am. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for a woman to teach. <i>Tunghaan nga gimaistráhan ni Sunya,</i> The school where Sonia is teaching. <number>2</number> <itype>[B156; a1]</itype> be a (female) teacher. <i>Maistráhun ku ning ákung anak,</i> I&apos;ll make my daughter into a teacher. <form>ubra {&mdash;|maistra}</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ubra</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12002><form>maistru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1, 1a</number> <xr>= <sc>maistra</sc></xr> (male). <number>2</number> education course. <number>3</number> the leader or <tr>instigator</tr> of activity, usually bad. <i>Ikay maistru sa tanang mga binúang,</i> You are the instigator of all the foolishness. <number>4</number> band or orchestra master. <i>Pasakalyi, maistru, kay mukanta ku,</i> Introduction, maestro. I shall sing now. <form>{&mdash;|maistru} ámu</form> <tr>boatswain</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|maistru} kusiníru</form> <tr>chief cook</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>teach</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[B6; a1]</itype> be a <tr>teacher</tr>. &dagger;

<p id=12003><form>maka-<sub>1</sub></form> potential active verb affix, future. (<ix>Past</ix>: <bx>naka-</bx>. <ix>Subjunctive</ix>: <bx>maka-</bx>. <ix>Short form</ix>: <bx>ka-</bx>.) <i>Dì ku makaalsa (kaalsa) niánà,</i> I cannot lift that. <i>Nakatilaw (katilaw) na ku niánà,</i> I have tried that. <i>Wà ku makasakay (kasakay),</i> I couldn&apos;t get a ride. <number>1</number> refers to an action s.o. has the capability of doing. (Only the future form is used in this meaning.) <i>Makamau na kung mukinatsilà sa nag-idad kug diyis,</i> I knew how to speak Spanish when I was ten years old. <number>2</number> refers to an action which one had the opportunity or managed to do. <i>Ug makaadtu ku sa inyu human sa paniudtu, muhapit ku,</i> If I get a chance to go to your place after lunch, I&apos;ll drop in. <i>Wà ku makalakaw kay síging abut ang mga bisíta,</i> I didn&apos;t have a chance to go out because we kept having visitors. <number>2a</number> <ix>with nouns:</ix> manage to get. <i>Ug trís ákung mahulbut run, makamadyung ku,</i> If I draw a three, I will get mahjong. <i>Niíning trabahúa hálus ta makasininà,</i> With this work I can hardly earn enough to buy a shirt. <number>3</number> refers to an accidental or unintentional action. <i>Diriyut siya makaihì sa dihang gilatigu siya sa íyang <pb n=662>inahan,</i> Her mother whipped her so hard she nearly wet her pants. <i>Makaingun kag nindut ug makakità ka,</i> Once you see it, you won&apos;t be able to help exclaiming at how beautiful it is.

<p id=12004><form>maka-<sub>2</sub></form> <ix>short form</ix>: <bx>ka-<sub>4</sub></bx> <pos>n</pos> affix added to numbers to form words which mean [do so-and-so] many times. <i>Makapila (kapila) ku na ikaw ingna?</i> How many times did I tell you? <i>Makaduha na ku malígù didtu,</i> I have gone swimming there twice. <i>Makadaghan na ku mabiktima,</i> I have been victimized many times.

<p id=12005><form>makahiyà</form> <xr>= <sc>kipìkipì</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>kipì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12006><form>makalibri</form> <xr>= <sc>kalibri<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=12007><form>makan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>macan</tr>, k.o. large-grained rice of wet fields, highly prized for ordinary eating. <number>2</number> k.o. very fat pig. <pos>a</pos> <tr>obese</tr>. <i>Gwapahun untang bayhána apan makan lang,</i> She&apos;s quite beautiful, only she&apos;s fat.

<p id=12008><form>makapunù</form> (from <ix>punù</ix>) <pos>n</pos> variety of coconut which produces ordinary fruit and once in a while fruit which are completely full of soft meat, slightly harder near the shell. The <ix>makapunù</ix> fruit is highly esteemed and is used for sweets.

<p id=12009><form>maka-r-</form> affix added to verbs referring to a state to form adjectives which mean cause s.o. to get into [such-and-such] a state to a great extent. Forms with this affix usually have long penults. <i>Makasusúbung hitabù,</i> A very saddening event. <i>Makalulúuy,</i> Inspiring pity. <i>Makalalagut,</i> Angering.

<p id=12010><form>makarúni</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>macaroni</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> cook a macaroni dish.

<p id=12011><form>Makaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> Chinaman from Macao. <number>2</number> Chinaman in a restaurant business (so called because many cooks in Chinese restaurants immigrated from Macao). <form>lútung {&mdash;|Makaw}</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>lútù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12012><form>máki<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a large, enamel-coated, round, metal platter, <measure reg="46 cm">18&Prime;</measure> or so in diameter for holding cooked rice or corn.

<p id=12013><form>máki<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a Chinese dish of sliced meats, stewed and thickened with cornstarch.

<p id=12014><form>makig-(&larr;)</form> prefix added to bases with a prefix <ix>pakig-</ix> to indicate future, volitional active forms. <ix>Past</ix>: <bx>nakig-</bx>. <ix>Subjunctive:</ix> <bx>makig-</bx>. No durative or potential forms. (<ix>See</ix> <xr><sc>pakig-</sc></xr> <ix>for meanings</ix>.) <ix>Short forms</ix>: <bx>kig-</bx> and <bx>tig-</bx>. <i>Makigkáun (kigkáun, tigkáun) siya nákù sa gawas,</i> He wants to take me out to eat. <i>Nakig-áway siyag dakung táwu,</i> He picked a fight with a large person. <i>Walà ku makigpustaánay níya,</i> I did not challenge him to bet.

<p id=12015><form>makina</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>machine</tr>. <number>2</number> engine. <i>Dílì na muandar ang makina sa awtu,</i> The automobile engine won&apos;t start. <number>3</number> sewing machine. <i>Ang makina kinahanglánun kaáyu sa sastri,</i> A sewing machine is a necessity to a dressmaker. <number>4</number> <formx>{&mdash;|makina} sa bugas</formx> corn, <tr>rice mill</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|makina} dimutur</form> <pos>n</pos> motorized machine, engine. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> <number>1</number> do by machine. <i>Ayawg kinamuta nà pagtahì, makinaha nà,</i> Don&apos;t sew it with your hands. Do it by machine. <number>2</number> put an engine s.w.

<p id=12016><form>makinarya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> machinery, set of machinery put together for a specific use. <number>2</number> machinery, set of activities or groups organized to accomplish s.t. <i>Ang makinarya sa Partídu Libiral,</i> The machinery of the Liberal Party.

<!-- TODO: expansion -ádu adds a: removed -->

<p id=12017><form>makinilya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> typewriter. <number>2</number> clipper to trim hair. <number>3</number> windlass. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> type. <i>Makinilyáhun giyud basta sulat nga aplikisiyun,</i> Letters of application should be typed. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> hit with a number of rapid blows, as if punching a typewriter. <i>Gimakinilya nákù siyag dyab,</i> I hit him with a rapid-fire succession of jabs. <number>2</number> cut hair with a clipper. <form>{-ádu|makinilyádu}, {-in-|minakinilya}</form> <pos>a</pos> typewritten.&dagger;

<p id=12018><form>makinista</form> <pos>n</pos> engine man, machine operator. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a2]</itype> become an engine man.

<p id=12019><form>makiníta</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> process of embroidery done by pricking the needle over the design on the top side of the cloth until the whole design is completed, after which the design on the bottom side is trimmed. The top becomes the right side. <number>2</number> needle for this sort of embroidery. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> embroider in this method.

<p id=12020><form>makmak</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> pound s.t. hard with s.t. <i>Makmáka ang puthaw samtang ínit pa,</i> Pound the iron while it is hot. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ab2]</itype> beat severely, pound. <number>2a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|makmak} ug kasábà, {sulti|makmak ug sulti}</formx> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> scold severely, lambast. <i>Dì ka ángay mumakmak níyag kasábà kay dì ka ginikánan,</i> You have no right to scold him severely because you are not his father.

<p id=12021><form>makra</form> <xr>= <sc>marka</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12022><form>maksut</form> <xr>= <sc>laksut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12023><form>mákù</form> <xr>= <sc>dakù</sc> (dialectal).</xr> <form>{&mdash;|mákù} dyamù</form> very big. <i>Mákù dyamù ang ílang báy,</i> They have a huge house.

<p id=12024><form>makúpa</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small tree cultivated for its red, top-shaped fruits, with white, spongy meat and a mild flavor, a large meaty variety of the <bio>Syzygium samarangense</bio>. The same genus as <ix>tambis,</ix> but much firmer of flesh.

<p id=12025><form>mal</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> in billiards, a false shot causing one to lose his turn. <number>2</number> unlucky number. <i>Daghang mahadluk sa numiru trísi kay mal kunu,</i> Lots of people are afraid of thirteen because it is said to be an unlucky number. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> make a bad shot. <i>Mamal kag láin ang maigù sa bulamánu,</i> You lose your turn if you hit <pb n=663>the wrong ball. <form>{&mdash;|mal} numiru</form> <xr>= <sc>mal</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr> <form>{&mdash;|mal} tiráda</form> <pos>n</pos> in billiards, a shot that is not well executed. <i>Mal tiráda tung ímu kay layù ra kaáyu sa lungag ang ímung gitiráhan,</i> That was a bad shot. The target ball was a mile from the pocket.

<p id=12026><form>mala</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>dry</tr>, not wet. <i>Mala na ang mga hinayhay,</i> The clothes that were hung up are dry now. <number>2</number> not displaying lively attention, <tr>disinterested</tr>. <i>Tingálig dì siya muapil kay mala siya ug tinubagan,</i> He probably won&apos;t participate because he gave a disinterested answer. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[APB; a2]</itype> <tr>dry up</tr>, become <tr>dried</tr>. <i>Mimala ang mga sapà,</i> The rivers dried up. <i>Ang kaínit sa adlaw mauy mumala (mupamala) sa mga basakan,</i> The heat of the sun will dry the rice fields up. <i>Nag-úsik lang sa panahun ang nagmala (nagpamala) íning salúga,</i> Whoever dried this floor off was just wasting his time. <i>Tiil nga makamalag (makapamalag) basakan,</i> Big feet (lit. that can dry up a rice paddy). <i>Namad-an ug singut ang íyang bukubuku,</i> The sweat on his back has dried up. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> be <tr>uninteresting</tr>, <tr>boring</tr>. <i>Wà ku mutiwas sa sini kay nagmala lang,</i> I did not see the movie to the end because it was boring. <number>2a</number> <itype>[b4]</itype> <formx>{&mdash;|mala} sa dugù</formx> become <tr>pale</tr>. <i>Pagpangutána sa pulis, gimad-an sa dugù ang nawung sa dalága,</i> The lady&apos;s face became pale when the policeman questioned her. <form>{ma-|mamala}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>land</tr>. <i>Ang ubang bakì nagpuyù sa túbig, ug ang uban sa mamala,</i> Some frogs live in water and some on land. <form>tilapya sa {ma-|mamala}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>prostitute</tr> (humorous). <form>{kamad-an|kamadmalaan}</form> <pos>n</pos> upland rice field.

<p id=12027><form>malabagákay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. rattan used in house building.

<p id=12028><form>malabanu</form> <xr>= <sc>gwayabanu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12029><form>malabutang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. rattan used in construction.

<p id=12030><form>malagaya</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. white-husked rice with very small, roundish, white grains, used in preparation of medicinal rice cakes or mixed with medicinal plants in poultices.

<p id=12031><form>Malakanyan, Malakanyang</form> <pos>n</pos> Malacañang, the Philippine Presidential Palace.

<p id=12032><form>mal-am</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>old</tr> in age. <number>2</number> <tr>grown up</tr>, but not doing things befitting one&apos;s age (derogatory). <i>Mal-am na, lubut gihápuy ilingkud,</i> He is already grown but he hasn&apos;t got anything upstairs (lit. all he does with his buttocks is sit on them&mdash;a readily understood circumlocution which avoids stating outright a hurtful truth).

<p id=12033><form>malangsi</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>sardine</tr> or small herring, growing to <measure reg="10 cm">4&Prime;</measure> long and <measure reg="2.6 cm">1&Prime;</measure> wide.

<p id=12034><form>malapati</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>fish</tr>.

<p id=12035><form>malapi</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <form>kumpradur di-</form> <pos>n</pos> one who buys goods which he knows the seller has no right to dispose of. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be a buyer of stolen goods. <i>Makumpradur dimalapi giyud ka kun makapalit ka niánang kináwat,</i> You&apos;ll be a buyer of stolen goods if you buy that stolen article.

<p id=12036><form>malapunti</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. red deep-sea fish with big reddish scales, <measure reg="61 cm">2&prime;</measure> by <measure reg="15 cm">6&Prime;</measure>, similar to a snapper, but with a filament projecting from the tip of the tail.

<p id=12037><form>malarya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>malaria</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> get, cause to get malaria. <i>Way lamuk nga makamalarya (makapamalarya) dinhi,</i> There are no mosquitoes here that cause malaria. <i>Tambáli ang gimalarya,</i> Give medicine to the man with malaria. <form>malaryahun</form> <pos>a</pos> having malaria.

<p id=12038><form>málas</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>dimálas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12039><form>malasádu, malasáwu</form> <pos>a</pos> soft-boiled, half-cooked. <i>Malasádung itlug,</i> Soft-boiled eggs. <i>Ang atay malasádu nga pagkalútù,</i> The liver was cooked rare. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1B26; a2]</itype> come out soft, rare, cause to do so.

<p id=12040><form>malasugi, malasúgi</form> <pos>n</pos> swordfish or sailfish: <bio>Xiphias gladius</bio>, et al.

<p id=12041><form>malatálu</form> <pos>a</pos> bananas that are almost full-grown (but still far from ripe). <i>Basta tinggutum tub-un na ang ságing bísag malatálu pa kaáyu,</i> In times of famine they cut down the bananas even before they mature. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B3; b6]</itype> for bananas to reach this stage.

<p id=12042><form>malatinduk</form> <pos>n</pos> mackerel scad, k.o. carangoid fish, but long and fleshy like a <ix>tinduk</ix> banana.

<p id=12043><form>*málay</form> <form>walay {&mdash;|málay}</form> innocently unaware, unknowing (slang). <i>Way málay ang asáwa nga may kabit ang íyang bána,</i> The wife was unaware that her husband had a mistress. <i>Wà silay málay nga gipitluk nag ílang manuk,</i> They were unaware that their chicken had been stolen.

<p id=12044><form>maláyang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fine, white rice introduced by the PACD.

<p id=12045><form>malaypálay</form> <pos>n</pos> poisonous part of the viscera and skin of a pufferfish, which is removed before eating.

<p id=12046><form>Maláyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Malay</tr> in race. <pos>a</pos> tending to have the features of the Malayan race.

<p id=12047><form>malbas</form> <xr>= <sc>marbas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12048><form>maldisiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> malediction, a curse. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b2c1]</itype> curse. <i>Imaldisiyun (maldisiyunun) siya sa párì,</i> The priest will pronounce a malediction on him.

<p id=12049><form>maldíta</form> <xr>= <sc>maldítu</sc></xr> (female).

<p id=12050><form>maldítu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> naughty, evil. <i>Kadtung maldítung bátà ang nagpapilit sa babulgam sa ímung sinínà,</i> That naughty child put bubble gum on your dress. <i>Daghang maldítu <pb n=664>sa piyir,</i> There are lots of bad types at the waterfront. <number>2</number> having unexpected ability. <i>Maldítu! Natubag giyud ang dyakpat nga pangutána dà,</i> He&apos;s smart! He answered the jackpot question correctly. <form>{&mdash;|maldítu} sa babáyi</form> one who deceives women. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become <tr>naughty</tr>. <form>{-in-(&rarr;)|minalditu}</form> <pos>a</pos> in an evil way. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> do <tr>mischief</tr>, evil, philander. <i>Makamau nang muminalditu ang gamay kung anak,</i> My little baby has already learned how to be naughty.

<p id=12051><form>mal-idukáda</form> <xr>= <sc>mal-idukádu</sc></xr> (female).

<p id=12052><form>mal-idukádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>ill-educated</tr>, <tr>ill-mannered</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be ill-educated or bad-mannered.

<p id=12053><form>malígas</form> <xr>= <sc>hulmígas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12054><form>malignu</form> <pos>n</pos> spirits of departed people who have not entered heaven and are doing their penance (<ix>kundínu</ix>). If they are not prayed for they may inflict sickness as a reminder. <form>ispiritu {&mdash;|malignu}</form> <xr>= <sc>malignu</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a4]</itype> be sick with an illness sent by a <ix>malignu</ix>.

<p id=12055><form>malignù</form> <xr>= <sc><corr sic=karabalyas>karbalyas</corr></sc>.</xr>

<p id=12056><form>malimnu</form> <xr>= <sc><corr sic=karabalyas>karbalyas</corr></sc>.</xr>

<p id=12057><form>malingka</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>himalingka</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12058><form>malisya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> awareness of sex. <i>Dúna na siyay malisya kay dì na man maghúbù ug malígù,</i> She is already aware of her sex because she won&apos;t bathe in the nude any longer. <number>2</number> bad thoughts regarding sex. <i>Ug way malisya, ngánung miagik-ik man ka?</i> If you are not harboring evil thoughts, why are you snickering? <number>3</number> <tr>ill will</tr>. <i>Way malisya ang ákung paghátag niíni,</i> There&apos;s no ill intent in my giving this to you. <number>4</number> <tr>bad omen</tr>, usually of death or misfortune. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b]</itype> send such an omen. <i>Nagmalisya siya únà mamatay. Nagpakítà únà siya sa íyang mga anak nga túa sa Amirika,</i> He sent an omen before he died. He appeared to his children in America. <form>malisyúsa</form> <xr>= <sc>malisyúsu</sc></xr> (female). <form>malisyúsu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> conscious of sex in an unwholesome way. <i>Ngánung dì ka man pagúnit? Kamalisyúsu gud nímu!</i> Why don&apos;t you want me to touch your hands? How sex-conscious you are! <number>2</number> maliciously done, out of ill will. <i>Malisyúsung mga pasángil nga way gipasikáran,</i> Malicious and baseless accusations. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> be, become sex conscious in an unwholesome way. <number>2</number> become malicious in behavior.

<p id=12059><form>málit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mallet</tr>.

<p id=12060><form>malíta</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>suitcase</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> carry a suitcase. <i>Magmalíta lang ku kay daghan kug dalhunun,</i> I&apos;ll take a suitcase because I have so many things to take.

<p id=12061><form>malitin</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a leather bag designed to hold medicine and some medical instruments. <number>2</number> a small suitcase.

<p id=12062><form>malmal<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; a12]</itype> be <tr>taught</tr>, <tr>rehearsed</tr>, or be <tr>inculcated</tr> to a high degree. <i>Namalmal mig maáyu sa ininglis kay Amirkánu ámung maistru,</i> We were taught English thoroughly because our teacher was an American. <i>Malmálun nátù ang bátà sa bili sa pagdagínut,</i> We will inculcate the value of thrift in the children&apos;s minds.

<p id=12063><form>malmal<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>beat</tr> s.o. up, usually in the mouth. <i>Akuy mimalmal sa irù nga mikáun sa isdà,</i> I gave the dog that ate the fish a sound beating. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> use s.t. or <tr>scold</tr> s.o. abusively. <i>Natural nagubà ang makinilya kay gimalmal,</i> Of course he broke the typewriter because he abused it. <i>Malmálun kag kasábà bísag gamayng sayup,</i> You get abusive scoldings for the slightest mistakes.

<p id=12064><form>malpagadur</form> <pos>a</pos> failing to pay one&apos;s debts. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> get to be a defaulter in one&apos;s debts. <i>Ug mamalpagadur ka, wà nay musálig pagpaútang nímu,</i> If you become a bad debtor, no one will dare allow you credit. <form>{-a(&larr;)|malpagadúra}</form> <xr>= <sc>malpagadur</sc></xr> (female).

<p id=12065><form>maltabána</form> <pos>n</pos> glazed brown urn, about <measure reg="61 cm">2&prime;</measure> high with a small mouth and handles at the shoulders. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make into, put in glazed clay jars.

<p id=12066><form>maltratar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>maltreat</tr>, <tr>mistreat</tr>. <i>Maltratahun siya sa íyang amaáma,</i> His stepfather will maltreat him.

<p id=12067><form>*málu</form> <form>{&mdash;|málu} pa ug</form> <number>1</number> on the chance that [such-and-such<corr>]</corr> a good thing happen. <i>Palit tag swipstik, málu pag makaswirti,</i> Let&apos;s buy a sweepstake ticket. We might just win. <number>2</number> [so-and-so] isn&apos;t bad, if that is what comes out. <i>Málu pa nà ug swildúhan kag bayinting adlaw?</i> Would it be bad if you were paid twenty pesos a day?

<p id=12068><form>malù<sub>1</sub></form> <form>{&mdash;|malù} <r>[dat.]</r></form> serves [dat.] right. <i>Malù nímu nga gipagirawut kay tapulan ka,</i> Serves you right that you were fired because you are lazy.

<p id=12069><form>malù<sub>2</sub>, málù<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> pollen of corn. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> grow pollen. <i>Dì na dúgayng masanggì ang mais basta magmalù na,</i> It won&apos;t be long before the corn can be harvested if there is pollen in the tassel.

<p id=12070><form>málù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the one who is &lsquo;it&rsquo; in the game of <ix>takyan</ix> or marbles. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make a person remain &lsquo;it&rsquo; for a long time. <i>Malúun kug maáyu si Huwan pinaági sa pagpátid sa takyan ug layù,</i> I&apos;ll make Juan be &lsquo;it&rsquo; for a long time by kicking the shuttlecock far away.

<p id=12071><form>malubgas</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small anchovy with a dark blue dorsal region and silvery white on its ventral region, widely eaten preserved in salt.

<pb n=665>

<p id=12072><form>maluíbun</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to ornamental climbing vines with dark green or yellow green cordate leaves, often grown indoors: <bio>Scindapsus aureus</bio> and <bio>Philodendron oxycardium</bio>.

<p id=12073><form>málung</form> <pos>n</pos> name of the sarong worn by the Muslims. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6(1)]</itype> wear a <ix>málung.</ix> <number>2</number> <itype>[a2]</itype> make into a <ix>málung.</ix>

<p id=12074><form>malunggay</form> <xr>= <sc>kalamunggay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12075><form>málus<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> highly fermented salted fish paste. <i>Málus na ang ginamus,</i> The salted fish paste is already highly fermented. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB2]</itype> for salted fish to become highly fermented, cause it to do so. <number>2</number> <itype>[B]</itype> develop a horrible smell. <i>Kalígù na kay nagkamálus ka na,</i> Take a bath. You&apos;re beginning to smell awful.

<p id=12076><form>malyíti</form> <pos>n</pos> gavel.

<p id=12077><form>malyurka</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. liquor of low proof made from cane sugar, flavored with anise.

<p id=12078><form>mám</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> ma&apos;am, term of address to a teacher or woman of high station. <i>Maáyung buntag kanímu, mám,</i> Good morning, Ma&apos;am. <number>2</number> lady teacher. <i>Usa sa mga mám nákù sa hayiskul mau si Mis Agápay,</i> One of my teachers in high school was Miss Agapay. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> call s.o. Ma&apos;am.

<p id=12079><form>máma<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> mother. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B13; a12]</itype> call s.o. <i>máma.</i>

<p id=12080><form>máma<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> mute. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become a mute. <i>Namáma nà siya tungud sa kalísang,</i> He was struck dumb by his great fright.

<p id=12081><form>mamà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> chew of betel nut (<ix>búnga</ix>) and piper betel leaves (<ix>búyù</ix>) with lime (<ix>ápug</ix>) and optionally tobacco. <number>2</number> action of chewing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC12; a12]</itype> chew betel nut. <i>Dì ku makamamà kay hálang,</i> I can&apos;t chew betel because it burns the tongue. <form>{&mdash;|mamà} ug dugù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c]</itype> get a bloody mouth (lit. chew blood). <i>Magmamà ka giyug dugù ug hisumbagan ta ka,</i> You will have a bloody mouth if I punch you. <form>mam-anan, malam-an</form> <pos>n</pos> container for the lime, betel nut, and betel leaf. <form>malam-un</form> <pos>n</pos> set of complete ingredients ready for chewing. <form>{hi&N;-|hingmamà}</form> <pos>a</pos> fond of chewing betel.

<p id=12082><form>mamadur</form> <pos>n</pos> breast pump. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b]</itype> use a breast pump.

<p id=12083><form>mámam</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> baby talk for <ix>inum</ix> &lsquo;drink&rsquo;. <number>2</number> drinking spree (humorous slang). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A]</itype> drink (baby talk). <number>2</number> <itype>[AC; a]</itype> hold a drinking spree. <i>Puwa na ang tápay, nakamámam tingáli,</i> His ears are red. He must have had s.t. to drink.

<p id=12084><form>mamay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> wet nurse. <number>2</number> any nursemaid. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wet-nurse. <i>Gimamay ang bátà nga ílu,</i> The orphaned infant was wet-nursed. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> take care of a child. <i>Siyay nagmamay sa tanan námung mga bátà,</i> She took care of all our children.

<p id=12085><form>mambad</form> <xr>= <sc>manbad</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12086><form>mambu</form> <pos>n</pos> mambo, a Latin American dance and its music. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> dance the mambo. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> play music in mambo rhythm.

<p id=12087><form>mámi<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> mommy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> call s.o. mommy.

<p id=12088><form>mámi<sub>2</sub></form> <corr><pos>n</pos> </corr>a Chinese dish consisting of soup and narrow egg noodles with meat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make <ix>mámi</ix>.

<p id=12089><form>mamilúku</form> <pos>n</pos> child&apos;s sunsuit, a one-piece romper with short pants and no sleeves. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> wear a sunsuit. <number>2</number> <itype>[c16]</itype> make into a sunsuit.

<p id=12090><form>maming</form> <xr>= <sc>lubaylúbay</sc>, <i>n</i>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>lubay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12091><form>mampud</form> short for <ix>mánu man pud</ix>. <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>ngánu</sc></xr> <ix>and</ix> <xr><sc>upud</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12092><form>Mampur</form> <pos>n</pos> Montford, a person who is said to have lived in olden times. <form>karáan pa ni {&mdash;|Mampur}</form> older than Montford. <i>Tabas sa íyang bistídu nga karáan pa ni Mampur,</i> Style of dress that dates back to Montford&apos;s time. <form>panahun pa ni {&mdash;|Mampur}</form> very old, from Montford&apos;s time. <i>Sa panahun pa ni Mampur ang ákung radiyu ug wà pa giyud magubà,</i> My radio is as old as the hills and still in fine shape. <i>Sa panahun pa ni Mampur nang kumidiyáha,</i> That joke is as old as the hills.

<p id=12093><form>mamsà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> name given to the large species of <bio>Caranx</bio>, a highly-prized food fish. <number>2</number> <formx>dakung {&mdash;|mamsà}</formx> influential, important person.

<p id=12094><form>mamsà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> schoolteacher, humorous word play on <ix>mám</ix>. <i>Ayaw mug sábà kay náa na si Mamsà,</i> Everybody shut up. The teacher is coming. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> be a schoolmarm.

<p id=12095><form>mamun<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. sponge cake. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make, make into <ix>mamun.</ix>

<p id=12096><form>mamun<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fruit tree similar to a <ix>gwayabanu</ix> but with a smaller and rounder fruit: <bio><corr sic=Anona>Annona</corr> sp</bio>.

<p id=12097><form>mámurd, mámurds</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> marbles without a flaw. <number>2</number> for girls to be well-rounded and smooth-skinned. <i>Mámurds kaáyu ang trátu ni Bin,</i> Ben&apos;s girl friend is very beautiful. <form>mamuray</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2]</itype> compare which is the smoothest, most well-rounded. <i>Mamuray tag dyúlin,</i> Let&apos;s compare our marbles to see which is the smoothest and best rounded.

<p id=12098><form>man</form> <number>1</number> because. <i>Kay ang íya dapit man sa dáhun, mamúnga dáyun,</i> Because his part was the part with the leaves, it would bear fruit quickly. <form>{&mdash;|man} ugud</form> because (giving an explanation). <i>Namatay ang tanum kay wà man gud bùbúi,</i> The plant died because no one watered it. <number>2</number> <ix>after an interrogative:</ix> particle to make the question not abrupt. <i>Háin man siya?</i> <pb n=666>Could you tell me where he is? <number>3</number> particle with a statement contradicting a previous statement or presumption. <i>Dì man nà mau,</i> That&apos;s not the one. <number>4</number> particle with a statement giving information. <i>Nía man si Pidru karung buntága,</i> Oh, Pedro is here this morning. <form>{&mdash;|man} diay</form> I notice that. <i>Nindut man diay ka kaáyung mukanta!</i> Oh, I see you sing very beautifully. <form>{&mdash;|man} kahà</form> [so-and-so] apparently is the case. <i>Kami man kahay muluhud, anus-a man ang kasal?</i> We are supposed to sponsor you, so when is the wedding going to be? <i>Dì lang ka tagáan. Dì man kahà ka gustu,</i> I won&apos;t give you any. You apparently won&apos;t want any, anyway. <form>{&mdash;|man} lagi</form> I notice [so-and-so] is the case, nevertheless. <i>Ingun siya dì ka muanhi. Nía ka man lagi,</i> He said you weren&apos;t coming, but here you are! <number>5</number> in other phrases: <form>ingun {&mdash;|man}</form> as well as. <i>Mubuhis ang tagasyudad ingun man ang tagabaryu,</i> The city people, as well as the barrio folks, pay taxes. <form>mau {&mdash;|man} gánì</form> that&apos;s why, despite what you would expect ... <i>Mau man gánì nga namula ang ákung pánit kay nabulad ku,</i> I have red skin, despite what you would expect, because I was out in the sun. <form>na {&mdash;|man}</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>na</sc>, <ix>4.</ix></xr> <form>pála {&mdash;|man} run</form> that&apos;s flattery. <i>Pála man run ug dì pa tinúud,</i> That would have been flattery if it were not true. <form>túud {&mdash;|man}</form> and so, as one would expect. <i>Túud man miabut dáyun ang pulis,</i> And so, as one would expect, the police immediately arrived.

<p id=12099><form>ma&N;-</form> <ix>(see p. xvi for the meaning of the symbol N)</ix> prefix added to bases with a prefix <bx>pa&N;-</bx> to indicate future volitional active forms. (<ix>past</ix> <bx>na&N;-;</bx> <ix>subjunctive</ix> <bx>ma&N;-</bx>. <ix>Durative forms: future and subjunctive</ix> <bx>magpa&N;-(&rarr;);</bx> <ix>past</ix> <bx>nagpa&N;-(&rarr;)</bx>. <ix>Potential active: future and subjunctive</ix> <bx>makapa&N;-</bx>; <ix>past</ix> <bx>nakapa&N;-</bx>.) <i>Mangutána ta kun háin siya,</i> Let us ask where he is. <i>Wà siya mangutána,</i> He didn&apos;t ask. <i>Nangutána ku piru way tubag,</i> I asked but there was no answer. <i>Nagpanguput siya sa kahadluk,</i> He held on with all his might for fright. <i>Walà ku makapangutána,</i> I didn&apos;t get a chance to ask. <i>Makapangasáwa ka na,</i> You can get married now.

<p id=12100><form>mana, mána<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a title of respect to a female older than the speaker. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> call s.o. <i>mána.</i>

<p id=12101><form>mána<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. cultivated tree, the bark and leaves of which are used for spices.

<p id=12102><form>manáging</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. white parrot, the racket-tailed parrot: <bio>Prioniturus discurus</bio>.

<p id=12103><form>manalabtan</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>sabat</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12104><form>manámù</form> short for <xr><sc>amahan námù</sc></xr> <pos>n</pos> the Lord&apos;s Prayer.

<p id=12105><form>mananabtan</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>sabat</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12106><form>manananggal</form> <xr>= <sc>anananggal</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12107><form>mananangkuy</form> <pos>n</pos> folk doctor (general term). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B13; a12]</itype> become a healer.

<p id=12108><form>mananap</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>animal</tr>, <tr>beast</tr>, <tr>insect</tr>. <pos>a</pos> brute, having the feelings of a beast. <i>Ikawng mananápa ka. Ngánung gibun-ug man nímu ang ákung anak?</i> You beast. Why did you beat my son? <form>{-in-|minananap}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>beastly</tr>.

<p id=12109><form>manan-aw</form> <pos>n</pos> general name for ornamental air orchids.

<p id=12110><form>manandis</form> <pos>a</pos> henpecked husband. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2]</itype> become henpecked.

<p id=12111><form>manang, mánang</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> title for elder sister. <number>2</number> title given to any woman older than the speaker. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> call s.o. <ix>manang.</ix> <form>{(&rarr;)|manang}</form> voc. form. <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>nang.</bx>

<p id=12112><form>mananggíti</form> <pos>n</pos> toddy gatherer. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be, become a toddy gatherer.

<p id=12113><form>manánuy</form> <pos>a</pos> sweet-sounding, melodious. <i>Ang manánuyng tíngug sa langgam,</i> The sweet, melodious voice of the bird.

<p id=12114><form>manátad</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. dove: the green-winged ground dove: <bio>Chalcophaps indica</bio>. <form>túlin pa sa {&mdash;|manátad}</form> very swift.

<p id=12115><form>manau, manaul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. parasitic air plant, with long linear lanceolate leaves radiating from the center: <bio>Asplenium nidus</bio>.

<p id=12116><form>manaul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the white-breasted sea eagle: <bio>Haliaetus leucogaster</bio>.

<p id=12117><form>manay, mánay</form> <pos>n</pos> title for a female much older than the speaker. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> call s.o. <ix>manáy.</ix> <form>{(&rarr;)|manay}</form> voc. form.

<p id=12118><form>ma&N;-ay</form> regional alternant of <ix>ma&N;-r-.</ix>

<p id=12119><form>manbad</form> (from <ix>subad</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> any large deep-sea fish. <number>2</number> usurer. <i>Nadátù siya kay mambad nga dakù,</i> He became rich because he was a great usurer. <number>3</number> <formx>dakung {&mdash;|manbad}</formx> an important person of great influence. <i>Si Lawril dakung mambad sa pulitika,</i> Laurel is a big figure in politics. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> fierce and grasping. <i>Púru mga mambad ang tagaadwána. Padug-un ka giyud ug táman,</i> The customs people are voracious beasts. They&apos;ll bleed you dry. <number>2</number> fierce, termagant woman. <i>Túa na pud, gitapuk-an na pud si Tiryu sa íyang mambad nga asáwa,</i> There goes Terio&apos;s shrewish wife at him again. <number>3</number> s.o. that is dangerous to women. <i>Ayawg túu níya kay mambad nà sa mga babáyi,</i> Don&apos;t believe him because he is dangerous to women. <form>{ka-|kamanbad}</form> <pos>n</pos> quality of being fierce and grasping. <i>Ang kamambad sa pamingkúngan,</i> The fierceness of a hammerhead shark.

<p id=12120><form>mandalúsa</form> <xr>= <sc>salimbángun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12121><form>Mandalúyung</form> <pos>n</pos> a district in Rizal, Luzon. <form>{taga-|tagamandalúyung}, gíkan sa {&mdash;|Mandalúyung}</form> <tr>crazy</tr> (lit. one who has been a patient at the mental hospital in <pb n=667>Mandaluyong).

<p id=12122><form>mandamyintu diaristu</form> warrant of arrest.

<p id=12123><form>mand&acaron;r</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> command; word or phrase esp. in set form by which a command is given. <i>Ang mand&acaron;r sa kapitan pagpahúnung ug tíru,</i> The captain&apos;s command to cease fire. <number>2</number> order, a serving of food in a public eating place. <i>Unsa man tuy ímung mand&acaron;r, pipsi u kuk?</i> What did you order, Pepsi or Coke? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> command, give an order to. <number>1a</number> command, order people around. <i>Nagmand&acaron;r na sad ang tapulan,</i> The lazy lout is giving orders again. <number>2</number> order, request a serving to be brought. <i>Nakamand&acaron;r na ba mu?</i> Have you ordered? <form>mandasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> command. <i>Ang mga ultimu mutúman sa mandasiyun sa kábu,</i> The privates follow the commands of the corporal. <pos>a</pos> liking to give orders. <i>Mandasiyun kaáyu nang ákung maguwang unyà dì mutábang sa trabáhu,</i> My older brother loves to give orders, and yet he doesn&apos;t help with the work.

<p id=12124><form>mandasiyun</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>mand&acaron;r</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12125><form>manday</form> <number>1</number> it&apos;s too late to be of use. <i>Manday human na ang baratilyu,</i> It&apos;s too late. The sale is over. <number>1a</number> just when s.t. happens that is too late or inconvenient, s.t. else happens. <i>Manday wà tay kwarta mu puy idaut sa mga bátà,</i> Just when we are broke, the children get sick. <i>Manday human ka nag káun mu pay ipanangpit,</i> You invite me to eat only after you&apos;re done? <i>Manday lumalarga na aku mu pay pagkaíla námù,</i> We got acquainted just as we were about to leave town. <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;|manday} untà</formx> instead of doing what was expected. <i>Manday untà masukù siya, mipahíyum hinúun,</i> Instead of he getting angry, he smiled. <number>2a</number> although, despite the fact that. <i>Manday daghang anak, gastadur hinúun,</i> Although she has lots of children, she spends money like mad.&dagger;

<p id=12126><form>mandi, manding</form> <pos>n</pos> a title of address for an elder sister or female relative much older than the speaker. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; a12]</itype> call s.o. <i>manding.</i>

<p id=12127><form>mandù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> give an order, command. <i>Gimandúan ang mga tríni pagdágan líbut sa kampu,</i> The trainees were ordered to run around the camp. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> rule or reign. <i>Siya ang hára nga mimandù sa pangílin,</i> She was the queen that reigned over the fiesta. <number>3</number> <itype>[A3; b6]</itype> prevail. <i>Human sa makusug nga litì ug bagyu mimandù ang túmang kalínaw,</i> After the fierce thunderstorm, quiet prevailed. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> order, command. <i>Tumána ang ákung mandù,</i> Carry out my order. <form>{mag-r-|magmamandù}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ruler</tr>, <tr>commander</tr>. <form>{ma-un|mamandúun}</form> <pos>a</pos> commanding. <i>&lsquo;Lakaw,&rsquo; tíngug ni Aldu nga mamandúun,</i> &lsquo;Go!&rsquo; said Aldo in a commanding voice. <form>{ka-an|kamandúan}</form> <pos>n</pos> area over which s.o. rules. <i>Ang kamandúan sa armi pinangulúhan ni Hiniral Riyis,</i> The Army Command is headed by General Reyes.

<p id=12128><form>mandunggu</form> <pos>n</pos> beef tripes. <form>mandunggáda</form> <pos>n</pos> dish made of blood and the internal organs of beef. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> make, make into a dish of blood and internal organs of beef.

<p id=12129><form>manga</form> <ix>always written</ix> <bx>mga.</bx> <number>1</number> particle optionally placed preceding a noun or adjective to indicate plurals, but referring only to things that are not all exactly alike. <i>Ang mga istudiyanti nanambung sa míting,</i> The various students attended the meeting. <i>Mga karáan kining mga libru,</i> These are all old books. <number>1a</number> particle preceding the name for parts of the body of which there are more than one. <i>Sakit ákung mga mata,</i> My eyes hurt. <number>2</number> preceding a form referring to time, measurement: about, approximately. <i>Mga alas utsu,</i> At around eight o&apos;clock. <i>Mupalit kug kutsi, tingáli mga Iníru,</i> I will buy a car, probably around January. <i>Mga duha ka búwan kanhi,</i> About two months ago. <i>Mga duha ka pulgáda,</i> About two inches. <i>Mga dus písus,</i> Around two pesos.

<p id=12130><form>mangagat, mangágat</form> <pos>n</pos> snapper, name given to most species of <bio>Lutianus</bio>.

<p id=12131><form>mangágaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. annual, stiff-haired herb, much-branched from the base, with small flowers in dense axilliary clusters. The stem yields a white milky sap which is used to cure fevers: <bio>Euphorbia pilulifera</bio> and <bio>hirta</bio>.

<p id=12132><form>mangga</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mango</tr>: <bio>Mangifera indica</bio>. <form>manggáhun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> plump in cheeks. <number>2</number> having red splotches like some varieties of mangoes. <form>manggahan</form> <pos>n</pos> mango orchard. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> grow mangoes.

<p id=12133><form>manggad</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> prized position, treasure, riches, wealth. <i>Náa sa baul ibutang ang ílang manggad,</i> Their treasures are placed inside a trunk. <number>2</number> dry goods. <i>Nabasà ang mga manggad nga íyang gisúruy,</i> The dry goods he was peddling got wet. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB; c]</itype> treasure, hold s.t. dear. <i>Wà sila magmanggad sa kabílin sa ílang katigulángan,</i> They do not value the things their ancestors left them. <i>Manggára (imanggad) ang íyang mga púlung,</i> Treasure his words. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> care for with devotion, lavish attention. <i>Way mumanggad sa ákung mga tanum ug mubyáhi ku,</i> No one will tend to my plants if I go on a trip. <form>manggaránun</form> <pos>a</pos> wealthy, rich. <i>Lagmit sa mga manggaránun mga garbúsu,</i> The rich are usually arrogant.

<p id=12134><form>manggas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sleeve, cuff. <i>Íyang gilúkut ang manggas sa íyang kamisadintru,</i> He rolled <pb n=668>up his shirt sleeves. <number>2</number> bottom of trousers. <i>Bukad ug manggas ang bilbátum,</i> Bell-bottom trousers have wide trouser legs. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> provide with sleeves or cuffs.

<p id=12135><form>manggátus</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>gatus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12136><form>manggi-</form> the <corr sic=futural>future</corr> volitional active form of verbs with a prefix <xr><sc>panggi-</sc>.</xr> <xr><sc>past</sc></xr>: <bx>nanggi-</bx>. <i>Didtu sila sa sála manggidáma,</i> They were in the living room playing checkers.

<p id=12137><form>manggilis</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. sweet potato with light reddish peelings and white meat. Its rather dry meat makes it good eating.

<p id=12138><form>manggi-un(&larr;)</form> alternant of <ix>ma-un</ix> used with some bases instead of <ix>ma-un</ix>. <i>Manggihatágun,</i> Generous.

<p id=12139><form>manggu</form> <pos>n</pos> handle of a pick, ax or a similar tool. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6(1)]</itype> make a handle of this sort.

<p id=12140><form>manggulimbaw</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. shrimp growing to <measure reg="3.8 cm">1&frac12;&Prime;</measure> with one claw bigger than the other.

<p id=12141><form>manggustan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mangosteen</tr>.

<p id=12142><form>manghud</form> <pos>n</pos> younger brother, sister. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> younger in age than s.o. else. <i>Manghud ka nákug duha ka túig,</i> You are two years younger than I am. <number>2</number> less in intensity. <i>Ang íyang pátid manghud lag diyútay sa pátid sa kabáyung simarun,</i> His kick was just a little less than a wild horse&apos;s. <i>Ang ímung tíngug manghud lag diyútay sa hunghung,</i> Your voice is just a little softer than a whisper. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> have a younger brother or sister. <i>Pilay idad sa nagmanghud ning batáa?</i> How old is the child just before this one? <i>Anus-a man nà siya manghúri?</i> When are you going to have another baby (lit. when is he going to have a younger brother or sister)? <form>{ig-|igmanghud}</form> <pos>n</pos> younger brother or sister. <i>Kanang mga gagmayng bátà pulus níya igmanghud,</i> Those little children are all his younger brothers and sisters. <form>kamanghúran, kinamanghúran</form> <pos>n</pos> youngest child.

<p id=12143><form>mangkay</form> <pos>n</pos> old maid. <i>Dílì tanang mangkay masulub-un,</i> Not all spinsters are lonely. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; c1]</itype> become an old maid.

<p id=12144><form>mangkimangki</form> <pos>n</pos> fast dance characterized by monkey-like movements of the hands. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> dance the <ix>mangkimangki</ix>.

<p id=12145><form>mangku</form> <pos>n</pos> s.o. with an arm deformity characterized by being twisted at the elbow. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> have a deformed arm. <i>Namangku siya dihang napíang íyang síku,</i> He got a deformed arm when he broke his elbow.

<p id=12146><form>mangkù</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small mackerel with a maximum width of <measure reg="7.7 cm">3&Prime;</measure>.

<p id=12147><form>mangkumu</form> <xr>= &dagger; <sc>magkunu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12148><form>mangliw, mangluy</form> <xr>= <sc>amamangluy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12149><form>mangnu, mangnù</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; b2]</itype> <tr>remember</tr>. <i>Hatági kug diyútay nga panahun tingálig mamangnuan (himangnuan) ku,</i> Give me a little time. Maybe I will remember it. <number>2</number> <itype>[AP]</itype> cause to notice, be aware of. <i>Ang pagbagting sa rilu mauy nagmangnù (nagpamangnù) nákù nga udtu na,</i> The ringing of the clock reminded me that it was already noon. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A]</itype> be careful. <i>Magmangnù (magmangnù) ka kanúnay arun dì ka masayup,</i> Be careful so that you won&apos;t commit any mistakes. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12; b2]</itype> come to. <i>Didtu na siya makamangnù sa huspital,</i> He regained consciousness in the hospital. <form>{pahi-|pahimangnu}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> advise, instruct s.o. not to do s.t. <i>Gipahimangnúan ku siya nga dílì pasudlag ínit ang pridyidir,</i> I have warned him against putting anything hot into the refrigerator. <pos>n</pos> <tr>instruction against</tr>.

<p id=12150><form>mangsi</form> <xr>= <sc>malangsi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12151><form>mangtas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> cruel, <tr>fierce beast</tr>. <i>Ang táwung nalúnud gikaun sa usa ka mangtas sa dágat,</i> The drowning man was eaten up by the shark (lit. fierce beast of the sea). <number>2</number> fierce, <tr>heartless</tr> in character. <i>Dílì makamaung malúuy sa pubri kanang mangtas nga adunáhan,</i> That heartless rich man does not know pity for the poor. <i>Mangtas nga katalagman,</i> A fearful calamity. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become fierce and devoid of tender feelings.

<p id=12152><form>mangù</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>brainless</tr>, <tr>dull</tr>, <tr>stupid</tr>. <i>Mangù ka man kahà kay dì ka man kasabut,</i> You must be brainless because you don&apos;t understand. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B23; b6]</itype> be, become stupid.

<p id=12153><form>Mangyan</form> <pos>n</pos> non-Christian natives of Mindoro.

<p id=12154><form>manhak</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. bird.

<p id=12155><form>mani</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>peanuts</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|mani} sa kasuy</form> <pos>a</pos> the edible nuts of the cashew. <form>manimani</form> <number>1</number> k.o. creeping herb similar to purslane (<ix>ulasíman</ix>) in appearance, used as pig feed. <number>2</number> k.o. <ix>balat</ix> found a few inches beneath the sand along the shore. It roughly resembles a peanut.

<p id=12156><form>*máni</form> <pos>n</pos> <form>{dinuwin|dinuwin máni}, gud {&mdash;|máni}</form> during World War II, the name given to the prewar money as opposed to the Japanese <ix>kurà</ix> and the <ix>imirdyinsi máni</ix>. <form>girilya {&mdash;|máni}</form> money issued by the guerilla authorities during the war. <form>imirdyinsi {&mdash;|máni}</form> the emergency money issued after the outbreak of hostilities and prior to the Japanese occupation. <form>{&mdash;|máni} urdir</form> <tr>money order</tr>.

<p id=12157><form>manibila</form> <xr>= <sc>manubíla</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12158><form>mánids</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> manage a business. <form>{-ir(&rarr;)|manidsir}</form> <tr>manager</tr>. <form>{-ir(&rarr;)|manidsir} hiniral</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>general manager</tr>. <pos>n</pos> manager of a business or boxer. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB156]</itype> be, become manager.

<p id=12159><form>maníhu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <number>1</number> drive a motor vehicle. <i>Ambi, aku lay mumaníhu sa dyíp,</i> Let me drive the jeep. <number>2</number> operate or manipulate a contraption. <i>Makamaníhu man nà siyag dagkung <pb n=669>makina,</i> He can operate big machines. <number>3</number> manage to make s.t. operate. <i>Manihúa ra ring pawuntin pin ug makahímù ka bag paági,</i> Try fooling around with this fountain pen and see if you can make it write. <number>3a</number> see to it that s.t. gets done. <i>Aku lay mumaníhu arun magmalampúsun ang átung prugráma,</i> I&apos;ll see to it that our program is successful. <number>3b</number> manage to do s.t. in a roundabout or underhanded way, where the usual methods won&apos;t work. <i>Makamaníhu ka ba pagpasulud nákù sa trabáhu?</i> Can you manage to get me into the job? <number>3c</number> do s.t. surreptitiously or secretly. <i>Lingawun ku ang tindíra manihúa pud ang káha,</i> While I keep the store clerk busy, you take care of the cash register.

<p id=12160><form>maniit</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible, small crab of shallow waters with a thick shell and strong pincers. <pos>a</pos> <tr>quarrelsome</tr>, esp. said of women.

<p id=12161><form>manikin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mannequin</tr>.

<p id=12162><form>manikiyur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>nail polish</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>manicure</tr>. <form>{-ista|manikiyurista}</form> <pos>n</pos> a <tr>manicurist</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be a manicurist.

<p id=12163><form>Maníla, Manílà<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Manila</tr>, the largest city in the Philippines. <form>{&mdash;|Maníla} buy</form> boy who has grown up in Manila and is, therefore, sophisticated. <form>{&mdash;|Maníla} pípar</form> <tr>Manila paper</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be in Manila. <form>manilan-un</form> <pos>n</pos> from Manila, of the Manila type. <form>manilinyu, {-a|manilinya}</form> <pos>n</pos> one from Manila.

<p id=12164><form>manílà<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. striped grouper: <bio>Grammistes sexlineatus</bio>.

<p id=12165><form>mani&N;-</form> future volitional prefix of verbs with the base <bx>pani&N;-</bx>. (<ix>Past</ix>: <bx>nani&N;-</bx>. <ix>Subjunctive</ix>: <bx>mani&N;-</bx>.) <i>Manimalus giyud ku,</i> I will get revenge. <i>Walà ku manimúhì sa ákung gikuptan,</i> I didn&apos;t let go what I was holding on to.

<p id=12166><form>manínay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>godmother</tr>, the female sponsor at one&apos;s wedding, and, by extension, the sponsor at one&apos;s baptism, confirmation, or ordination. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> become one&apos;s godmother.

<p id=12167><form>maniníyut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>photographer</tr>. Word play on <ix>maniníyat</ix> to make it sound humorously risqué (recalling <ix>iyut</ix>, the taboo word for sexual intercourse).

<p id=12168><form>manínuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>godfather</tr>, the sponsor at one&apos;s wedding, and, by extension, at one&apos;s baptism, confirmation, or ordination. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> become one&apos;s godfather.

<p id=12169><form>manistil</form> <xr>= <sc>mistil</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12170><form>maniubra</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>maneuver</tr>, skillful handling of a vehicle. <number>2</number> s.t. done in a secret and underhanded way. <i>Maniubra sa pulitika,</i> A political maneuver. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> maneuver s.t. skillfully. <i>Maniubráha (imaniubra) pag-áyu ang sakayan arun dílì masángad,</i> Manipulate the boat skillfully so that it won&apos;t run aground. <number>2</number> contrive s.t. skillfully in an underhanded way. <i>Nakalusut dáyun ang ákung lún sa bangku kay gimaniubrag maáyu sa ákung amígu,</i> My loan went through OK because my friend maneuvered it skillfully.

<p id=12171><form>mankumunidad</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>commonwealth</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become a commonwealth.

<p id=12172><form>ma&N;-l-</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>ma&N;-r-</sc>, but used only regionally.</xr> <number>2</number> affix added to verbs referring to sorcery, praying, and other relations with the supernatural to form nouns which mean one who engages in this activity. <i>Manalagnà,</i> <tr>Seer</tr>. <i>Manalabtan,</i> <tr>Leader</tr> in prayers. <i>Mamalaktul,</i> One who practices the sorcery called <ix>paktul</ix>.

<p id=12173><form>manlà</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. edible crustacean similar to a prawn but with pincers. It burrows under soft mud in swampy places.

<p id=12174><form>manlawud</form> (from <ix>lawud</ix>) <pos>n</pos> name given to fishes that are found in deep waters.

<p id=12175><form>manlulundà</form> <xr>= <sc>manulunda</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12176><form>manlut<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>banlut</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12177><form>manlut<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large, green grasshopper.

<p id=12178><form>ma&N;-r-</form> affix added to verb bases to form a noun referring to a person who does [such-and-such] as an occupation. It is most commonly added to roots which form verbs by the addition of pa&N;-. <i>Mangingisdà,</i> <tr>Fisherman</tr>. <i>Mananabang,</i> <tr>Midwife</tr>. <i>Manunúnud,</i> <tr>Heir</tr>.

<p id=12179><form>ma&N;-r-ay</form> regional alternant of <ix>ma&N;-r-</ix>.

<p id=12180><form>mansa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>stain</tr>. <i>Dílì makúhà ang mansa sa tubà,</i> Stains from palm toddy won&apos;t come out. <number>2</number> moral blemish, <tr>dishonor</tr>. <i>Walay mansa ang ákung ngálan,</i> My name is unsullied. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b25]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>stain</tr>. <number>2</number> stain one&apos;s honor. <i>Kaputlì nga walà pa kamansáhi sa kasinatían,</i> Purity that has not been stained by experience. <form>{-du|mansádu}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>stained</tr>. <i>Dì giyud nà siya musul-ub ug sinínà nga mansádu,</i> She never wears stained clothes. <number>2</number> easily stained. <i>Mansádu kaáyu ang sinínà nga putì,</i> A white dress easily gets dirty. <form>mansahun</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having stains. <number>2</number> panty stained with blood. <i>Iladlad pag-áyu ang mga mansahun,</i> Bleach those stained panties very well.

<p id=12181><form>mansánas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>apple</tr>.

<p id=12182><form>mansanilya</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. perennial aromatic herb cultivated for ornamental and medicinal purposes: <bio>Chrysanthemum indicum</bio>.

<p id=12183><form>mansanítas</form> <pos>n</pos> small spreading tree of waste spaces, the bast fibers of which make rope in times of scarcity: <bio>Muntingia calabura</bio>.

<p id=12184><form>mansibádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>common-law couple</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a12]</itype> live as man and wife without the benefit of a church wedding.

<p id=12185><form>mansinítas</form> <xr>= <sc>mansanítas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12186><form>mansiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mansion</tr>.

<pb n=670>

<p id=12187><form>mansu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> break in a work animal. <i>Si Dyígu ray makamansu ning kabayúa,</i> Only Diego can tame this horse. <number>2</number> <tr>train</tr>, <tr>discipline</tr> s.o. <i>Namansu sa párì ang walay hibangkaágan nga bátà,</i> The priest trained the child that was innocent of all knowledge. <number>2a</number> give s.o. a lot of work to do. <i>Kining batáa namansu sa mga trabáhu sa balay,</i> The household chores were dumped on the child. <form>mansuhan, mansuhánan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>training ground</tr>.

<p id=12188><form>mantágà</form> <xr>= <sc>mantalágà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12189><form>mantálà</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>herald</tr>, <tr>announce</tr>. <i>Ang tuktugáuk sa sunuy nagmantálà sa umaábut nga kabuntágun,</i> The crowing of the rooster announces the approaching morning. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>publish</tr> in a magazine or newspaper. <i>Gimantálà sa mantaláan ang umaábut nílang kasal,</i> Their approaching wedding was published in the papers. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> <tr>advertise</tr>. <i>Mga lúhà nga nagmantálà sa ákung kapildíhan,</i> Tears that advertised my defeat. <form>{-an|mantalaan}, {pa&N;-an|pangmantalaan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>newspaper</tr>, <tr>magazine</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>press</tr>. <form>{mag-r-|magmamantálà}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>publisher</tr>. <form>{tagapa&N;-|tagapangmantálà}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>press relations officer</tr>. <form>{tig-|tigmantálà}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> advertising man. <i>Milíhuk ang tigmantálà sa bag-ung kumpaníya,</i> The new company&apos;s ad man worked hard. <number>2</number> an <tr>announcer</tr>, s.o. or s.t. who or that spreads talk or news around. <i>Kanang bayhána mauy tigmantálà sa tanang mahinabù dinhi,</i> That woman is the person who spreads the gossip of all that is going on around here. <number>3</number> <tr>publisher</tr>.

<p id=12190><form>mantalágà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>giant octopus</tr>.

<p id=12191><form>mantas</form> <xr>= <sc>mangtas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12192><form>mantiának</form> <xr>= <sc>mantiyának</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12193><form>mantíaw</form> interjection showing dismay and displeasure, but to be taken lightly. <i>Mantíaw ning batáa, muulì lag mukáun,</i> My! This child never comes home except to eat.

<p id=12194><form>mantíkà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lard</tr>, fat from flesh. <number>1a</number> <formx>lúpig pay {&mdash;|mantíkà} kun matúlug</formx> tending to sleep deeply (lit. better at sleeping than lard). <number>2</number> <tr>cooking oil</tr>. <form>bugnaw ug {&mdash;|mantíkà}</form> derisive reference to one who has indolent habits or is a slowpoke. <form>{(&rarr;)|mantikà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> fry in lard. <i>Mantikai ang báhaw,</i> Fry the leftover food. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> exude lard or oil. <i>Haúna dáyun kun mumantikà na ang tambuk,</i> Take the pan out of the fire when lard comes out of the pork fat. <number>3</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for public transportation to move slowly and sluggishly at times that there are few passengers. <i>Wà giyuy pasahíru. Nagmantikà ang trák sa dálan,</i> There are few passengers, and the bus is moving slowly down the street empty. <form>{-in-an|minantikáan}</form> <pos>n</pos> food fried in oil. <form>{-un|mantikáun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>greasy</tr>. <i>Sud-an nga mantikáun,</i> Greasy food. <number>2</number> <tr>obese</tr>. <i>Babáying mantikáun,</i> An obese woman.

<p id=12195><form>mantíka dikakaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cocoa butter</tr>.

<p id=12196><form>mantikilya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>butter</tr> or <tr>margarine</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> spread butter on s.t.

<p id=12197><form>mantil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>tablecloth</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put, use a tablecloth. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a tablecloth.

<p id=12198><form>mantilya</form> <pos>n</pos> veil used to cover a woman&apos;s head in church. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> wear a veil. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a veil.

<p id=12199><form>mantilyína</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>head covering</tr> for wearing inside a church. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear a head covering in church.

<p id=12200><form>mantinil, mantinir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; c]</itype> <tr>make do with</tr>, content oneself with s.t. less than the best. <i>Magmantinil lang tag amútig way bugas,</i> We&apos;ll make do with sweet potatoes if there&apos;s no rice. <i>Nagmantinil lang siyag pangarga,</i> He just took a temporary job as a stevedore. <i>Mantiniri (mantinihi) lag kawáyan pára halígi ang balay,</i> Just use bamboo for the meantime as a post for the house. <form>{-in-|minantinil}</form> <pos>a</pos> of makeshift or second choice sort.

<p id=12201><form>mantiw</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>tall and lanky</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be, become, make lanky.

<p id=12202><form>mantiyának</form> <pos>n</pos> supernatural being which preys on newborn infants. It drinks the blood from childbirth and tries to get at the newborn baby&apos;s liver. If the baby dies, he drinks the mother&apos;s milk without her knowledge and kills her thereby. It is pictured the size of a baby, with horns and fangs, with long pointed ears, dirty brown in color and angular in features. It has the ability to walk, change its appearance, and make itself invisible.

<p id=12203><form>mantsa</form> <xr>= <sc>mansa</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12204><form>mantsinítas</form> <xr>= <sc>mansanítas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12205><form>mantsúsu</form> <pos>a</pos> easily soiled or stained. <i>Mantsúsu kaáyu ang putì nga bistídu,</i> White clothing gets soiled easily. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; b6]</itype> be, become easily soiled.

<p id=12206><form>mánu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC2; a]</itype> in ball games, play off one with another to determine who plays first or whose play it is. <i>Átung manúhun ug kinsay mayur,</i> I&apos;ll play it off with you to see who starts the game. <pos>n</pos> act of determining the order of who plays first. <form>manuhan</form> <pos>n</pos> a line from which s.t. is tossed to determine who is first.

<p id=12207><form>mánu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> title of address for a male older than the speaker. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> call s.o. <ix>mánu</ix>.

<p id=12208><form>mánu<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> hand of dried tobacco leaves containing 100 leaves. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> bind tobacco leaves into hands.

<p id=12209><form>mánu<sub>4</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>ngánu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12210><form>*mánu<sub>5</sub></form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>dimánu</sc></xr>, <xr><sc>armas {di-|dimánu}</sc></xr>, <xr><sc>bula {di-|dimánu}</sc></xr>, <xr><sc>buyna &mdash;</sc></xr>, <xr><sc>sigunda {&mdash;|mánu}</sc>.</xr> <form>manumánu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC2; c1]</itype> do s.t. by human strength, hands alone. <i>Manumanúhun (imanumánu) lang ni nátug <pb n=671>bira ang awtu,</i> Let&apos;s just push this car by hand. <pos>n</pos> fight with the hands. &dagger;

<p id=12211><form>manúbig</form> (from <ix>túbig</ix>) <pos>n</pos> k.o. crab of swamps and rivers lighter in color than the <ix>kágang</ix>.

<p id=12212><form>manubíla</form> <pos>n</pos> a mechanism one manipulates to steer: steering wheel, handle bars, etc. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> make a steering mechanism.

<p id=12213><form>Manúbu, Manúbù</form> <pos>n</pos> name of an ethnic group in the mountains of eastern Mindanao.

<p id=12214><form>manugimpu, manugimpul</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. parasitic plant which attaches itself to trees. It extends out a vine-like trunk which clings and covers the host.

<p id=12215><form>manuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>chicken</tr>. <i>Pinirítung manuk,</i> Fried chicken. <number>1a</number> <formx>layù ra sa tinái sa {&mdash;|manuk}</formx> <number>1a1</number> off the subject, not to the point. (Lit. far from the chicken&apos;s intestines.) <number>1a2</number> wound of no consequence, harmless scratch. <number>2</number> <tr>gamecock</tr>. <number>2a</number> a protegé involved in any race or competition: politics, boxing, love, et al. <i>Napildi ang íyang manuk,</i> His candidate (protegé) was defeated. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> have chicken for one&apos;s meal. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make s.o. one&apos;s protegé, candidate in a competition. <i>Akuy mumanuk nímu ug dì ba sugut dáyun nang bayhána,</i> If I put you up as a candidate that girl will surely accept you. <i>Midaug siya kay gimanuk mang Sirhing,</i> He got elected because he was a protege of Serging&apos;s. <form>{-an|manukan}, {-an(&larr;)|manúkan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>poultry business</tr>. <number>2</number> one who has lots of chickens. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> have a poultry business. <form>{-in-|minanuk}</form> <pos>a</pos> sleeping half-awake because of insomnia or because of a need to remain conscious. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> sleep in such manner. <i>Magminanuk kug kat&umacracu;g paghuwat sa pirs trip,</i> I&apos;m just going to nap because I have to make it to the first trip. <form>{-un(&larr;)|manúkun}</form> <pos>a</pos> slightly cross-eyed. <i>Gwápa untang bayhána, ugáling manúkun lang,</i> That girl is beautiful, but she is cross-eyed. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>lukgaw</sc>.</xr> <form>{-un|manukun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <xr>= <sc>{-un(&larr;)|manúkun}</sc>, <i>a</i>.</xr> <pos>n</pos> the cow-nosed ray, so called because it moves like a bird in the water: <bio>Rhinoptera javanica</bio>.

<p id=12216><form>manukmánuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> wind coming in strong gusts. <number>2</number> weather vane. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B456; b4]</itype> be caught in gusting winds. <i>Piligrung ilawud ug magmanukmánuk ang hángin,</i> It&apos;s dangerous to set sail in gusty weather.

<p id=12217><form>manukúlu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>monocle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> wear a monocle. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> get a monocle.

<p id=12218><form>manul</form> <pos>n</pos> variety of jasmine of the same species as <ix>sampagíta</ix> but with double petals and rounded leaves: <bio>Jasmimum spp</bio>.

<p id=12219><form>manulunda, manulundà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>angel</tr>. <i>Daw manulundà ang íyang kaanyag,</i> She has the beauty of an angel.

<p id=12220><form>manumbága</form> <xr>= <sc>tinumbága</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>tumbága</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12221><form>manung, mánung</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> title for an elder brother. <number>2</number> title of respect for a man older than the speaker. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> call s.o. <ix>mánung</ix>. <form>{(&rarr;)|manung}</form> voc. form. <ix>Short form</ix>: <bx>nung</bx>.

<p id=12222><form>manunggal</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. tree.

<p id=12223><form>manunggul</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. limestone found in tidal flats, rough and irregular in surface, grey on the outside, but white on the inside. It is used for road surfacing, stone walls, or wherever a porous stone is desirable.

<p id=12224><form>mánus</form> <xr>= <sc>amánus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12225><form>manútu</form> <xr>= <sc>mánu<sub>3</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=12226><form>mánuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> title for an elder brother or uncle. <number>2</number> expression used by a person who has been defeated in a scuffle to indicate submission. <i>Hala, mánuy arun dílì ku lubáun ning ímung buktun,</i> Go on, say &lsquo;uncle&rsquo; so I won&apos;t twist your arm. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> call s.o. <ix>mánuy</ix>. <form>{(&rarr;)|manuy}</form> voc. form. <ix>Short form</ix>: <bx>nuy</bx>.

<p id=12227><form>manwal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>manual</tr>, <tr>handbook</tr>.

<p id=12228><form>manya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> fit of bad temper. <i>Ang paghilakhílak ánang batáa manya lang nà,</i> That child&apos;s persistent crying is just a tantrum. <number>2</number> <tr>caprice</tr>, <tr>fancy</tr>. <i>Manya lang tung pagpapalit níyag láing sapátus,</i> His asking for another pair of shoes was just out of caprice. <pos>a</pos> for a horse to tend to balk, move slow. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> throw a <tr>tantrum</tr>, act like a spoiled brat. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for a horse to throw a fit or just balk. <i>Dinhà giyud sa kinasang-an ang kabáyù magmanya, ug wà mulíhuk bísag unsáug búnal,</i> The horse balked right in the middle of the crossing and wouldn&apos;t move no matter how hard it was whipped. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; b5c1]</itype> <tr>move slowly</tr>. <i>Ang mumanya ug tambung sa lamísa dì masalinan,</i> If you dilly-dally in getting to the table, nothing will be left for you.

<p id=12229><form>manyak</form> <pos>a</pos> having an uncontrollable urge to do things, esp. sexual. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be, become a <tr>maniac</tr>. <i>Namanyak siya human makatilaw ug kausa,</i> She became a nympho after her first experience. <i>Ngánung namanyak man siya sa pangáwat nga sapían man?</i> Why did she become a kleptomaniac when she is so rich?

<p id=12230><form>manyampuk</form> <xr>= <sc>láwung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12231><form>*manyána</form> <form>{&mdash;|manyána} ka lang, {ka purin|manyána ka purin}</form> you&apos;re out of it, you don&apos;t know what&apos;s going on. <i>Manyána ka lang (purin). Nagkúyug ímung trátug láin,</i> You don&apos;t know what&apos;s going on. Your boy friend is going out with other girls.

<p id=12232><form>manyang</form> <pos>n</pos> hard liquor distilled from fermented water obtained from the bud of the nipa palm.

<p id=12233><form>mápa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>map</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> plan a course of action, esp. in committing a crime. <i>Nagmápa sila unsáun pagtúlis ang tindáhan,</i> They <pb n=672>are planning how to rob the store. <number>2</number> <itype>[B36; b]</itype> for dirt or stains to form a map-like configuration on s.t. <i>Mimápa ang íyang buling sa líug,</i> The dirt formed map-like configurations on his neck. <i>Gimapáhan sa tintà ang ímung bulsa,</i> The ink has formed a map-like configuration on your pocket.

<p id=12234><form>máping<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>mápa</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr>

<p id=12235><form>mapunti</form> <xr>= <sc>malapunti</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12236><form>Mar.</form> <pos>n</pos> abbreviation for <ix>Marsu</ix> &lsquo;March&rsquo;.

<p id=12237><form>marabal</form> <pos>a</pos> person or animal that has grown very large. <i>Kadakung marabal sa ilipanti,</i> What a giant that elephant is! <i>Kadakung marabal ning batáa,</i> What a giant this child has gotten to be.

<p id=12238><form>marabilyas</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. ornamental bush often called <ix>alas kwatru</ix> because its flowers open at around four o&apos;clock in the afternoon: <bio>Mirabilis jalapa</bio>.

<p id=12239><form>marabya</form> <xr>= <sc>murabya</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12240><form>maragábit</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. rice suitable for planting in uplands or in paddies.

<p id=12241><form>maragáti</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. fishing whereby a line with several hooks baited only with decoys is dragged behind a boat.

<p id=12242><form>marákas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>maracas</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; a]</itype> play the maracas, make into maracas.

<p id=12243><form>maral</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. carnivorous civet, dark gray in color, having a very offensive odor.

<p id=12244><form>máram</form> <xr>= <sc>márang</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12245><form>maramà, marámà</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>tough</tr>, <tr>roughneck</tr>. <i>Ang marámà nga táwu ísug ug walay gikahadlúkan,</i> A tough guy is rough and is not afraid of anyone. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be tough and bad.

<p id=12246><form>Maranaw</form> <pos>n</pos> Lanao Muslims.

<p id=12247><form>marang</form> <xr>= <sc>malasugi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12248><form>márang</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large fruit tree, bearing fruit similar to the jackfruit (<ix>nangkà</ix>), but smaller and sweeter. Not commonly cultivated except in Mindanao: <bio>Artocarpus odoratissima</bio>.

<p id=12249><form>marapíta</form> <pos>n</pos> variety of banana with thick green peelings, 20 cm. long and <number>5</number> cm. wide coming to what looks like a nipple at the end, eaten cooked.

<p id=12250><form>maratun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>marathon</tr> race. <number>2</number> any long-distance or endurance contest. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2; c1]</itype> hold a marathon, compete in a marathon.

<p id=12251><form>marbas</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. half-woody herb of waste places, with numerous medicinal uses: <bio>Abutilon indicum</bio>.

<p id=12252><form>margarin, margarína</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>margarine</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put margarine on s.t.

<p id=12253><form>margáti</form> <pos>n</pos> system of planting rice which has increased the yield, whereby the bed is more carefully prepared and the seedlings planted further apart than is traditionally done.

<p id=12254><form>mari</form> <xr>= <sc>kumári</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12255><form>maribágu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. shrub of the seashore: <bio>Hibiscus tiliaceus</bio>.

<p id=12256><form>maribuhuk</form> <xr>= <sc>agúhu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12257><form>mariguld</form> <xr>= <sc>ahítu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12258><form>marihwána</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>marijuana</tr>.

<p id=12259><form>márik</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pickax</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> do s.t. with a pickax.

<p id=12260><form>marika</form> <xr>= <sc>umari ka</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ari</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12261><form>marína</form> <pos>n</pos> collar in a woman&apos;s dress. <i>Taúri unyag marína ang ákung sinínà,</i> Attach a collar to my dress. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[b6(1)]</itype> attach, make a collar. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a collar.

<p id=12262><form>mariníra</form> <pos>n</pos> sailor&apos;s collar or the middy collar on a woman&apos;s dress. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make a middy collar.

<p id=12263><form>marínu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sailor</tr> on a merchant ship or in the navy or soldier assigned on a boat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a sailor. <i>Magmarínu kang dagatun ka man?</i> You want to be a sailor even if you easily get seasick? <form>asul {&mdash;|marínu}</form> <tr>navy blue</tr>. <form>mariníru</form> <xr>= <sc>marínu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12264><form>maripúsa</form> <pos>n</pos> a k.o. orchid that has flowers that look like white butterflies, branching in sprays: <bio>Phalaenopsis amabilis</bio>.

<p id=12265><form>marísi</form> <xr>= <sc>mirísi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12266><form>Maríya</form> <ix>name</ix> <tr>Mary</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|Maríya} klára</form> <number>1</number> character in Rizal&apos;s Noli Me Tangere who embodied the traditionally praised feminine virtues of modesty and shyness. <number>2</number> traditional nineteenth century costume with a full skirt and low-cut blouse worn with a triangularly-folded kerchief. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> behave like or act the role of Maria Clara. <number>2</number> wear the Maria Clara. <form>{&mdash;|Maríya} Santisima</form> <pos>n</pos> The Blessed Virgin Mary. <form>Santa {&mdash;|Maríya}</form> <pos>n</pos> mildly profane exclamation of discomfiture. <form>buhuk ni {&mdash;|Maríya}</form> <xr>= <sc>maribuhuk</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>agúhù</sc>.</xr> &dagger;

<p id=12267><form>maríya buhuk</form> <xr>= <sc>maribuhuk</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>agúhù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12268><form>mariyal</form> <xr>= <sc>máha riyal</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>máha</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12269><form>marka</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a visible trace or impression on a surface. <i>Dúnay mga marka sa tiil sa kawatan didtu,</i> The burglar left footprints over there. <number>2</number> a <tr>brand</tr>, <tr>label</tr> or <tr>sign</tr> printed, written, or stamped on s.t. <i>Unsay marka ánang ribintadúra?</i> What brand are those firecrackers? <number>3</number> grade in school. <i>Pagtuun pag-áyu arun muísa ang marka mu sa klási,</i> Study hard so that your grades will get better. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put a mark on. <i>Kinsay nagmarka áning ákung libru?</i> Who put a mark in my book? <i>Markáhan sa mga inspiktur ang karni únà ibaligyà,</i> The meat inspectors will first stamp a mark on the meat before having it sold. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> for a meter to give an indication, read. <i>Nagmarka nag utsinta ang dágan sa awtu,</i> The speedometer already read eighty. <number>3</number> <itype>[b]</itype> be eyed for a purpose. <pb n=673><i>Gimarkáhang patyun,</i> Marked for assassination. <i>Sapátus nga gimarkáhan níyang palitun,</i> Shoes which he has long been having his eye on. <form>{&mdash;|marka} bulkan</form> <pos>n</pos> twenty-peso bill (slang&mdash;so called from the picture of Mount Mayon that was on the back of the bill in former times). <form>{&mdash;|marka} dimunyu</form> <pos>n</pos> strong liquor, so called from a brand of strong liquor which has the picture of the devil on it. <form>{&mdash;|marka} kalabíra</form> <pos>n</pos> the skull markings on the container of highly poisonous matter. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B26N]</itype> be dead (slang). <i>Biyà sa ínum arun dì ka mamarka kalabíra ug sayu,</i> Stop drinking or you will die young.

<p id=12270><form>markir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> marker or piece of paper to keep track of the lines. <number>2</number> marker put s.w. to indicate a location.

<p id=12271><form>markis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>marquis</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB156; a12]</itype> be made or become a marquis. <form>{-a(&larr;)|markísa}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>marchioness</tr>.

<p id=12272><form>*markit</form> <form>may (walay) {&mdash;|markit}</form> <tr>marriageable</tr> (not) marriageable. <i>Minyù nang tawhána, wà na nay markit,</i> That man is already married. He is not available any more. <form>walà ang {&mdash;|markit}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> get to be unavailable for marriage or considered so to be.

<p id=12273><form>marku<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wall stud</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make a wall stud.

<p id=12274><form>marku<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>breasts</tr>. <i>Nagbitay ang mga marku sa babáyi, mu rag búnga sa kapáyas,</i> The woman&apos;s breasts are hanging like papayas. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> nudge s.o. in the breast.

<p id=12275><form>markut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> propagate plants by marcotting. <pos>n</pos> propagation of plants by marcotting.

<p id=12276><form>marmul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>marble</tr>. <i>Dúwang nga marmul,</i> A marble font. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a1]</itype> have marble, make into marble.

<p id=12277><form>marpil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>false teeth</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> have false teeth. <i>Kinahanglang marpílan ang ímung pangag,</i> You should have a bridge made for your missing tooth. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make into false teeth.

<p id=12278><form>marsanti</form> <xr>= <sc>martsanti</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12279><form>marsíku</form> <xr>= <sc>amursíku</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12280><form>marsiyal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>marshall</tr>, a military commander. <i>Mag-una ang marsiyal ug may paráda,</i> The marshall leads a parade. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> be, become a marshall.

<p id=12281><form>Marsu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>March</tr>. <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>abril</sc></xr> <i>for verb forms.</i>

<p id=12282><form>marsútu</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. suiting material of high quality (from the brand name Marsotto). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> wear clothing made of this cloth.

<p id=12283><form>martabána</form> <xr>= <sc>maltabána</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12284><form>Marti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Mars</tr>.

<p id=12285><form>martilyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hammer</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|martilyu} dikabra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>claw hammer</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|martilyu} dibúla</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ball peen hammer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> hammer. <i>Martilyúha ang tabla arun matangtang,</i> Hit the piece of wood with a hammer to get it off.

<p id=12286><form>martiníku</form> <xr>= <sc>bartuníku</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12287><form>martir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>martyr</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|martir} sa Gulgúta</form> <tr>Jesus Christ</tr>. <number>2</number> one who has suffered like a martyr. <i>Si Lusíla usa ka martir tungud kay gisákit siyag maáyu sa íyang bána,</i> Lucila is a martyr because she is tortured by her husband. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[Ab16]</itype> make s.o. suffer like a martyr.

<p id=12288><form>Martis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Tuesday</tr>. <ix>See</ix> <xr><sc>birnis</sc></xr> <ix>for verb forms</ix>. <form>{&mdash;|Martis} Santu</form> the Tuesday of the Holy Week.

<p id=12289><form>*marts</form> <form>un yur {&mdash;|marts}, sagitsit, gu</form> command in a race: On your mark, get set, go!

<p id=12290><form>martsa</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> <tr>march</tr>. <number>1a</number> attend one&apos;s graduation exercises. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> dance a march or play a march number. <pos>n</pos> speed of an automotive transmission used at higher speed. <i>Kwarta, kinta martsa,</i> Fourth, fifth gear.

<p id=12291><form>martsanti</form> <pos>n</pos> middleman, one who buys and sells commodities between producers and retailers.

<p id=12292><form>martuníku</form> <xr>= <sc>bartuníku</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12293><form>marubya</form> <xr>= <sc>murabya</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12294><form>marúnung</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> wise to the ways of the world. <i>Dì nà maílad kay marúnung nà,</i> He knows what&apos;s coming off. You can&apos;t fool him. <number>2</number> have proficient knowledge or skill in s.t. <i>Katubag si Pidru sa lisud nga pangutána. Marúnung giyud,</i> Peter was able to answer the questions. He certainly is bright. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become sly or crafty. <form>{-in-(&rarr;)|minarunung}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do s.t. in a cunning, sly way<corr>.</corr> <i>Minarununga (iminarunung) sad nà pagpaági arun ka makabalus,</i> Be cunning about it so you can get revenge.

<p id=12295><form>maruy</form> <xr>= <sc>miruy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12296><form>marúya</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to a variety of sweets, all of which are formed into rounded patties and fried: <number>1</number> made of ground rice. <number>2</number> made of sliced bananas. (<xr>= <sc>bangdaybangday</sc></xr>). <number>3</number> made of shredded sweet potatoes (<xr>= <sc>bitsubitsu</sc></xr>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make <ix>marúya</ix>.

<p id=12297><form>maryánas</form> <xr>= <sc>biyatilis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12298><form>Maryúsip</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>hisusmaryusip</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12299><form>*mas</form> <number>1</number> <formx>{&mdash;|mas} <r>[adj.]</r></formx> <tr>more</tr> [adj.]. <i>Ang ákung balay mas gamay sa imúha,</i> My house is smaller than your house. <i>Mas maáyu nga pritúhun ni kay sa tanukun,</i> It is much better to fry this than to boil it. <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;|mas} báli</formx> it is better to [do]. <i>Mas báli ihátag kay sa hulaman nga dílì iúlì,</i> I would rather give s.t. away than lend it and not get it back.

<p id=12300><form>mása<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> mix solids with a little liquid. <i>Kinsay mumása sa simintu?</i> Who&apos;ll mix the cement? <i>Masáha na nang himúung dúnat,</i> Mix the dough for the doughnuts now. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> dough or other mixture of solids with water. <number>2</number> proportions, things that make up a <pb n=674>mixture. <i>Ang másang gigámit tris dus,</i> They use a mixture in proportions of three to two. <form>masahan</form> <pos>n</pos> place to mix dough or similar mixtures.

<p id=12301><form>mása<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the masses, common people. <form>{&mdash;|mása} kumun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> common masses. <number>2</number> property owned in common by heirs.

<p id=12302><form>masáhi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>massage</tr>. <i>Masahían ta nang ímung páang gipamaúlan,</i> Let&apos;s massage your sore legs. <pos>n</pos> <tr>massage</tr>. <form>{-sta|masahista}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>masseur</tr>, <tr>masseuse</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be, become a masseur.

<p id=12303><form>masámung</form> <pos>n</pos> a man who is married into one&apos;s immediate family&mdash;i.e., is married to one&apos;s sister or daughter. <i>Masámung si Íki námù kay naminyù siyang Maríyang ákung manghud. Masámung sad siya sa ákung ginikánan,</i> Eke is a <ix>masámung</ix> to us because he married my sister Maria. He&apos;s also my parents&apos; <ix>masámung</ix>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> get as a son- or brother-in-law; be, become this relation.

<p id=12304><form>másang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23; c1]</itype> hit s.t. directly with full impact. <i>Mimásang sa ákung nawung ang íyang kúmù,</i> His fist smashed into my face. <i>Imásang (masánga) ang garapun sa pusti,</i> Smash the glass jar against the post.

<p id=12305><form>masariyal</form> <xr>= <sc>máha riyal</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>máha</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12306><form>mási</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. sweet made from mashed taro or ground sticky rice formed into balls with peanuts. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make <ix>mási</ix>.

<p id=12307><form>*masig<sub>1</sub></form> <form>{&mdash;|masig} ka <r>[<ix>noun</ix>]</r></form> each of two or more in a group. <i>Nahiyusan ang masig ka ligid,</i> All of the wheels had a flat tire. <i>Nagdápat ang ílang masig ka áping,</i> Their two cheeks touched.

<p id=12308><form>masig<sub>2</sub></form> short for <ix>maskin ug</ix>. <ix>See</ix> <xr><sc>bísan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12309><form>masimasi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> hurry s.o. to work. <i>Ug náay magmasimasi nátug patrabáhu, dì na hinúun tang katunung,</i> We make mistakes if we are always pressed to hurry our work. <i>Dílì kaáyu haum ang sinínà kay gimasimasi (gimasimasihan) man ang sastri ug pahuman,</i> The dress does not fit well because the dressmaker was pressed to finish it hurriedly. <form>{ka-|kamasimasi}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be pressed to work in a frenzy. <i>Magkamasimasi mig panlútù basta pyista, mau nga dì mi makalingawlíngaw,</i> We get so busy cooking during fiestas we can&apos;t enjoy ourselves.

<p id=12310><form>masimási</form> <pos>n</pos> mashi-mashi, a k.o. dance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> dance the mashi-mashi.

<p id=12311><form>masin-gan</form> <xr>= <sc>masinggan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12312><form>masinggan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>machine gun</tr>. <number>2</number> k.o. rapid-firing bamboo popgun. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> shoot with a machine gun. <form>{-in-|minasinggan}</form> <pos>a</pos> like a machine gun. <i>Kasábang minasinggan,</i> Scolding like a burst of machine gun fire.

<p id=12313><form>masítas</form> <pos>n</pos> small ornamental plants, a flower pot with a plant in it. <form>{&mdash;|masítas} sa ingkantu</form> <xr>= <sc>lukdulukdu</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain ornamental plants. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|masitasan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>flower pot</tr>. <form>masitíra</form> <pos>n</pos> flower pot.

<p id=12314><form>masiyar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> offer, quote a price in selling. <i>Ug mumasiyar siya sa kálù ug písus, palita,</i> If he offers the hat for a peso, buy it. <number>2</number> bet money on s.t. <i>Áning manúka mumasiyar ku ug mil písus,</i> On this cock I will bet a thousand pesos. <form>masyáda</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the amount placed as bet. <i>Gatus ang ákung masyáda apan sitinta ray gidáwat,</i> I wanted to bet one hundred, but they only accepted seventy. <number>2</number> total amount of money bet by both sides. <number>3</number> fee paid in playing a set of bowling, tennis, pingpong, and the like. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> pay this fee. <form>masyadur</form> <pos>n</pos> the person in cockfighting who calls out bets offered and matches them with other bets.

<p id=12315><form>maskáda</form> <pos>n</pos> bits of tobacco for chewing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> chew tobacco.

<p id=12316><form>maskara</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mask</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> wear a mask.

<p id=12317><form>maski, maskin</form> <xr>= <sc>bísan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12318><form>maskipap, maskipaps</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. popular dance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do this dance.

<p id=12319><form>maskirid bul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>masquerade ball</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> hold a masquerade ball.

<p id=12320><form>maskuláda</form> <xr>= <sc>muskuládu</sc></xr> (female).

<p id=12321><form>maskuládu</form> <xr>= <sc>muskuládu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12322><form>masputítu, masputítus</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. dance, the mashed potatoes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do this dance.

<p id=12323><form>*mastir</form> <form>{&mdash;|mastir} kátir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>master cutter</tr> of a tailoring shop. <form>{&mdash;|mastir} ki</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>master key</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|mastir} mayind</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mastermind</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> be the mastermind. <i>Pulis ang nagmastirmayind sa túlis,</i> A cop masterminded the robbery.

<p id=12324><form>masturbisyun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. dance wherein both hands are alternately used as if masturbating. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do the masturbation dance.

<p id=12325><form>másu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sledge hammer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> do s.t. with, make into a sledge hammer.

<p id=12326><form>mas-uk</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> <tr>die</tr>, be <tr>killed</tr>. <i>Nakrás ang ayruplánu ug namas-uk ang pilútu,</i> The plane crashed and the pilot got killed.

<p id=12327><form>masun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>freemason</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> become a freemason.

<p id=12328><form>masuy</form> <pos>n</pos> brand of mild liquor taken for medicinal purposes or for pleasure. <form>bínu uy {&mdash;|masuy}</form> <xr>= <sc>masuy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12329><form>masyáda</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>masiyar</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12330><form>masyádu</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> being too much of s.t. <i>Kini si Tunyu masyádu na, dúgayng mukáun ug dì pa manghúgas sa plátu,</i> This Tonio is too much; he eats late and doesn&apos;t even do the dishes. <number>2</number> how very. <i>Masyádu kamahal!</i> How very expensive!

<p id=12331><form>masyadur</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>masiyar</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12332><form>masyaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>yellow corn</tr>.

<pb n=675>

<p id=12333><form>mat</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mat</tr> for gymnastics.

<p id=12334><form>mát</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>math</tr>, a subject in school.

<p id=12335><form>mata</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>eyes</tr>. <i>Nagluhang mga mata,</i> Eyes filled with tears. <number>1a</number> <formx>tawutáwu sa {&mdash;|mata}</formx> the <tr>pupil</tr> of the eyes. <number>2</number> <tr>eyeglasses</tr>. <i>Nangítà ku sa ákung mata,</i> I&apos;m looking for my glasses. <number>3</number> eyelets in the shoes. <number>4</number> any growth or structure in some way similar to the eyes. <formx>{&mdash;|mata} sa báling</formx> mesh of the net. <formx>{&mdash;|mata} sa baskit</formx> mesh of the basket. <formx>{&mdash;|mata} sa lubi</formx> two spots in the coconut shell which resemble human eyes. <formx>{&mdash;|mata} sa gábi</formx> a button-like outgrowth on the flesh of the taro rootstock. <formx>{&mdash;|mata} sa, ug lumban</formx> an eye-like operculum found in turban shells. <formx>{&mdash;|mata} sa pinya</formx> eyes of the pineapple, the hollow cavity found on the surface of the flesh of the pineapple fruit which contains seeds. <form>{-g|matag} tikì</form> <pos>n</pos> small boil that has come to a head. <number>5</number> <formx>{&mdash;|mata} sa ulitáwu (dalága)</formx> expression used when playing with children to make them blink their eyes. <number>6</number> <xr>= <sc>ay<sub>4</sub></sc>.</xr> <number>7</number> <formx>{-mbáka|matambáka}</formx> <xr>= <sc>mat-an</sc>, <ix>5</ix></xr> (lit. cow-eyes). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> hit in the eye. <i>Mat-a pag-igù ang mantágà,</i> Hit the giant octopus on the eyes. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a2b23]</itype> wake up, be awake. <i>Ngánung mimata ka mag sayu?</i> Why did you wake up early? <i>Nagmata ka na ba?</i> Are you awake now? <number>2a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|mata} ug buntag</formx> <itype>[A13]</itype> be unaware of what&apos;s going on (lit. be awake only in the morning). <i>Nagmata ka lag buntag sa gibúhat sa ímung asáwa,</i> You don&apos;t seem to know what&apos;s going on with your wife. <number>2b</number> <formx>himat-an, hikatulgan</formx> have s.t. constantly in one&apos;s mind, awake or asleep. <i>Himat-an hikatulgan ku ang ákung prublíma,</i> I am constantly thinking about my problem, day and night. <number>3</number> <itype>[b8]</itype> for a child to become aware of his surroundings. <i>Ang íyang namat-an nga pagmatutù mau ang kang Iyù Sinun,</i> The first parent he ever knew was Uncle Senon. <number>3a</number> be born s.w. (lit. aware of light). <i>Kining dapíta ang ákung namat-ag maháyag,</i> This is the place I was born. <number>4</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> for fats to liquify. <i>Mumata ang mantíkà kun inítun,</i> The lard will liquify when you heat it. <form>{&mdash;|mata} pubri</form> <pos>a</pos> looking down upon others as not one&apos;s equal. <i>Mata pubri kaáyu. Dì mutagad sa mga kabus,</i> She looks down on others and pays no attention to the poor. <form>{(&larr;)|máta}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A2; a12]</itype> estimate a measurement by inspection. <i>Wà nay kinahanglan ug pulgadíra, matáun na lang,</i> You don&apos;t need a measuring stick. You can estimate it just by inspection. <number>1a</number> look for s.t. simply with the eyes. <i>Matáun lang ang imbaw,</i> You can find clams by just looking at the water. <number>2</number> <itype>[AC; a1]</itype> say frankly, tell face to face. <i>Nagkamáta ang duha ka kandidátu sa platapurma,</i> The two candidates had it out face to face on the platform. <i>Matáhun tikag sulti,</i> I&apos;ll talk to you frankly. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for bivalves to be active, as manifested by their being open or bubbling. <i>Magmáta na gáning mga imbaw sayun ra pagtultul,</i> When the clams are active it is easy to locate them. <form>matamata</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> <number>1</number> see an illusion, mirage. <i>Gimatamata ug busay ang táwu sa disyirtu,</i> The man in the desert saw a mirage, a waterfall. <number>2</number> be unable to choose or decide wisely because of bedazzlement. <i>Wà giyud ku kapílì. Gimatamata ku sa kadaghang palítun,</i> I wasn&apos;t able to choose because there were so many beautiful things to buy. <form>matamáta</form> <xr>= <sc>máta</sc>, <i>v1.</i></xr> <form>{hig-|higmata}/{hag-|hagmata}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <number>1</number> wake up accidentally. <i>Nahigmata ku kay sábà,</i> I woke up because it was so noisy. <number>2</number> become aware of s.t. <i>Karun pa ku mahigmata sa íyang kabangis,</i> For the first time I became aware of what a terrible person he was. <form>mat-an</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having eyes or an eye-like configuration. <number>2</number> artful, wily, cunning. <i>Ang mga Insik mat-an kaáyu sa nigusyu,</i> Chinese are very shrewd in business. <number>3</number> <formx>mat-ay balíli, dunggánay gabíi</formx> the walls have ears. (Lit. the grass has eyes and the night has ears.) <i>Hináya ang inyung sulti kay mat-an ra bay balíli ug dunggánay gabíi,</i> Talk quietly because the walls have ears. <number>4</number> <formx>mat-an pa sa pinya</formx> <pos>a</pos> wily, cunning (having more eyes than a pineapple). <i>Dì ka kaílad ni Dyú kay mat-an pa nà sa pinya,</i> You can&apos;t fool Joe. He is very alert. <pos>n</pos> k.o. fish with huge eyes: <bio>Selar crumenophthalmos</bio>. <form>{pa&N;-|pangmata}</form> <xr>= <sc>ay<sub>4</sub></sc>.</xr> <form>{tagi-|tagimata}, {tagli-|taglimata}, {tagu-|tagumata}</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. eye infection. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> get this infection.

<p id=12336><form>matáda</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> divide the meat into portions. <number>2</number> <itype>[c16]</itype> sell meat by the portion. <form>{-in-|minatáda}</form> <xr>= <sc>matáda</sc>, <i>v2.</i></xr>

<p id=12337><form>matadíra</form> <xr>= <sc>matadíru</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=12338><form>matadíru<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>butcher</tr>, one who slaughters and cuts up animals. <number>2</number> butcher who sells meat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a]</itype> work as a butcher.

<p id=12339><form>matadíru<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>clever</tr>, skillfully shrewd in deception and trickery. <i>Ayawg kumpiyansahi nang tawhána kay matadíru kaáyu nà sa baráha,</i> Don&apos;t trust that man because he&apos;s very cunning in card games. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> become <tr>cunning</tr>.

<p id=12340><form>matadur</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>matadíru</sc><sub>1, 2</sub>.</xr> <number>2</number> <tr>matador</tr>. <number>3</number> <tr>killer</tr>, <tr>fierce</tr>. <i>Manuk nga matadur,</i> A killer gamecock. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be, become a matador.

<p id=12341><form>matag</form> <number>1a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|matag} <r>[<ix>word referring to time or day</ix>]</r></formx> <tr>every</tr>. <i>Bisitáhan ku níya matag adlaw,</i> He visits me every day. <number>1b</number> <formx>{&mdash;|matag} <r>[<ix>verb base</ix>]</r></formx> every time [so-and-so] is done. <i>Usa ka bandihádu ang <pb n=676>mahurut níya matag káun,</i> Each time he ate he consumed a platter of rice. <form>{&mdash;|matag} karun ug unyà</form> every now and then. <i>Tan-áwa ang linat-an matag karun ug unyà,</i> Take a look at the stew every now and then. <form>{&mdash;|matag} usa <r>[<ix>dat.</ix>]</r></form> each and every one of [dat.]. <i>Matag usa níla muámut ug singku písus,</i> Each and every one of them will contribute five pesos.

<p id=12342><form>matalak-un, matak-ánun</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>taka</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12343><form>matang<sub>1</sub></form> humorous euphemism for <xr><sc>matay</sc></xr>, exclamation.

<p id=12344><form>matang<sub>2</sub>, mátang</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>kind</tr>. <i>Ipiktíbu kining matánga sa midisína,</i> This k.o. medicine is effective. <i>Makasayaw siya sa tanang mátang sa tugtug,</i> She can dance to all kinds of music. <form>{ka-(&larr;)|kamátang}</form> <pos>a</pos> of the same kind, alike. <i>Túa ra ang íyang kamátang nga mga mugbug lupad,</i> That&apos;s where you find her k.o. people, prostitutes.

<p id=12345><form>matansa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>butcher</tr> an animal, <tr>slaughter</tr> it or cut it up. <pos>n</pos> fee paid to the market authority for approval to slaughter animals.

<p id=12346><form>matansíra, matansíru</form> <xr>= <sc>matadíra</sc></xr>, <xr><sc>matadíru</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12347><form>matay</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126; b3(1)4(1)c5]</itype> <tr>die</tr>. <i>Namatay si Simyun sa tísis,</i> Simeon died of tuberculosis. <i>Sakit nga makamatay,</i> A disease that kills. <i>Katigúlang ang íyang namatyan (gikamatyan),</i> He died of old age. <i>Namatyan silag bag-ung inanak,</i> They lost a newly-born child. <i>Ikamatay nákù ang ímung pagbíyà,</i> If you leave me I will die. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> stop functioning. <i>Namatay ang rilu,</i> The watch stopped. <i>Namatay ang makina taliw&amacrgra; sa lawud,</i> The engine went dead in the middle of the sea. <i>Namatay ang sugà pagbutu sa pyús,</i> The light went out when the fuse blew. <number>2a</number> <itype>[B12]</itype> for the moon to be in its invisible phase. <ix>exclamation</ix> <number>1</number> of displeasure. <i>Matay! Kabahù,</i> Jesus! What a smell! <i>Matayng mahála,</i> How expensive it is! <number>2</number> swearing as to the truth of s.t. <i>Matay! Ug wà pa ka, patay tà ku run,</i> Believe me. If it hadn&apos;t been for you, I&apos;d be dead now. <i>Tinúud lagi nà. Matay pa,</i> It&apos;s true, so help me God. <form>{ka-(&larr;)|kamátay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C2]</itype> for people to be killing each other. <i>Nagkamátay lang kanúnay ang mga nanagkaáway didtu sa Byitnam,</i> There is a lot of killing in this war in Vietnam. <pos>n</pos> mass death, killing on a vast scale. <i>Mahitabù ang kamátay tungud sa típus,</i> Typhus can mean mass death. <form>{paka-|pakamatay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> <number>1</number> die for a cause. <i>Gipakamatyan níya ang yútang natawhan,</i> He gave his life for his country. <number>1a</number> commit suicide. <i>Magpakamatay siya kun mapakyas,</i> He will kill himself if he fails. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> allow s.o. to die. <i>Pakamatyun lang mi ninyu sa gútum?</i> Will you let us die of hunger? <number>3</number> <itype>[b6]</itype> allow dirt to get deeply engrained. <i>Ang linadlad nga pakamatyan sa sabun kúling maputì,</i> If you bleach clothes under the sun without sprinkling (lit. allow the soap to die in the bleaching), it will never get white. <form>{panga-(&larr;)|pangamátay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> die (plural). <i>Nangamátay ang ákung mga manuk,</i> My chickens died. <form>sa tanang {nanga-|nangamátay}</form> more [so-and-so] than anyone else (said of bad traits). <i>Tapulan ka sa tanang nangamátay,</i> You&apos;re the laziest of the lazy. <form>{hi-un|himatayun} nga búlan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>last quarter</tr>. <form>bispiras sa {hi-un|himatayun}</form> the last day the moon can be seen before the new moon (<ix>patay ang búwan</ix>). <form>himalatyun</form> <pos>a</pos> dying. <i>Lúya na kaáyu ang himatyun níyang inahan,</i> His dying mother is already very weak. <i>Himatyun na ang sugà kay wà nay gás,</i> The lamp is dying down because the kerosene is all gone. <form>{-in-|minatay}</form> <pos>n</pos> human <tr>corpse</tr>. <form>adlaw sa {&mdash;|minatay}</form> <tr>All Souls&apos; Day</tr>. <form>{-in-(&larr;)|minátay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3c]</itype> cry loudly, <tr>wail</tr>, usually over the dead. <i>Ngánung nagminátay ka man, namatyan ka?</i> Why are you wailing so loud? Did s.o. die? <pos>n</pos> loud <tr>wailing</tr>. <form>{ka-|kamatay}</form> expression of strong <tr>anger</tr> or <tr>disgust</tr>. <i>Kamatay, wà giyud masúd ang tris dà, Damn!</i> The number three ball didn&apos;t go into the pocket! <form>kalamatyan, kinamatyan</form> <pos>n</pos> a fatal spot in the body. <i>Kalamatyan ang kasingkásing,</i> The heart is a fatal spot in the body. <form>{ka-un(&rarr;)|kamatayun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>death</tr>. <i>Kalit nga kamatáyun,</i> <tr>Sudden death</tr>. <form>{kina-un|kinamatayun}</form> <pos>a</pos> as if one is about to die. <i>Ngánung kinamatyun nang ímung trabáhu? Wà na bay ugma?</i> Why are you working as if you were going to die? Is there going to be no tomorrow? <form>{mag-l-(&larr;)|magmalátay}</form> <pos>n</pos> about to die. <i>Lawus na ang dáhun sa mangga kay magmalátay man,</i> The leaves on the mango tree are withering because they are dying. &dagger;

<p id=12348><form>máti</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>checkmate</tr> in chess. <i>Bantayi ang hárì kay matíhun tikaw,</i> Watch the king because I&apos;m going to checkmate you. <pos>n</pos> <tr>checkmate</tr>.

<p id=12349><form>matikmátik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> do s.t. with careful reckoning and planning. <i>Aku lay magmatikmátik ug paági nga mabáwì ang yútà,</i> I will find means to get the lot back. <i>Matikmatíka pag-áyu arun dì ka maalkansi,</i> Figure it carefully so you don&apos;t lose.

<p id=12350><form>matikud</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> <tr>notice</tr>, <tr>become aware of</tr> s.t. <i>Karun pa aku makamatikud sa dakù kung sayup,</i> I just realized what a big mistake I had made. <i>Wà ku mamatikdi ang ímung pag-abut,</i> I didn&apos;t notice your arrival.

<p id=12351><form>matimáti</form> <tr>wait</tr> for a while. <i>Matimáti úsà kay náa pay átung paabútun,</i> Wait awhile. We are expecting some more people to come. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> finish slowly. <i>Átù lang ning matimatíhun <pb n=677>(imatimáti) pagkáun arun dúgay mahurut,</i> Let us eat it slowly so it can last a little longer. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> make do with less equipment, or give s.t. less attention, disregarding the quality of the work. <i>Matimatíhun ku lang nig kinamut ang drúwing bísag way rúlir,</i> I&apos;ll just make a rough drawing by hand because there is no ruler.

<p id=12352><form>matimátiks</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mathematics</tr>.

<p id=12353><form>mating</form> humorous euphemism for <xr><sc>matay</sc></xr>, exclamation of displeasure. <i>Mating bug-áta ning ákung dá!</i> My! How heavy this is!

<p id=12354><form>matiriyal<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> particle or trace of truth in feelings and emotion. <i>May matiriyal sa katinuúran ang íyang púlung,</i> His words have some particles of truth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for feelings and emotions to start developing. <i>Mimatiriyal ang íyang pagdúda dihang kanúnay nang higabin-ag paúlì ang bána,</i> She developed suspicions when her husband started always coming home late nights. <i>Nakamatiriyal ang gugma sa ílang duha ka kasingkásing,</i> Love sprouted in their hearts.

<p id=12355><form>matiriyal<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> person&apos;s capability for a certain position. <i>Maáyu siyang matiriyal pagkaprisidinti,</i> He is a good presidential timber.

<p id=12356><form>matirniti</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>maternity clinic</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>maternity dress</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; c16]</itype> wear, make a maternity dress. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> wind up in the maternity clinic&mdash;i.e. have a baby out of wedlock. <i>Mamatirniti ka giyung bayhána kag mag-unauna ka sa mga láki,</i> You&apos;ll end up in a maternity clinic if you are forward with men. <form>{&mdash;|matirniti} lib</form> <tr>maternity leave</tr>.

<p id=12357><form>matiryális</form> <pos>n</pos> materials used for constructing. <form>{&mdash;|matiryális} pwirtis</form> <number>1</number> durable materials for construction. <number>2</number> for a woman to be well-built. <i>Maáyung pangasaw-un kay matiryális pwirtis,</i> She&apos;s a good prospect because she is well built.

<p id=12358><form>matmat<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> <tr>unravel</tr>, undo s.t. all tangled. <i>Aku ray mumatmat sa hílu nga nagubut,</i> I&apos;ll unravel the tangled thread. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> recount a story, events. <i>Ákung imatmat sa husgádu ang nahitabù,</i> I&apos;ll tell the judge what happened.

<p id=12359><form>matmat<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>alimatmat</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12360><form>matngà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> be hit full in the area intended with a big impact. <i>Namatngà pagkaigù ang langgam sa batu,</i> The stone hit the bird squarely. <pos>a</pos> hit square. <i>Matngà giyud pagkaigù ang lansang nga gimartilyu,</i> He hit the nail square on the head.

<p id=12361><form>matngun</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> take care of by observing precautions, handle carefully. <i>Magmatngun ka arun dì ka madisgrasya,</i> Be careful so you don&apos;t meet an accident. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> pay attention, heed. <i>Wà mu magmatngun sa ákung tambag, ha?</i> You didn&apos;t heed my advice, did you? <number>3</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> be aware of, realize. <i>Nakamatngun siya nga walà na ang íyang pitáka,</i> He noticed that his wallet was gone. <i>Namatngunan na níya nga walà diay salà ang bátà,</i> He has just realized that the child was innocent. <form>{&mdash;|matngun} ug buut</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b8]</itype> be aware of, reach the age of reason. <i>Dinhi na ku ning baláya sukad ku makamatngun ug buut,</i> I have lived in this house since I saw light. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> regain consciousness. <i>Didtu na siya makamatngun ug buut sa uspital,</i> He regained consciousness in the hospital. <form>{pahi-|pahimatngun}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>advise</tr> and <tr>admonish</tr>. <i>Pahitmangúni siya báhin sa íyang pag-inum,</i> Advise him about his drinking. <pos>n</pos> <tr>admonishment</tr>. <form>{kahi-|kahimatngun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>awareness</tr> of s.t.

<p id=12362><form>matráka</form> <pos>n</pos> grager, used as a noisemaker in the procession on Good Friday. <form>matrakáhun ug bàbà</form> talking like a machine gun. <i>Báhu ning tabian matrakáhun ug bàbà,</i> This gossip! Her mouth goes like a machine gun.

<p id=12363><form>matrídu</form> <xr>= <sc>matríru</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12364><form>matrikula</form> <pos>n</pos> school fees. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> pay <tr>tuition</tr>.

<p id=12365><form>matrimunyal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>double bed</tr>.

<p id=12366><form>matríra</form> <xr>= <sc>matríru</sc> (female).</xr>

<p id=12367><form>matríru</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>wise</tr> to the ways of the world. <i>Dì na nà siya matuntu kay matríru,</i> You can&apos;t pull a fast one on him. He&apos;s wise to the ways of the world. <number>2</number> <tr>wise</tr>, <tr>tricky</tr>. <i>Matríru ang mga matansíru kay dílì hustu ang timbangan,</i> The meat sellers are very tricky because the scales are not honest. <number>3</number> for game to be shy and not easily approached by persons. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> be, become wise to the ways of the world or tricky.

<p id=12368><form>matris<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>uterus</tr>.

<p id=12369><form>matris<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mattress</tr>.

<p id=12370><form>matrúna</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the head <tr>maid</tr> in a wealthy household, the one in charge of running the household. <number>2</number> <tr>housemother</tr> of a women&apos;s dormitory or boarding house. <pos>a</pos> <tr>matronly-looking</tr>, old, and slightly stout. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B136; c16]</itype> be, become a house mother or head maid; get to be <tr>matronly</tr> in appearance.

<p id=12371><form>mats</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c6]</itype> for wearing apparel to match. <i>Mimats ang ímung sapátus sa pitáka,</i> Your shoes match your purse.

<p id=12372><form>matsa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> do s.t. in a relaxed and unhurried manner. <i>Ayaw matsaha (imatsa) nang ímung linaktan ug sugúun ka,</i> Don&apos;t take it so slow when you are told to do s.t.

<p id=12373><form>matsing<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> small monkey. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> like a monkey in appearance. <number>2</number> <tr>mischievous</tr>. <i>Matsing kaáyu ning batáa u, lukup lag panúngug sa uban,</i> This child is mischievous. He keeps on teasing the others. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B145]</itype> look ugly <pb n=678>like a monkey. <i>Nagmatsing lang nang dagway mu,</i> You have a monkey&apos;s face.

<p id=12374><form>matsing<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> matching type exam.

<p id=12375><form>matsuy</form> humorous euphemism for <xr><sc>matay</sc></xr>, exclamation of displeasure. <i>Matsuy ning batáa, langas kaáyu,</i> My! What a nuisance this child is.

<p id=12376><form>mátud <r>[<i>gen.</i>]</r></form> according to what [so-and-so] says. <i>Mátud níya, maáyu kanang klási,</i> According to him that is a good kind. <i>&lsquo;Adtu na ta,&rsquo; mátud níya,</i> He said, &lsquo;Let&apos;s go.&rsquo;

<p id=12377><form>matulì</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <ix>balat</ix> (sea cucumber).

<p id=12378><form>matúmat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[C; bc3]</itype> engage in a friendly, casual chat. <i>Dì ku makigmatúmat nímug dúgay kay nagdalì ku,</i> I can&apos;t chat with you for long because I&apos;m in a hurry.

<p id=12379><form>matun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ruffian</tr>, <tr>tough guy</tr>. <i>Daghang istambay nga matun sa piyir,</i> There are many ruffians hanging around at the pier. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B2; b6]</itype> be, become a tough guy.

<p id=12380><form>matutù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> take care of a child. <i>Kinsay nagmatutù sa ímung anak samtang walà ka?</i> Who took care of your child when you were gone? <number>2</number> <tr>rear</tr>, <tr>bring up</tr>. <i>Akuy nagmatutù kaníla hangtud sa ílang pagkaulitáwu,</i> I reared the boys until they were teen-agers. <number>2a</number> <itype>[A; b5c]</itype> inculcate with s.t. <i>Matutua (matutui) ang mga tinun-an sa nasyunalismu,</i> Teach the pupils nationalism. <number>3</number> nurture a feeling. <i>May gimatutù siyang pagdumut álang kanákù,</i> He is nursing a grudge against me. <pos>n</pos> <tr>care</tr>, <tr>guidance</tr>. <i>Matutù sa inahan,</i> Mother&apos;s guidance.

<p id=12381><form>matyag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12b2]</itype> <tr>observe</tr>, watch to <tr>see</tr>. <i>Siyay mumatyag sa kamaisan nga dì kan-un sa mga amù,</i> He will watch the cornfield to see if the monkeys are getting at it. <i>Nakamatyag ka nag táwung giupirahan?</i> Have you ever watched a person being operated on? <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>batyag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12382><form>matyanak</form> <xr>= <sc>mantiyának</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12383><form>mau</form> <ix>short forms</ix>: <bx>mu, maw</bx> is, are, was, were. <number>1a</number> preceding subject in sentences with nominal predicates. <i>Kadtung íyang gisulti mau ang nakapalágut nákù,</i> What he said was what angered me. <i>Ang kangihit sa tambal muy nakapataas sa prisyu,</i> The scarcity of medicine is what made prices high. <number>1b</number> <ix>with no subject:</ix> it&apos;s [predicate] which is the one. <i>Nagtúu giyud aku nga kanà mau,</i> I believe that that is the one. <i>Ug mau kanà, ang útang maimpas sunud búlan,</i> If that is the case, the debt will be paid off next month. <i>Ang ímung tubag dílì mau,</i> Your answer is not right. <form>{&mdash;|mau} bítaw</form> that is so. <i>Kadakung trabáhu nu? Mau bítaw,</i> What a big job, isn&apos;t it? It certainly is! <form>{&mdash;|mau} kaáyu</form> the very one. <i>Mau ni? Mau kaáyu,</i> Is this the one? Yes it is the very one. <form>{&mdash;|mau} gayud</form> that is the way it is. <i>Mau giyud nà siya ug mahubug,</i> That is the way he is when drunk. <form>{&mdash;|mau} gihápun</form> it&apos;s (it was) as usual. <i>Ang atup sa ámung balay mau gihápun, nípà,</i> The roof of our house is the usual kind&mdash;of palm thatch. <form>{&mdash;|mau} lang</form> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>lámang</sc>, <ix>2c1</ix>.</xr> <form>{&mdash;|mau} kini ug kini, {&mdash;|mau} kanà ug kanà</form> <ix>in giving excuses, reasons or alibis:</ix> it is because of this, because of that. <number>1c</number> <ix>in response to a question as to the identification of s.t.:</ix> yes, it is the one. <i>Mau ba ni ang imúha? Dílì mau,</i> Is this yours? No, that is not the one. <i>Si Pidru na ba nà? Mau na,</i> Is that Peter now? It&apos;s him all right. <number>1d</number> yes, that is the case, said esp. in response to negative comments. <i>&lsquo;Kusug siyang manghulam mu rag kamaung muúlì.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Mau,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;She likes to borrow things as if she knew enough to return them (which she doesn&apos;t).&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Yes, that is so.&rsquo; <number>1e</number> <formx>{&mdash;|mau} nang, {&mdash;|mau} na sa ginháwang <r>[<ix>verb</ix>]</r></formx> doing one&apos;s best, tiring oneself out doing [verb]. <i>Mau na nga pangítà nákù, (<r>or</r> mau na sa ginháwa nákung pangítà) ug sápì apan kamu nagsígi lang ug ínum,</i> I wear myself out earning money, and all you do is drink. <number>1f</number> <formx>{&mdash;|mau} ra pud núun</formx> that&apos;s the only thing that&apos;s wrong with it. <i>&lsquo;Dì man pasulayan sa dì pa mapalit.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Mau ra pud núun,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;It&apos;s good, but you can&apos;t try it out before you buy it.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;That&apos;s the only thing that is wrong with it.&rsquo; <number>1g</number> <formx>{-y|mauy} (ang) pag-<r>[<ix>verb</ix>]</r>, i-<r>[<ix>verb</ix>]</r></formx> is the time [so-and-so] happens. <i>Mauy ipanangpit níya manday human na,</i> He calls you after he&apos;s finished eating. <i>Pag-adtu níya mau say pag-adtu nákù,</i> When he went was the time I went, too. <number>1g1</number> <formx>{&mdash;|mau} pa</formx> <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>pa-</sc>, <i>2e, 8b.</i></xr> <number>1h</number> <formx>{&mdash;|mau} nga <r>[<ix>noun</ix>]</r></formx> the aforementioned, said. <i>Wà ku makaila sa maung táwu,</i> I don&apos;t know that particular person. <number>1i</number> <formx>{&mdash;|mau} pay ... {&mdash;|mau} pay</formx> even though [such-and-such] is the case, [so-and-so] is true of the same person anyway. <i>Mu pay mangáyù mu pay mangísug,</i> He asks a favor, and yet he has the nerve to get angry. <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;|mau} nga <r>[<ix>sentence</ix>]</r></formx> therefore, consequently. <i>Sígi kung praktis, mau nà nga maáyu kung mubayli,</i> I always practice. That&apos;s why I dance well. <i>Sa ámù kanúnay nga mangísug si Máma. Mau gánì nga dílì layhang mupaúlì si Pápa,</i> Mother is always angry at home. That is why even Dad doesn&apos;t like to go home. <number>3</number> <formx>{&mdash;|mau} ra</formx> no more, that&apos;s all. <i>&lsquo;Adúna pay láin?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Mau ra,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Is there any more?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;That&apos;s all there is.&rsquo; <number>3a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|mau} ra nga</formx> the same. <i>Mau rang klasíha nà. Purus tagdiyis,</i> Those are of the same class. They are all ten cents apiece. <number>4</number> <formx>{&mdash;|mau} ra ug</formx> <number>4a</number> it seems. <i>Mu rag láin nà,</i> It seems to be a different one. <pb n=679><number>4b</number> rather. <i>Mu rag giuhaw ku,</i> I am rather thirsty. <i>Ang báhù dílì mangga, mau rag nangkà hinúun,</i> The smell is not that of the mango, it is rather like that of the jackfruit. <i>Mau ra ug nahuwasan na ku sa ákung kakulbà,</i> I feel a bit relieved from my fright. <number>4c</number> as if [so-and-so] were the case. <i>Nagpaduludiskursu siya mu rag si kinsa,</i> He took it upon himself to give a speech as though he were s.o. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> turn out to be correct. <i>Gisulaysuláyan kug duut ang usa sa mga timbri, namau bayà,</i> I tried pressing one of the buttons at random. It happened to be the right one. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> be the same. <i>Bísan ug atbang ta sa pulitika magmau lang gihápun ang átung pagbinatiay,</i> Though we are opponents in politics, our feelings towards each other are still the same. <form>{ka-|kamau}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b8]</itype> know how to do s.t. <i>Makamau kang musulat?</i> Do you know how to write? <i>Wà kuy nakamauhan,</i> I don&apos;t know anything. <form>{di-(&larr;)|dimáu}</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>dimáu</sc>.</xr> <form>{paka-|pakamau}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> pretend, consider s.t. as right or the one. <i>Ngánung pakamauhun man nímu nga ang ákù man ni?</i> Why do you insist this is the very one, when it is mine? <form>maumáu</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> make temporary repairs by just trying things out, make do with s.t. less than what is really needed. <i>Ug maáyu kang mumaumáu ug áyu, mudágan giyud nang mutúra,</i> If you are good at fiddling around with your motorcycle, at least it will run. <number>2</number> fabricate, make s.t. not real. <i>Sa mga kumunista ang Diyus usa ka maumáu,</i> To the communists, God is a figment of man&apos;s imagination. <form>maumáu na sa ginháwa</form> <xr>= <sc>mau</sc></xr>, <i>1e.</i>

<p id=12384><form>ma-un(&larr;)</form> affix added to verbs and adjectives to form adjectives which mean &lsquo;having the characteristic of doing or becoming [so-and-so]&rsquo;. <i>Malipáyun,</i> <tr>Happy</tr>. <i>Maluyáhung tíngug,</i> In a weak voice. <i>Mapangilyupúung naghangyù sa Prisidinti nga luwasun ang íyang anak,</i> With pleas she implored the President to spare her son. <i>Mapasalígung balità,</i> Reassuring news. <i>Matuhùtuhúun,</i> <tr>Gullible</tr>, <tr>superstitious</tr>.

<p id=12385><form>maung</form> <pos>n</pos> blue <tr>denim</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> wear blue denim.

<p id=12386><form>mauraúra</form> somewhat similar. <i>Ang ibid mauraúra sa halu ug hitsúra, gáling may sílik lang sa líug,</i> The agamid lizard is somewhat similar to the monitor lizard, only it has a crest on its neck.

<p id=12387><form>maut</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>hypocrite</tr>, one who puts up a praiseworthy, but completely false front. <i>Pagkamaut bayhána, manugilun nga hingatag piru labihan diayng hakúga,</i> What a hypocrite that woman is. She claims to be generous but actually she is a terrible tightwad. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> be, become a hypocrite. <form>{-in-|minaut}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>hypocritical</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> act hypocritically. <i>Ayawg minaut kay nasáyud mi sa ímung pagkatáwu,</i> Don&apos;t be hypocritical. We know what you are.

<p id=12388><form>máut</form> (from <ix>daut</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>not good</tr>, <tr>substandard</tr> in quality. <i>Máut ning ripridyiritúra kay dì muayis,</i> This refrigerator is no good because it won&apos;t produce ice. <number>2</number> <tr>unfavorable</tr> condition or state. <i>Mubagyu tingáli kay máut man ang panahun,</i> There seems to be a typhoon because the weather is bad. <number>3</number> <tr>unpleasant</tr> in ways. <i>Máut ug batásan,</i> <tr>Disagreeable</tr> in his ways. <i>Máut bayà nang mamalíkas,</i> It&apos;s bad to curse. <number>4</number> unpleasant in looks, smell, and the like. <i>Máut kaáyu árung bahúa uy,</i> What a bad smell! <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a1]</itype> be, become bad, ugly, unpleasant to the senses, etc. <form>{ka-|kamáut}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>badness</tr>, <tr>ugliness</tr>, <tr>defectiveness</tr>.

<p id=12389><form>mawu-</form> <ix>for words with</ix> <bx>mawu-</bx> <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>malu-</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12390><form>mawungmáwung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> cover up, hide one&apos;s feeling. <i>Dúnay mga táwu nga makamau giyung mumawungmáwung sa ílang kaguul,</i> There are people who know how to hide their grief.

<p id=12391><form>mawutpis</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> boxer&apos;s <tr>mouthpiece</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear a mouthpiece.

<p id=12392><form>maw-uy</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>arousing pity</tr>, touching. <i>Maw-uy kaáyung tan-áwun ang bátà nga makalilímus,</i> The child beggar was a pitiful sight.

<p id=12393><form>may</form> <number>1</number> there is, are, was<corr>,</corr> were. <i>May tulu ka táwung nangítà nímu,</i> There were three persons looking for you. <i>Kun may isúgù,</i> At your service (lit. if there is an order to give). <number>2</number> <tr>have</tr>. <i>May sigarilyu ka dihà?</i> Do you have any cigarettes on you? <number>2a</number> <formx>may pagka-</formx> be somewhat. <i>May pagkatabian ni si Áning,</i> Aning is somewhat talkative. <number>2b</number> <formx>{&mdash;|may} idad</formx> be of age. <i>May idad na siya ug makabutar na,</i> He is already of age and he can vote now. <number>3</number> near a place. <i>Didtu siya magtindug sa may pultahan,</i> He was standing there by the door. <number>4</number> some, [so-and-so] long ago, <i>May duha ka búwan na níyang trabáhu dinhi,</i> He&apos;s been working here for about two months now. <number>4a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|may} mga</formx> at about [such-and-such] a time. <i>Didtu siya sa may mga alas kwatru,</i> He was there at around four. <form>{&mdash;|may} láin pa</form> yes, of course (is there anything or anyone else). <i>Siya giyuy nagkúhà sa libru kay siya ra may dihà. May láin pa?</i> He must have taken the book because he was the only one there. Who else could have? <i>Kan-un giyud ni níya. May láin pa?</i> He&apos;ll eat this, don&apos;t worry. Would he fail to do so!

<pb n=680>

<p id=12394><form>máya</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small bird found in rice fields, the chestnut mannikin: <bio>Lonchura malacca</bio>. <form>{&mdash;|máya} nga bungul</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. brown-colored <ix>maya</ix> which is believed to be deaf because it is not easily disturbed or afraid of noise.

<p id=12395><form>mayà</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>happy</tr> and <tr>cheerful</tr> in appearance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B4; c16]</itype> be, become <tr>gay</tr>. <i>Pagmayà kay adlaw nímu run,</i> Be cheerful. Today is your birthday. <i>Imayà (mayaa) nang inyung panagway kay litratúhan na ta,</i> Put on a cheerful expression because they are going to take our picture. <form>{ka-|kamayà}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cheerfulness</tr>.

<p id=12396><form>mayáman</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>rich</tr>, <tr>moneyed</tr> (colloquial). <i>Mayáman kaáyu ku run kay bag-ung swildu,</i> I am very rich now because I have just received my pay.

<p id=12397><form>mayamaya, mayamáya</form> <pos>n</pos> red snapper, <bio>Lutianus spp</bio>.

<p id=12398><form>mayánà</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ornamental herbs with variously colored green and purple leaves which have medicinal uses: <bio>Coleus blumei</bio>.

<p id=12399><form>mayáus</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. thin-bodied slipmouth (<ix>palutput</ix>).

<p id=12400><form>maybay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. large, light green, cooking banana, only a little smaller than the <ix>tinduk</ix>.

<p id=12401><form>mayhu, mayhum</form> (from <ix>humay</ix>) <pos>n</pos> rice (humorous slang). <i>Ayay! Mayhum diay karun ang átung kan-un,</i> Goody. We are going to have rice today. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> eat rice as one&apos;s staple.

<p id=12402><form>mayik</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>microphone</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>sound system</tr> with an amplifier. <i>Mayik ang ílang gigámit sa bayli kay mahal ang musiku,</i> They used a sound system for the dance because an orchestra would be too expensive. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> use a mike or sound system.

<p id=12403><form>maylab</form> <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s <tr>sweetheart</tr> or loved one (humorous). <i>Ímu nang maylab ang ímung kúyug?</i> Was that your sweetheart that was with you?

<p id=12404><form>maymay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <tr>advise</tr>, <tr>admonish</tr> s.o. in a nice tone. <i>Maymáyi siyang dílì na maghubughúbug,</i> Advise and encourage him not to get drunk any more. <pos>n</pos> <tr>advice</tr> or <tr>admonition</tr>. <form>{pa-|pamaymay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> listen to advice. <i>Ang táwung dì magpamaymay háyan mahitabù,</i> A person who does not listen to advice is likely to get into trouble. <form>{ma-un|pamaymayun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>admonishing</tr>.

<p id=12405><form>maynur</form> <pos>n</pos> one&apos;s minor subject. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> take as one&apos;s minor.

<p id=12406><form>maypáy</form> <xr>= <sc>malaypálay</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12407><form>mayrun</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>having money</tr> (colloquial). <i>Mayrun tingáli ni dà, kay nangimbitar man,</i> You&apos;re probably in the clover today since you&apos;re inviting us.

<p id=12408><form>maytir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>miter joint</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|maytir} baks</form> <tr>miter box</tr>.

<p id=12409><form>Máyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>May</tr>. <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>abril</sc></xr> <ix>for verb forms:</ix> <form>plúris di {&mdash;|Máyu}</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>plúris</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12410><form>mayukmuk</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>powdery soil</tr>. <i>Ayaw pagdúlà sa mayukmuk kay abug kaáyu,</i> Don&apos;t play with the powdery soil because it&apos;s very dusty. <number>1a</number> <tr>river sediment</tr>. <i>Ang mayukmuk sa subà nadala sa bahà,</i> The river sediment was carried off by the flood. <number>2</number> small fry: little children, anything small or lower in class. <i>Basta mga mayukmuk lagmit way púl,</i> If you are a small fry you have no influence. <i>Nangat&umacracu;g na ang mga mayukmuk,</i> The kids are all asleep now. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b2]</itype> get powdered soil on one. <form>{ka-|kamayukmuk}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> get powdery soil all over one.

<p id=12411><form>máyung</form> <pos>a</pos> for the weather to be somewhat <tr>overcast</tr>, <tr>sunless</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> be, become overcast. <i>Maáyu rung ipasíyu sa bátà kay nagmáyung na,</i> It&apos;s a fine time to take the baby for a stroll. It is a little overcast.

<p id=12412><form>may-ung</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[C3; c6]</itype> have a <tr>resemblance</tr>, make things <tr>look alike</tr>. <i>Magkamay-ung ug panagway ang mag-ágaw,</i> The cousins have a resemblance. <i>Imay-ung ang ímung nawung sa kang Dulpi nga kataw-anan,</i> Make your face like Dolphy&apos;s funny face. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> recognize, be familiar to s.o. <i>Mu rag nakamay-ung ku sa ági niíning sulat,</i> I think I recognize the handwriting in this letter. <number>3</number> <itype>[A12; b2]</itype> notice s.t. <i>Namay-ungan níya nga may táwung misulud,</i> She noticed a man entering. <form>{ka-|kamay-ung}</form> <pos>n</pos> s.t. which resembles s.t. else. <i>Kamay-ung ang ímung panagway ánang artistáha,</i> You have a resemblance to that actor.

<p id=12413><form>mayunis, mayunísa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mayonnaise</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b]</itype> put, use mayonnaise.

<p id=12414><form>mayur</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> municipal or city <tr>mayor</tr>. <number>2</number> in a game, the one who has the first play or turn. <number>3</number> <tr>major chord or key</tr>. <i>Du mayur,</i> C major. <form>{&mdash;|mayur} diidad</form> <pos>a</pos> of legal age. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B256]</itype> be of legal age. <form>{&mdash;|mayur} dúma</form> <xr>= <sc>{&mdash;|mayur} dúmu</sc></xr> (female). <form>{&mdash;|mayur} dúmu</form> <tr>majordomo</tr> of an estate, hotel, ship, or other large institutions requiring a chief steward. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be, become the majordomo. <ix>For other phrases with</ix> <bx>mayur</bx> <ix>as the first word, see the entry under the second word.</ix> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; a2]</itype> be, become mayor. <i>Si Talyuks ang átung mayurun sa syudad,</i> Let&apos;s make Talyux the mayor in the city. <form>{(&larr;)|máyur}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C2; ac3]</itype> play off against one another to see who goes first in the game. <i>Átung mayúrun kun kinsay muúnag lábay sa búla,</i> Let&apos;s play it off to determine who will be the first to throw the ball.

<p id=12415><form>mayuríya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>majority</tr> of a body convened. <i>Mibutar ang mayuríya sa musiyun,</i> The majority voted for the motion. <i>Si Usminya nakakuhag singkuwinta bútus nga mayuríya,</i> Osmeña got a majority of fifty votes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <pb n=681>get a majority of votes.

<p id=12416><form>mayurù</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. white upland rice with long and slender grains, harvested after six months.

<p id=12417><form>mayuskula</form> <pos>n</pos> majuscule.

<p id=12418><form>mga</form> abbreviation for <xr><sc>manga</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12419><form>mi<sub>1</sub></form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>kami</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12420><form>mi<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the note <tr>mi</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|mi} mayur</form> E major. <form>{&mdash;|mi} minur</form> E minor.

<p id=12421><form>m&imacrgra;</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> representation for the sound made by a goat. <number>2</number> <tr>goat</tr> (slang). <i>Mukáun kug m&imacrgra; piru dì kug aw-aw,</i> I eat goat meat but not dog.

<p id=12422><form>mi-</form> past punctual active verbal prefix. <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>mu-</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12423><form>míd</form> <pos>n</pos> a female household help. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be, become a <tr>maid</tr>. <form>{pa-|pamíd}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> hire oneself out as a maid.

<p id=12424><form>mídal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>medal</tr>. <i>Nakadawat ug mídal ang balidikturyan,</i> The valedictorian was awarded a medal. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b(1)]</itype> receive a medal. <form>bruns, guld, silbir {&mdash;|mídal}</form> <pos>n</pos> bronze, gold, silver medal. <form>{-ist(&rarr;)|midalíst}</form> <pos>n</pos> gold, bronze, silver <tr>medalist</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> become a medal awardee.

<p id=12425><form>midalya</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> medal. <number>2</number> religious medal worn by devotees. <number>2a</number> dried <ix>palutput</ix>, so called because of its resemblance to a medal (humorous). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> wear, win, award s.o. a medal.

<p id=12426><form>midalyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>medallion</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> wear, put a medallion on s.o.

<p id=12427><form>mídi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>midi skirt</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear a midi dress. <number>2</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> make a midi dress.

<p id=12428><form>midída</form> <pos>n</pos> cloth tape measure used in dressmaking.

<p id=12429><form>midikal</form> <pos>a</pos> connected with the practice or study of medicine.

<p id=12430><form>midikilyu</form> <xr>= <sc>miriku</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12431><form>midiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>physician</tr>, <tr>doctor</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|midiku} ligal</form> <pos>n</pos> legal physician who certifies the medical facts surrounding a death.

<p id=12432><form>mid-in dyapan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>shoddy</tr> in workmanship or quality. <number>2</number> <tr>weakling</tr>, <tr>sickly</tr>. <i>Tambuk tan-áwun apan mid-in dyapan. Dalì rang mayasmì,</i> She looks fat, but she is weak. She easily gets sick.

<p id=12433><form>midisin</form> <pos>n</pos> course of medicine. <form>{&mdash;|midisin} kabinit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>medicine cabinet</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|midisin} bag</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>medicine bag</tr>.

<p id=12434><form>midisína</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>medicine</tr>. <i>Pagpalit ug midisína sa butíka,</i> Buy medicine at the drugstore. <number>2</number> chemical for the processing of s.t. <i>Midisína sa kulung,</i> Chemicals for a permanent wave. <number>3</number> course in medical school.

<p id=12435><form>midiya</form> <tr>half</tr>. <i>Midiya pulgáda ang gibag-un,</i> Half an inch thick. <i>Midiya ang bátà sa sinihan,</i> A child pays half fare in the movies. <i>Midiya kílu nga karni,</i> Half a kilo of meat. i- thirty minutes after the hour. <i>Alas dus imidiya,</i> Two thirty. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B56]</itype> get to be to the half hour. <i>&lsquo;Alas singku na ba?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Mumidiya na hinúun,&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;Is it already five o&apos;clock?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;It is nearly five thirty.&rsquo; <form>{&mdash;|midiya} agwa</form> <pos>n</pos> a roof projecting beyond the wall at a downward angle over the whole length or width of a house, or just over a window or door. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> add an overhang. <form>{&mdash;|midiya} bangku</form> <pos>n</pos> wind coming at a forty-five degree angle from directly in back of a boat. <i>Pabur gihápun sa sakayan ang hángin nga midiya bangku,</i> A wind which comes from the back but at an angle is still favorable to sailboats. <form>{&mdash;|midiya} díya</form> <pos>n</pos> half day. <i>Midiya díya ra ang trabáhu basta Sabadu,</i> We work half-day on Saturdays. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> do s.t. half-day. <form>{&mdash;|midiya} nutsi</form> <pos>n</pos> the dinner served at midnight on Christmas. <form>{&mdash;|midiya} pága</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>half fare</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|midiya} táwu</form> <pos>n</pos> s.o. who is extraordinarily short. <form>midiyamidiya</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> do s.t. in a moderate way. <i>Midiyamidiyáhi lang pagpadágan arun dílì ta madisgrasya,</i> Drive at a moderate rate so we don&apos;t meet an accident. <i>Midiyamidiyáhi ug hugut ang twirka arun dílì maharùs,</i> Tighten the screw moderately so it won&apos;t get stripped. <form>midiyahan</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a fifth, so called because it contains half the volume of a bottle which formerly was in wide use. <number>2</number> small train station between two main stations where a train can stop to take on or discharge passengers or freight but cannot issue tickets. &dagger;

<p id=12436><form>midiyas</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>socks</tr>, <tr>stockings</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>condom</tr> (humorous euphemism). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put on, wear socks, stockings. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> use a condom. <form>{-an(&larr;)|midiyásan}</form> <pos>n</pos> for an animal to have a different color on its legs so that it looks as if it is wearing stockings.

<p id=12437><form>midiyu</form> <form>{&mdash;|midiyu} <r>[adj.]</r></form> <tr>somewhat</tr>, <tr>a little bit</tr>. <i>Midiyu hubug ka dà,</i> You&apos;re a little bit drunk. <i>Midiyu língin ang purma,</i> It is somewhat roundish in shape.

<p id=12438><form>midiyus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>makeshift</tr> or <tr>temporary</tr> means to accomplish s.t. <i>Pangitáan ta nig midiyus arun muand&acaron;r ang makina,</i> Let&apos;s look for some temporary way we can get this engine to run. <number>2</number> means of resolving a problem. <i>Kadtung íyang labad sa úlu midiyus lang tu sa paglikay sa trabáhu,</i> His headache was just an excuse to get out of doing work. <i>Wà kuy láing midiyus gawas sa pagpangútang,</i> I have no other way of resolving the problem except borrowing money. <i>Ang labing maáyung midiyus sa ímung ubu,</i> The best remedy for your cough.

<p id=12439><form>midtik</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> Medical Technology course. <i>Ang íyang gikúhà midtik,</i> He is taking up Med. Tech. <number>2</number> <tr>housemaid</tr> (humorous and depreciatory word play on míd). <i>Naíbug ka ánang midtik man nà?</i> Did you fall for that girl <pb n=682>when she&apos;s just a maid?

<p id=12440><form>midtirm</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mid-term exams</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> have the mid-term exams.

<p id=12441><form>mid-ub-ánur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>maid of honor</tr> at a wedding. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; c6]</itype> be, become the maid of honor.

<p id=12442><form>mídul kard</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to the pieces in mahjong from <number>2</number> through <number>8</number> as compared to the <ix>tirminális</ix> (1 and 9).

<p id=12443><form>midwayip</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> trained <tr>midwife</tr>. <number>2</number> course of midwifery. <number>3</number> maid (humorous, deprecatory word play on <ix>míd</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be, become a midwife. <form>{-iri|midwayipiri}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>midwifery</tr>.

<p id=12444><form>midyur</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> major in the military or police force. <number>2</number> major field of study in an academic course. <i>Sáyans ang íyang midyur,</i> She is a science major. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> be, make s.o. a major. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> take a certain course as one&apos;s major.

<p id=12445><form>migkap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146]</itype> be <tr>slothfully inactive</tr>. <i>Ang táwung magmigkap dì madúgay niíning trabahúa,</i> A person who loafs will not last long on this job.

<p id=12446><form>migkat</form> <xr>= <sc>migkap</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12447><form>migrupunu</form> <xr>= <sc>mikrupunu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12448><form>mihihì</form> <xr>= <sc>bahìhì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12449><form>mihìmihì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> for a child to whimper or cry softly from discomfort or naughtiness. <i>Nagmihìmihì na sab si Bíbi. Katulgun tingáli,</i> Baby is whimpering again. She probably is sleepy. <i>Ayaw kug mihìmihii ug dúna kay pangayúun,</i> Don&apos;t whimper at me if you want s.t.

<p id=12450><form>mihit</form> <xr>= <sc>nihit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12451><form>mihúras</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>improvements</tr>. <i>Ang Mayur walay nahímung mihúras hangtud karun,</i> The Mayor has not made any improvements to this day. <i>Kining mangga usa lang sa daghang mihúras niíning yutáa,</i> This mango tree is only one of the many improvements on this land. <number>1a</number> favor of a financial nature. <i>Unsang mga mihúras ang ímung nahátag kaníya nga dakù man siyag útang buut nímu?</i> What have you done for him that he owes you a debt of gratitude? <number>2</number> <tr>virtues</tr>, <tr>good qualities</tr>. <i>Unsa may mga mihúras niánang bayhána nga nakagustu man ka níya?</i> What are the good qualities that made you like that woman? <number>3</number> <tr>assets</tr>. <i>Kanang magtiayúna dakù kaáyug mihúras nga ikabílin sa ílang mga anak,</i> That couple has a large number of possessions to leave their children. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> make improvements. <i>Dílì makamihúras kaaáyu ang mayur sa íyang lungsud kun kuntra partídu siya sa administrasiyun,</i> A town mayor can make few improvements in his municipality if he is not aligned with the administration.

<p id=12452><form>mík</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a Mexican copper coin worth one-hundredth of the Mexican peso. Formerly circulated, it is now used only as offerings to spirits or used topically for medicinal purposes. <number>2</number> <tr>fake coin</tr>.

<p id=12453><form>mikà</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>idle</tr>, not doing things. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B145]</itype> <number>1</number> sit around lazily. <i>Magmikà lang ang babáying way hibangkaágan sa panimalay,</i> A girl who knows nothing about household work sits around lazily. <number>2</number> go about in low spirits. <i>Unsay nahitabù nga nagmikà ka man?</i> What happened that you are in such low spirits?

<p id=12454><form>mikanikal</form> <pos>n</pos> course of mechanic engineering. <form>{&mdash;|mikanikal} indyinir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mechanical engineer</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|mikanikal} indyiníring</form> <xr>= <sc>mikanikal</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12455><form>mikaniku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mechanic</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2b8]</itype> be, become a mechanic.

<p id=12456><form>mikanismu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mechanism</tr>, the workings of a machine.

<p id=12457><form>mik-ap<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> make up a lacking subject or part of a subject in school. <i>Kinahángang mik-ápan ang absin,</i> You have to make up your absences.

<p id=12458><form>mik-ap<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>make-up</tr>, <tr>cosmetics</tr>. <i>Bagà siyag mik-ap,</i> She had heavy make-up on. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> put make-up on s.o. or on oneself.

<p id=12459><form>míki</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. large yellow noodle made of wheat flour. <number>2</number> dish made of such noodles. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> make, make into noodles. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> prepare a dish of noodles.

<p id=12460><form>mikrubyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>microbes</tr>.

<p id=12461><form>mikru krúm</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mercurochrome</tr>.

<p id=12462><form>mikrupunu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>microphone</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> use a microphone.

<p id=12463><form>mikruskupyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>microscope</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> look at with a microscope.

<p id=12464><form>mikskla</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>mix</tr> solids or liquids. <i>Mikskláha ang pintal ug túbig,</i> Mix the paint and the water together. <i>Mikskláhi ug pulug ang minása nga simintu,</i> Mix dye into the cement mixture. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> prepare s.t. that has to be mixed. <i>Nakamikskla ka na ba ug ilimnun?</i> Have you prepared (mixed) the drinks? <pos>n</pos> <tr>mixture</tr>, proportion in which s.t. is mixed. <i>Ispísung mikskla,</i> A thick mixture.

<p id=12465><form>mil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>thousand</tr>. <i>Ang balur sa ákung awtu trayinta mil,</i> My car is worth thirty thousand pesos. <pos>v</pos> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>disiutsu</sc>.</xr> <form>{&mdash;|mil} únu, dusyintus, etc.</form> One thousand one, two, etc. <form>milmíl</form> <pos>a</pos> valued in thousands. <i>Dì ku makaabut pagpalit niánang mga milmíl nga kantidad,</i> I cannot afford to buy things that cost in three figures.

<p id=12466><form>míl</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> post in the mail. <i>Imíl ba kining suwáta?</i> Shall I mail this letter?

<p id=12467><form>milagru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>miracle</tr>. <i>Milagru ray makaluwas sa masakitun,</i> Only a miracle can save the sick man. <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;|milagru} ug</formx> it would be a miracle if [so-and-so] were to happen. <i>Milagrug mutúgut <pb n=683>si Pápa mu pagpatan-aw nímug sini,</i> It will be a snowy day in May before your father will let you go to the show. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> perform miracles. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> do s.t. which is completely unexpected. <i>Nagmilagru uruyng tihik nga nanghátag,</i> A miracle! The cheapskate is giving out money. <form>{-sa|milagrusa}</form> <xr>= <sc>milagrúsu</sc></xr> (female). <form>{-su|milagrusu}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>miraculous</tr>. <i>Ang milagrúsung birhin sa Patíma,</i> The miraculous Virgin of Fatima. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1246]</itype> be, become miraculous.

<p id=12468><form>milàmilà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146; a4]</itype> for eyes to be watery, full of pus. <i>Gimilàmilà (nagmilàmilà) ang mata sa palahúbug,</i> The drunkard&apos;s eyes are all watery.

<p id=12469><form>milangkuliya, milangkulíya</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a4]</itype> feel <tr>melancholic</tr>, esp. from homesickness. <i>Gimilangkulíya nà siya sa íyang trátung túa sa Amirika,</i> She is homesick for her boy friend in the States.

<p id=12470><form>miláru</form> <pos>n</pos> thick syrup from brown sugar. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make thick brown-sugar syrup.

<p id=12471><form>milbaks</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mailbox</tr>.

<p id=12472><form>milibiki</form> <pos>n</pos> brace, a carpentry tool used for boring wood. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> use this tool.

<p id=12473><form>miligrámu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>milligram</tr>.

<p id=12474><form>miliguy</form> <xr>= <sc>kawatkawat</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>káwat</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12475><form>milimitru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>millimeter</tr>.

<p id=12476><form>milindris</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ornamental shrub with white, pink, or purplish flowers growing on small terminal panicles: <bio>Lagerstroemia indica</bio>.

<p id=12477><form>milisya</form> <pos>n</pos> collective term for Filipino recruits during World War I. <form>{-nu|milisyaun}</form> <pos>n</pos> member of the Filipino militia. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; c1]</itype> become a member of the Philippine militia.

<p id=12478><form>militar</form> <pos>n</pos> the <tr>military</tr>, <tr>soldiers</tr>. <i>Nanghilabut ang militar sa iliksiyun,</i> The military interfered with the election. <form>pwirsa {&mdash;|militar}</form> <tr>military force</tr>. <form>salúdu {&mdash;|militar}</form> <tr>military salute</tr>. <form>upisyal {&mdash;|militar}</form> <tr>military officials</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> wear a military uniform. <i>Gimilitaran ang sundálung namatay,</i> The soldier who died was dressed in a military uniform. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1356; c1]</itype> become a military man. <number>3</number> <itype>[c1]</itype> be done in a military manner. <i>Militarun (imilitar) ang kasal sa ákung manghud kay níbi may íyang pamanhunun,</i> My younger sister will be married in a military wedding because the groom is a navy man.

<p id=12479><form>*milk</form> <form>pawdir {&mdash;|milk}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>powdered milk</tr>.

<p id=12480><form>milma</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a]</itype> <tr>lessen</tr>, <tr>slow down</tr>. <i>Bísan tigúlang na siya wà mumilma ang íyang kusug,</i> Even when he was old, his strength did not decrease. <i>Nagmilma na ang dágan sa trák,</i> The truck slowed down. <i>Hilánat ang nakamilma sa íyang gána sa pagkáun,</i> Fever has lessened his appetite. <i>Milmáhan ta ang paggastugastu,</i> We will go slow on spending. <i>Unsa kahay imilma ku niánang íyang pagkahimabáyi,</i> I wonder what I can do to discourage his amorous activities.

<p id=12481><form>milù</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. civet similar to the <ix>maral</ix>, but lighter in color and not so odorous.

<p id=12482><form>milun, mílun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cantaloupe</tr>: <bio>Cucumis melo</bio>.

<p id=12483><form>milung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> feel disappointed and embarrassed that s.t. expected did not turn out to be or happen. <i>Dà, namilung lagi sila kay walà man diay salída sa sini, labun pa, walà na giyud maniudtu,</i> They were embarrassed and disappointed. There was no movie that day, and they had gone without even eating lunch.

<p id=12484><form>milya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mile</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B256]</itype> be, get to be about one mile. <i>Mumilya giyud ang gilay-un,</i> The distance is about a mile. <form>{-hi|milyahi}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mileage</tr>.

<p id=12485><form>milyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>million</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>disiutsu</sc>.</xr> <form>{&mdash;|milyun} dálar ismayil</form> <pos>n</pos> a million dollar smile. <form>{&mdash;|milyun} dálar ligs</form> <pos>n</pos> shapely legs. <form>{-arya|milyunarya}</form> <xr>= <sc>milyunaryu</sc></xr> (female). <form>{-aryu|milyunaryu}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>millionaire</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> be, become a <tr>millionaire</tr>.

<p id=12486><form>milyun pláwir</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. low, ornamental shrub with large, rounded, hairy leaves and clusters of blue or pinkish flowers: <bio>Hydrangea macrophylla</bio>.

<p id=12487><form>mimbru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>member</tr>. <i>Mimbru sa simbahan,</i> Church member. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; c16]</itype> be, make a <tr>member</tr>. <form>{pa-|pamimbru}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> join s.t. to become a <tr>member</tr>.

<p id=12488><form>mími</form> baby talk for: <number>1</number> going to sleep. <number>2</number> drinking. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> sleep or drink.

<p id=12489><form>míming</form> <pos>n</pos> term of endearment for a cat.

<p id=12490><form>mímis<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> <tr>rub</tr> s.t. violently on s.t. <i>Gimímis sa iring ang ilagang gitangag dihas yútà,</i> The cat rubbed the rat it was holding in its mouth on the ground.

<p id=12491><form>mímis<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a variety of first-class rice having white, smooth, shiny, slender, and long grains. <number>2</number> any first-class white rice.

<p id=12492><form>mímu, mimurandum</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>memorandum</tr>.

<p id=12493><form>mimuráyis</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>memorize</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> skip a meal. <i>Gimimuráyis ku ang paniudtu,</i> I skipped lunch.

<p id=12494><form>mimurya</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>memorize</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> skip a meal. <i>Gimimurya námù ámung pamáhaw sa ámung byáhi,</i> We skipped our breakfast during our trip.

<p id=12495><form>mimyu</form> <xr>= <sc>mimyugrap</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12496><form>mimyugrap</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>mimeograph</tr>. <i>Magmimyugrap ku sa prugráma,</i> I am going to mimeograph the program. <form>{tig-|tigmimyugrap}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mimeographer</tr>.

<p id=12497><form>mína<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>mine</tr>, mineral deposit. <number>2</number> explosive mine. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> mine a mineral deposit. <form>minahan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mine</tr>. <i>Túa siya magtrabáhu sa minahan,</i> He is working in the mine. <form>minahun</form> <pos>n</pos> mineral deposit to be mined.

<pb n=684>

<p id=12498><form>mína<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> situation in pool wherein two or more balls are in contact with each other and the one in the back is directly in line with one of the pocket holes, so that it is almost certain that the ball or balls in front will be knocked into the hole. <i>Sigurádung masúd nang utsu kay mína man,</i> The eight ball will surely go into the hole because they are directly aligned.

<p id=12499><form>minandis</form> <xr>= <sc>manandis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12500><form>Mindanaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Mindanao</tr>.

<p id=12501><form>ming-</form> <xr>= <sc>mi-</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12502><form>míng</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> sound used to call cats. <number>2</number> baby talk for a cat.

<p id=12503><form>míngaw</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lonely</tr>, <tr>deserted</tr>. <i>Míngaw ang balay, kay nanáug ang tanan,</i> The house is deserted because everyone went out. <number>2</number> <tr>lonely</tr> in feeling. <i>Míngaw ang syudad ug istranyu ka,</i> A city is a lonely place for a stranger. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> be lonely, quiet. <i>Nagmingaw ka man gud, ikaw ra bang usa?</i> You seem to be lonely. Are you alone? <number>2</number> <itype>[a4b3]</itype> feel <tr>homesick</tr>, miss s.o. <i>Wà ka ba mingáwa (mingawa) sa ímung mga bátà?</i> Didn&apos;t you miss your children? <i>Buut akung magpaduul gayud sa namingáwan (gikamingáwan) kung asáwa,</i> I want very much to be near my wife whom I miss so much. <form>{&mdash;|míngaw} sa gunting</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> for hair to be uncut (humorous). <i>Ang buhuk sa mga Bítuls gimíngaw sa gunting,</i> The Beatles&apos; hair is lonely for the scissors. <form>{ka-|kamíngaw}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>loneliness</tr>, <tr>homesickness</tr>. <form>{ma-|mamíngaw}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>quiet</tr>, <tr>silent</tr>. <i>Mamíngaw nga kagabhíun,</i> Quiet night. <form>{ma-un|mamingáwun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>lonely</tr>. <i>Mamingáwun kaáyu siya sukad mamatay ang íyang bána,</i> She has been lonely since her husband died. <form>{ka-an|kamingáwan}</form> <pos>a</pos> lonely, deserted place. <i>Nagtubù siya sa kamingáwan sa kabukíran,</i> He grew up in the lonely mountains.

<p id=12504><form>minghuy</form> <xr>= <sc>pinghuy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12505><form>mingkay</form> <pos>n</pos> endearing term for a cat.

<p id=12506><form>mingming</form> <xr>= <sc>míng</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12507><form>minì</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>unintelligent</tr>. <i>Lisud ikasulti ning minì kay láin ug tubag,</i> It is difficult to talk with an unintelligent person because he can&apos;t answer to the point. <number>2</number> <tr>fake</tr>, <tr>counterfeit</tr>. <i>Kwartang minì,</i> Counterfeit money. <i>Diplúmang minì,</i> Fake diploma.

<p id=12508><form>min-ibin, min-ibint</form> <pos>n</pos> main event in boxing. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> hold a main event. &dagger;

<p id=12509><form>minimu<sub>2</sub>, minimum</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>minimum wage</tr>. <i>Sayis ang adlaw ang minimu karun,</i> The minimum wage is six pesos a day. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> pay a minimum wage.

<p id=12510><form>minindyaytis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>meningitis</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be afflicted with meningitis.

<p id=12511><form>miniral, minirális</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>minerals</tr>. <i>Miniral nga gikinahanglan sa láwas,</i> Minerals which the body requires. <i>Ang yútà sa Sibu tugub sa mga miniral,</i> The lands in Cebu are rich in minerals.

<p id=12512><form>minirba</form> <pos>n</pos> hand-fed printing press (so called from the trade name, Minerva).

<p id=12513><form>miníru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>miner</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1456]</itype> be a miner.

<p id=12514><form>miniskirt</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>miniskirt</tr>, k.o. skirt that hugs the hips and is <measure reg="10&ndash;13 cm">2&ndash;5&Prime;</measure> above the knee. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> wear a miniskirt.

<p id=12515><form>ministil</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>mistil</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12516><form>ministiryu</form> <pos>n</pos> divine or religious <tr>ministration</tr>. <i>Ang ministiryu sa iglisya álang sa kalibútan,</i> The church&apos;s ministry is to the whole world.

<p id=12517><form>ministru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>minister</tr>, usually of a Protestant church. <number>2</number> minister to a head of state. <form>primir {&mdash;|ministru}</form> <tr>prime minister</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be a church minister or minister to a head of state.

<p id=12518><form>míns</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>menstruation</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a4]</itype> have menstruation. <i>Ayaw kalígug magmíns (minsun) ka,</i> Don&apos;t bathe if you&apos;re menstruating.

<p id=12519><form>minsáhi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> message left for s.o. <i>Nagbílin bag minsáhi ang mitilipunu nákù?</i> Did the man who called me leave a message? <number>2</number> <tr>message</tr>. <i>Ang minsáhi sa Santu Pápa,</i> The Pope&apos;s message. <form>{-ru|minsahiru}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>messenger</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> be, become a messenger.

<p id=12520><form>mintal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mental hospital</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> wind up in a mental hospital. <i>Ayaw pagpalábig hunàhúnà sa ímung prublíma kay mamintal ka unyà,</i> Don&apos;t worry too much about your problem or you&apos;ll wind up in the loony bin.

<p id=12521><form>mintalidad</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mentality</tr>, <tr>mental ability</tr> or way of thinking. <i>Mubù kaáyug mintalidad ang mga bátà sa ákung klási,</i> The children in my class are of a low mental ability. <i>Mau nay mintalidad sa mga batan-un karun,</i> That&apos;s the way young people think these days.

<p id=12522><form>mintira</form> <pos>a</pos> pronouncing words with phonemes metathesized, e.g. <ix>balyu</ix> for <ix>baylu, sùdan</ix> for <ix>sud-an</ix>, etc. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> pronounce words with phonemes reversed. <i>Nagmintíra ang íyang ubang púlung kay natakdan sa mga taga Simala,</i> He pronounces some of his words with the sounds reversed because his speech is influenced by the Simala speech.

<p id=12523><form>mintiryu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cemetery</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> <tr>die</tr> (lit. go to the cemetery). <i>Sa ímung kabágis mamintiryu giyud kag sayu,</i> You are such a ruffian you won&apos;t live long.

<p id=12524><form>mintras</form> while, during or the time that. <i>Mintras naghulat ka, pagkalingawg basabása dihà,</i> While you are waiting, just amuse yourself reading. <i>Paglípay mintras búhì pa,</i> Enjoy yourself while you&apos;re still alive. <form>{&mdash;|mintras} tantu</form> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>mintras</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> for the time being. <i>Lápis lay gamíta mintras tantu nga wà tay bulpin,</i> Just use a pencil for the time being since <pb n=685>we have no ball point pen.

<p id=12525><form>mintul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mentholated candy</tr>.

<p id=12526><form>mínù</form> <pos>n</pos> <pos>a</pos> magic spell cast by supernatural inhabitants of forested areas on persons wandering in their area. The victim is caused to see mirages and loses his way. The mirage may consist of trails diverging from the main path or thick underbush, so that the trail vanishes, or a person whom the traveler follows and then vanishes. The spell may last for days but can be counteracted if the victim removes his clothing and puts it back on inside out. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be lost because of the <ix>mínù</ix> spell.

<p id=12527><form>minúdu</form> <pos>a</pos> sold in small quantities. <i>Binaskit giyud ang sambag, dílì minúdu,</i> You have to buy the tamarinds by the basket; you can&apos;t buy just a few. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> sell in small quantity or amount. <form>{pa-|paminúdu}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> for a young woman to engage in sex occasionally. <i>Ayaw ipaminúdu ang ímung pagkababáyi,</i> Don&apos;t sell your virtue bit by bit (i.e. don&apos;t give in to sexual advances).

<p id=12528><form>minuldi</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>muldi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12529><form>minúnga</form> <xr>= <sc>binúnga</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12530><form>min-úpis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>main office</tr>.

<p id=12531><form>minur<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> in <tr>low gear</tr> or speed. <i>Gibutang ku sa minur ang mútur,</i> I put the motorcycle at low gear. <number>2</number> for engines to be revolving at slow speed, idling speed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; b7c]</itype> for an engine to slow down. <i>Wà siya muminur sa kurbáda,</i> He didn&apos;t slow down at the curve. <i>Ningminur ang dágan sa makina kay way gasulína,</i> The engine slowed down because it ran out of gasoline. <form>minurmínur</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b7]</itype> decrease the intensity of, or the amount of work. <i>Minurminúri lang ang ímung káun arun dílì ka mutambuk,</i> Decrease your food intake so that you will not grow fat.

<p id=12532><form>minur<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>minor key</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>minor chord</tr>. <number>3</number> songs in a minor key.

<p id=12533><form>minur diidad</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>minor in age</tr>.

<p id=12534><form>minuríya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>minority</tr>.

<p id=12535><form>mínus</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>few</tr>, <tr>less in quantity</tr>. <i>Mínus ang abut run kay húlaw,</i> The yield is lower this time because of the long drought. <i>Mínus kaáyu ang pumapálit ánang klasíhas panaptun,</i> Few buy that kind of cloth. <number>2</number> <tr>low</tr>. <i>Mínus ang grádu,</i> Having low marks. <number>3</number> <tr>inferior in quality</tr>. <i>Ayawg palit íni kay mínus kaáyung klasíha,</i> Don&apos;t buy this because it&apos;s an inferior sort. <number>4</number> <tr>slow in comprehension</tr>. <i>Ikaw kay mínus ka, dílì dáyun makasabut,</i> Because you are slow in comprehension you don&apos;t get it right. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB6; b7]</itype> <tr>lower</tr> or <tr>reduce</tr>; be less, get scarce. <i>Dílì giyud mumínus (mamínus) sa kinyintus ang ákung kítà,</i> My income will not be less than five hundred pesos. <form>{(&rarr;)|minus}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b]</itype> look down haughtily on s.t. <i>Nakaminus ka nákù nga biyà may ímung ihátag?</i> Do you look down on me since you give me the rejects? <i>Gikaminusan níla ang ímung trabáhu,</i> They look down on the kind of job you have.

<p id=12536><form>minuskula</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lower case letters</tr>.

<p id=12537><form>minutíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>minute hand</tr> of a clock.

<p id=12538><form>minútu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>minute</tr>. <i>Lima na lang ka minútu sa dílì pa ang alas singku,</i> It is five minutes before five o&apos;clock. <form>{-s|minútus}</form> <tr>minutes</tr> (used after the numbers of Spanish origin). <i>Dus minútus,</i> Two minutes. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>unminútu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12539><form>minyak, minyat</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. small musk shrew.

<p id=12540><form>minyù</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>married</tr>. <i>Pagdagínut na kay minyù ka na,</i> Be thrifty because you&apos;re married now. <i>Daghan sa mga minyù nga nanagbúlag,</i> Many married couples have separated. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16C; ab]</itype> get married. <i>Gustu na si Rumulítu nga magminyù,</i> Romulito wants to get married now. <i>Ug maminyù na ku,</i> When I am married. <i>Makigminyù na ang ákung trátu,</i> My girl friend wants to get married now. <i>Minyúun (paminyúun) sila arun dì magkawatkawat sa gawas,</i> Let&apos;s let them get married so they won&apos;t be meeting outside in secret. <i>Gipaburusan siya, piru wà minyúi,</i> He made her pregnant but did not marry her. <form>{ka-un|kaminyúun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>marriage</tr>. <i>Gihiúsa sila sa kaminyúun,</i> They were united in marriage. <i>Kinabúhì sa kaminyúun,</i> Married life. <form>{mag-l-|magmilinyù}</form> <pos>n</pos> about to get married.

<p id=12541><form>míra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>myrrh</tr>.

<p id=12542><form>mirakul</form> <pos>a</pos> persons short in height (humorous&mdash;so called from miracle rice, a newly developed variety of rice which ripens rapidly). <form>{&mdash;|mirakul} rayis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>miracle rice</tr>.

<p id=12543><form>miramíra</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> wave the fingers at s.o. in anger. <i>Gimiramiráhan ku níya, mu rag si kinsang dunyáha,</i> She waved her fingers at me as if she were some grand señora.

<p id=12544><form>mirasul</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>sunflower</tr>: <bio>Helianthus annuus</bio>.

<p id=12545><form>mirída</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bad omen</tr>, usually portending death of s.o. far away. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> for a portent of death to appear. <i>Pagkamatay ni Pidil sa Manílà nagmirída sa íla kay may itum nga alibangbang nga nagtuyuktúyuk,</i> When Fidel died, there was an omen that appeared to them: a black butterfly fluttering about in their house.

<p id=12546><form>miriguráwun</form> <pos>n</pos> a children&apos;s game in which all the participants hold hands to form a circle; then they let the circle turn singing at the same time.

<p id=12547><form>mirkánu</form> <xr>= <sc>amirikánu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12548><form>miriku</form> <pos>n</pos> folk doctor that treats illnesses of natural or supernatural cause. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B156; b(1)]</itype> be, become a folk doctor. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <pb n=686>have a sickness treated by a folk doctor. <i>Imiriku (mirikuha) kanang ímung buyagbuyag,</i> Have a folk doctor take care of that skin ailment. <form>{pa-|pamiriku}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> go to a folk doctor for treatment.

<p id=12549><form>mirinda</form> <xr>= <sc>miryinda</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12550><form>miringgi<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>meringue</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make meringue, put meringue on s.t.

<p id=12551><form>mirísi</form> expression indicating that s.o. got his just desserts. <i>Mirísi nga nahúlug ka kay kiat man,</i> That&apos;s what you get when you won&apos;t sit still. Now you fell.

<p id=12552><form>miritu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>merit</tr>, praiseworthy quality. <i>Way miritu ang ímung paghátag ug hinábang ug ímung gikabug-at sa buut,</i> There is no merit in giving help with strings attached.

<p id=12553><form>mirkádu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>market</tr>. <i>Mamalit kug útan ug sibúyas sa mirkádu,</i> I will buy vegetables and onions in the market. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1N; a12]</itype> go shopping. <i>Mangmirkádu (magmirkádu) tag sayu,</i> Let&apos;s do our shopping early. <i>Isdà lay ákung mirkadúhun kay náa na man ang tanan,</i> All I&apos;ll buy is fish because we&apos;ve got everything else. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1; a1]</itype> make into, become a market. <i>Gimirkadúhan ang iskwátir irya,</i> A market has been put up in the squatter&apos;s area.

<p id=12554><form>mirkána, mirkánu</form> <xr>= <sc>amirkána</sc></xr>, <xr><sc>amirkánu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12555><form>Mirkulis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Wednesday</tr>. <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>birnis</sc></xr> <ix>for verb forms</ix>. <form>{&mdash;|Mirkulis} Santu</form> Wednesday of the Holy Week.

<p id=12556><form>mirkyur krúm, mirkyuru krúm</form> <xr>= <sc>mikru krúm</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12557><form>mirma</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B]</itype> for the body to reduce. <i>Mumirma ang ímung láwas ug wà kay tulug,</i> You will lose weight if you lack sleep.

<p id=12558><form>mirtiyulit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>merthiolate</tr>.

<p id=12559><form>mirun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> spectator in table games. <number>2</number> one who goes to cockfights but doesn&apos;t pay admission and attaches himself to people on the outside that want to bet, helping them place their bets. <number>3</number> one who eats without paying, mooching off others or who rides, enters, or engages in any other activity without paying. <number>4</number> anyone who asks for handouts shamelessly, though perfectly able to support himself. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> be a <tr>spectator</tr>. <number>2</number> act as the <ix>mirun</ix> for gamblers. <i>Gimirun nà siya sa mga tahur,</i> The professional gamblers use him to help place their bets. <number>3</number> get to act like a <tr>moocher</tr>. <i>Mamirun kag magtsinílas sa simbahan,</i> You will be no better than a moocher if you wear slippers to church.

<p id=12560><form>miruy</form> <pos>a</pos> having lost all one&apos;s money in betting. <i>Miruy na ku ug mapildi ning katapúsan kung kwarta,</i> I&apos;ll go home in a barrel if I lose this last piece of money. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> lose all one&apos;s money in betting. <i>Miruyun ka lang ánang mga tawhána,</i> You will just lose all your money to those men.

<p id=12561><form>miryinda</form> <pos>n</pos> light meal taken between lunch and supper. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> take one&apos;s afternoon snack. <form>{&mdash;|miryinda} sína</form> <pos>n</pos> a light supper given in the afternoon. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> have a merienda cena.

<p id=12562><form>mis<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> Miss, a title of high respect for an unmarried woman, e.g. term used to address a nurse. <number>2</number> <tr>muse</tr>, <tr>beauty queen</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; c1]</itype> be, become a muse, beauty queen.

<p id=12563><form>mis<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>month</tr>, used only after <ix>un</ix> or <ix>usa ka</ix> &lsquo;one&rsquo;. <i>Un (usa ka) mis,</i> One month. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B256]</itype> be a month. <i>Hápit na mumis sukad sa íyang paggíkan,</i> It&apos;s almost a month now since she left. <form>{-is(&larr;)|mísis}</form> <xr>= <sc>mis<sub>2</sub></sc> (plural).</xr> <i>Dus (duha ka) mísis,</i> Two months.

<p id=12564><form>mísa<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> mass in the church. <form>{&mdash;|mísa} diaginaldu, {digalyu|mísa digalyu}</form> nine consecutive dawn masses ending on Christmas Eve. <form>{&mdash;|mísa} digrasya</form> <tr>thanksgiving mass</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|mísa} ditris</form> mass officiated by three priests. <form>{&mdash;|mísa} griguryána</form> mass said for one hundred successive days for the soul of a departed person. <form>{&mdash;|mísa} ispisiyal</form> any special mass. <form>{&mdash;|mísa} kantáda</form> mass that is sung. <form>{&mdash;|mísa} kumun</form> mass said for a number of dead people at once. <form>{&mdash;|mísa} kunsilibráda</form> mass celebrated by more than one priest. <form>{&mdash;|mísa} mayur</form> high mass with incense. <form>{&mdash;|mísa} puntipikal</form> <tr>pontifical mass</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|mísa} rikim</form> requiem mass. <form>{&mdash;|mísa} risáda</form> <tr>low mass</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|mísa} sulimni</form> high mass with a special offering, usually offered for the patron saint of a place. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> say mass. <form>{pa-|pamísa}</form> <itype>[A; b]</itype> have a mass offered. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> mass offered. <i>Maghatud kug pamísa sa simbahan pára sa kalag sa ákung inahan,</i> I will make a mass offering for the soul of my mother. <number>2</number> amount given to have a mass said.

<p id=12565><form>mísa<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>billiard table</tr>. <i>Maáyung pagkaníbil ang mísa. Tul-id kaáyu ang dágan sa búla,</i> The billiard table is good and level. The ball rolls straight. <form>sarhintu {di-|dimísa}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>desk sergeant</tr>. <form>{-da|misáda}</form> <pos>n</pos> amount paid for the use of game facilities, usually based per game. <i>Bayinti sintábus ang misáda sa bilyar,</i> Each game you pay twenty centavos. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> pay the <ix>misáda</ix>.

<p id=12566><form>misal, mísal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>missal</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> bring, use a missal in church.

<p id=12567><form>misay</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pet cat</tr>.

<p id=12568><form>misbuy</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>messboy</tr> on a boat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> be, become a messboy, make s.o. a messboy.

<p id=12569><form>misik</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[a3]</itype> for s.t. to be <tr>misplaced</tr>. <i>Namisik ang ákung papil nga gitrabáhu,</i> I misplaced the paper I was working on. <number>2</number> <formx>walay {&mdash;|misik}</formx> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> nothing was missed, s.t. happened to all. <i>Way namisik níla, nakadawat silang tanan ug latigu,</i> Not one of them was spared. <pb n=687>They all got whipped. <i>Way imisik níla sa pagkáun nga ibutang sa lamísa,</i> They did not miss a morsel of the food left on the table.

<p id=12570><form>misímis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> attack s.t. with utter abandon and intense violence. <i>Kinsa may nagmisímis niíning bag-ung piryudiku?</i> Who crumpled this newspaper till it is utterly ruined? <i>Gimisímis sa iring ang ilagà nga íyang nadakpan,</i> The cat picked up the mouse it caught and moved it about violently.

<p id=12571><form>misimus</form> <xr>= <sc>musimus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12572><form>misirabli</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>miserable</tr>. <i>Misirabling kahimtang sa prísu,</i> The prisoners are in a miserable condition. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; c1]</itype> be, become miserable, look miserable. <i>Misirabli ang pamilya sukad abandunaha sa amahan,</i> The family has been miserable since the father abandoned them.

<p id=12573><form>misirinúbis</form> Cebuano pronunciation of <ix>miserere nobis</ix> in the litany of the Rosary.

<p id=12574><form>mísis<sub>1</sub></form> <ix>see</ix> <sc>mis<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p id=12575><form>mísis<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>Mrs</tr>., title given to a married woman. <number>2</number> one&apos;s wife. <i>Siya ang mísis ni Tínung,</i> This is Tinong&apos;s wife. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> call s.o. Mrs.; be, become Mrs. <form>{(&rarr;)|misis}</form> voc. <ix>short form:</ix> <bx>sis</bx>. <i>Ása ka, sis?</i> Where are you going, Ma&apos;am?

<p id=12576><form>misíta</form> <xr>= <sc>lamisíta</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12577><form>misítas</form> <xr>= <sc>masítas</sc>.</xr> <form>misitasan</form> <xr>= <sc>masitasan</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12578><form>misitíra</form> <xr>= <sc>masitíra</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>masítas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12579><form>misíyas</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Messiah</tr>. <i>Si Kristu ang Misíyas,</i> Christ, the Messiah.

<p id=12580><form>misiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a series of special exercises getting the people in an area to fulfill their church obligations. <i>Magsúgud na karung adláwa ang misiyun sa simbahan,</i> The church mission will start today. <number>2</number> foreign missionary. <i>Misiyun ang nagdala ánang simbahána,</i> A missionary is running that church. <number>3</number> mission for which s.o. is being sent. <i>Unsay ímung misiyun pag-adtu sa Amirika?</i> What is your purpose in going to America? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> hold a church mission s.w. to get the parishioners to fulfill their religious obligations. <form>{-aryu|misiyunary}, {-íru|misiyuníru}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>missionary</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be, become a missionary.

<p id=12581><form>miskínu</form> <pos>a</pos> in <tr>small quantities</tr>, <tr>scarce</tr>. <i>Miskínu ang túbig tungud sa húlaw,</i> There&apos;s very little water because of the drought. <i>Miskínu ang taksi dinhing dapíta,</i> Taxis are scarce in this area. <i>Miskínu sila mupakáun sa ílang mga kasíra,</i> They feed their boarders in a niggardly way. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> get to be scarce, small in quantities. <i>Mumiskínu (mamiskínu) ang ímung ginastuhan ug maminyù ka,</i> You won&apos;t spend on such a big scale once you get married.

<p id=12582><form>miskla</form> <xr>= <sc>mikskla</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12583><form>mismis</form> <pos>n</pos> particles of yellowish substance sticking to the face after sleep, hardened mucus from the eyes or mouth. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A123P; a4]</itype> cause, have such substances on the face. <i>Panghilam-us kay gimismis ka,</i> Wash your face because you have mucus on your face.

<p id=12584><form>mismu</form> <number>1</number> <ix>with nouns or pronouns referring to a person:</ix> even [so-and-so]. <i>Sa klin-ap wik ang mismu nga mga tituládu manilhig,</i> During Clean-up Week even white collar workers sweep. <i>Aku mismu many milútù niíni,</i> I cooked this myself. <form>walay {&mdash;|mismu}</form> not even this little bit. <i>Way mismung usa ka dakù ang íyang gitábang nákù,</i> He didn&apos;t even give me a single penny in help. <number>2</number> <ix>with forms referring to a place:</ix> right in [such-and-such] a place. <i>Sa Maníla mismu may mga Huk,</i> There are Huks right in Manila. <i>Didtu mismu siya mamatay,</i> He died right in that place. <number>2a</number> <formx>{karun|karun mismu}, awra {&mdash;|mismu}</formx> right this very moment. <i>Karun mismu nag-íhap na sila sa mga balúta,</i> Right this very moment they are counting the ballots.

<p id=12585><form>mistík</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mistake</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> make a mistake in school or on one&apos;s paper.

<p id=12586><form>mistil</form> need to, have to do (used only negatively or in questions). <i>Mistil pa ba nà nímu buhátun?</i> Must you do that? <i>Dì na siya mistil sultíhan,</i> He does not need to be told. <form>{-in-|ministil}</form> <xr>= <sc>mistil</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12587><form>mistir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> title for a <tr>gentleman</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>husband</tr>. <i>Háin man magtrabáhu ang ímung mistir?</i> Where is your husband working? <number>3</number> title for the winner of a contest among men, as Mr. Universe. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; a12]</itype> call s.o. Mr. <number>2</number> <itype>[B156; c6]</itype> be, become Mr. [so-and-so]. <i>Kun gustu kang mamistir Pilipins pagbarbil,</i> If you want to become a Mr. Philippines, practice weight lifting. <form>{(&rarr;)|mist&icaron;r}</form> voc. <i>Ása ka Mist&icaron;r?</i> Where are you going, Sir?

<p id=12588><form>mistiri tyún</form> <pos>n</pos> mystery tune contest on the radio.

<p id=12589><form>mistiryu</form> <pos>n</pos> mystery, one of the fifteen events in the lives of Jesus and Mary serving as a subject for meditation during the saying of the rosary. <i>Mistiryu sa Himáyà, Kalípay, Kasákit,</i> The Glorious, Joyful, Sorrowful Mysteries. <number>2</number> mystery, s.t. that is difficult to understand. <form>{-sa|mistiryúsa}</form> <xr>= <sc>mistiryúsu</sc></xr> (female). <form>{-su|mistiryúsu}</form> <pos>a</pos> mysterious. <i>Usa ka mistiryúsung istranyu ang nagluwas nákù,</i> A mysterious stranger rescued me. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get mysterious. <i>Nagkamistiryúsu na hinúun ang íyang kamatáyun,</i> His death is getting to become more and more of a mystery.

<p id=12590><form>mistísa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> woman of mixed blood. <i>Mistísa Insik,</i> Woman with Chinese blood. <number>2</number> k.o. light-skinned cooking banana. <number>3</number> drink of <pb n=688>beer, coke, and cheap hard liquor. <form>{&mdash;|mistísa} dris</form> <pos>n</pos> a modern version of the old Filipina dress (<ix>sáyang pinarawhan</ix>) which may lack the <ix>panuylu</ix> or long skirt (<ix>íkug</ix>) or the stiff sleeves (<ix>paráwu</ix>). <form>mistisahun</form> <pos>a</pos> having Caucasian features. <form>mistisilya</form> <pos>a</pos> having some mestiza blood or features.

<p id=12591><form>mistísu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> person of mixed blood. <number>1a</number> person with Caucasian features, considered to be handsome. <number>2</number> animal of mixed breed. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be, become mestizo. <form>{&mdash;|mistísu} balúlang, bangus, patsang</form> <pos>n</pos> a word of ridicule for an ugly mestizo. <form>mistisuhun</form> <pos>a</pos> looking like a person with Caucasian blood. <form>{-in-(&rarr;)|ministisu}</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. working knife (<ix>búlu</ix>) with a square end, longer than the usual <ix>búlu</ix> but shorter than the <ix>sundang</ix>.

<p id=12592><form>mistra</form> <xr>= <sc>maistra</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p id=12593><form>mistru</form> <xr>= <sc>maistru</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p id=12594><form>miswa<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> fine, brittle, thread-like noodles of white flour. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> make a dish of <ix>miswa</ix>.

<p id=12595><form>miswa<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> humorous term of address for young ladies, used intimately without affixing the name. <i>Huy, Miswa, dalì na,</i> Miss, Miss. Come here. <i>Nía nang mga miswa,</i> Here comes the girls.

<p id=12596><form>misyunibirs</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Miss Universe</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B16]</itype> be, become Miss Universe. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12; b8]</itype> get a Miss Universe winner. <i>Nakamisyunibirs (namisyunibirsan) na ang Pilipínas,</i> The Philippines has produced a Miss Universe.

<p id=12597><form>mitad</form> <pos>n</pos> half the number or size of s.t. <i>Ang mitad sa karni kang Piduy,</i> Half the piece of meat belongs to Pete. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> in a game, give s.o. a handicap of half the number of points. <i>Arun lang magkadúlà ta mitaran ta ka,</i> Just so we can play I will give you a handicap of half the number of points.

<p id=12598><form>mítal</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>metal</tr>. <i>Palábad nga mítal,</i> Metal propeller.

<p id=12599><form>mitalika</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>tíla</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12600><form>mitaliku</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>metallic</tr>. <i>Hílu nga mitaliku,</i> Metallic thread.

<p id=12601><form>mitàmità<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> act childishly by crying or threatening when demands are not met, complaining all the time, and the like. <i>Ug dúna kay gustu ayawg mitàmità kay dakù ka na,</i> If you want s.t. don&apos;t just scream. You&apos;re too big for that.

<p id=12602><form>mitàmità<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> pick at food, eat without appetite. <i>Magmitàmità siyag káun ug way sud-an,</i> She only picks at the food if there&apos;s no food to go with the rice. <form>{-un|mitàmitáun}</form> <pos>a</pos> always without appetite in eating, given to picking at food.

<p id=12603><form>mithì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ideals</tr>, <tr>virtues</tr>. <i>Unsay ímung mga mithì sa kinabúhì?</i> What are your ideals in life? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> have s.t. as one&apos;s ideal, cherish. <i>Ibaligyà hasta kalag tungud sa gimithì nga kalampúsan,</i> They sell their souls to attain the success they so desire. <form>{paka-|pakamithì}</form> <xr>= <sc>mithì</sc>, <i>v</i>.</xr>

<p id=12604><form>miti, mitimíti, mitilmítil</form> <xr>= <sc>mitirmítir</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12605><form>míting</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>meeting</tr> convened. <number>2</number> political meeting or rally. <form>{&mdash;|míting} diabansi</form> political rally the night before an election. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C2; ab]</itype> hold a meeting. <form>{-anan|mítinganan}</form> <pos>n</pos> place for holding meetings.

<p id=12606><form>mitirmítir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put a limit to or limit one&apos;s acts. <i>Ása mumitirmítir ug sulti si Máma ug manuyù,</i> Mama does not mince words when she is angry. <i>Karung panahúna kinahanglan nga magmitirmítir ug sinud-anan,</i> In these times it is necessary to limit our food consumption. <pos>a</pos> being done in a scarce, limited way.

<p id=12607><form>mitkan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mess kit</tr>, commonly used as a lunch box. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c6]</itype> put s.t. in a mess kit.

<p id=12608><form>mitmit</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; a4]</itype> for the eyes to be full of yellowish discharge. <i>Nagmitmit (gimitmit) íyang mata sa mútà,</i> His eyes are full of eye discharge.

<p id=12609><form>mitnà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>minute</tr>. <i>Pipila ka mitnà ang nanglábay únà ku makatíngug,</i> Several minutes elapsed before I could say a word.

<p id=12610><form>mitru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>taxi meter</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>meter</tr> (not used after the numbers of Spanish origin). <i>Duha ka mitru (mitrus),</i> Two meters. <form>{-s|mitrus}</form> <tr>meters</tr>. <i>Dus mitrus,</i> Two meters. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; c1]</itype> measure by the meters. <form>mitrusan, mitruhan</form> <pos>n</pos> measuring stick or tape.

<p id=12611><form>mitsa<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> small cylindrical tin can of around <measure reg="110 to 170 grams">4&ndash;6 oz.</measure> in a size used for kerosene lamps. <i>Mitsa nga punug sinsilyu,</i> A tin can filled with coins. <form>mitsahan</form> <pos>n</pos> kerosene lamp made out of small empty tin cans.

<p id=12612><form>mitsa<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wick</tr>, <tr>fuse</tr> of explosive. <i>Mubù ra ang mitsa sa dinamíta. Maung mibutu dáyun,</i> The dynamite has too short a wick. That is why it exploded immediately. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> use, make as a dynamite wick.

<p id=12613><form>mitsádu</form> <pos>n</pos> dish consisting of round of beef into which strips of pork fat have been inserted stewed with spices to tender, served sliced with tomato sauce.

<p id=12614><form>mitsilin</form> <pos>n</pos> cement used for patching rubber (so called from the brand name). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a2]</itype> patch with rubber cement.

<p id=12615><form>mituáku</form> <ix>short for:</ix> <bx>Mitúu Aku</bx> The <tr>Apostles&apos; Creed</tr>.

<p id=12616><form>mitudu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> method of teaching, learning in music. <i>Mitudu sa sista,</i> Method of learning how to play the guitar. <number>2</number> being methodical. <i>Way mitudu ang pagpanglimpiyu,</i> You <pb n=689>aren&apos;t being methodical in your cleaning.

<p id=12617><form>mituluhíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mythology</tr>.

<p id=12618><form>miunmíun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> be careful in using money or consuming goods. <i>Magmiunmíun ta sa bugas arun mulungtad,</i> We must economize on our rice so it will last. <number>2</number> hold back one&apos;s temper or feelings, restrain oneself. <i>Ayawg imiunmíun ang ímung kaguul arun dílì ka masakit,</i> Don&apos;t suppress your grief so that you will not get ill.

<p id=12619><form>*míya</form> <form>íha {&mdash;|míya}</form> my darling girl. <i>Uy, íha míya dì nà mau ang ímung nadá. Iúlì nà,</i> Oh, honey, you took the wrong one. Put it back! <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>madri</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12620><form>miyaw</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>meow</tr> of a cat. <number>2</number> cat in baby talk. <form>{(&larr;)|míyaw}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> cry meow. <i>Kusug mumíyaw ang iring nga mangúlag,</i> A cat in heat cries loud.

<p id=12621><form>míyur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mayor</tr>.

<p id=12622><form>Mlbn.</form> <pos>n</pos> abbreviation for <ix>manlalában</ix>. <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>lában</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12623><form>mm</form> <number>1</number> sound made prior to plunging into one&apos;s speech. <i>Mm, kinsa tu?</i> Umm, who was it now? <number>2</number> sound emitted in showing approval of s.t. tasted or smelled. <xr><ix>see also</ix> <sc>um</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12624><form>Mr.</form> <pos>n</pos> abbreviation for <ix>Mistir</ix>.

<p id=12625><form>mu<sub>1</sub></form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ámù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12626><form>mu<sub>2</sub></form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ikaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12627><form>mu<sub>3</sub></form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>kamu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12628><form>mu<sub>4</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>mau</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12629><form>m&umacrgra;</form> <xr>= <sc>múlù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12630><form>mu-</form> punctual active verbal prefix, future. (<ix>Past</ix>: <bx>mi-</bx> <ix>or</ix> <bx>ni-</bx> <ix>or</ix> <bx>ming-</bx>. <ix>Subjunctive</ix>: <bx>mu-</bx>.) <i>Muadtu ku didtu ugmà,</i> I will go there tomorrow. <i>Miadtu (niadtu, ning-adtu, ming-adtu) ku didtu gahápun,</i> I went there yesterday. <i>Walà ku muadtu didtu,</i> I did not go there. Verbs with <ix>mu-</ix>, <i>mi-</i> have the following meanings (as opposed to verbs with <ix>nag-</ix>, <i>mag-;</i> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>mag-</sc></xr>). <number>1</number> volitional action. <i>Walà siya musulti,</i> He wouldn&apos;t (refused to) say. <i>Gipapaháwà siya kay walà muhátag sa báhin,</i> He was evicted because he refused to give the landowner his share. <number>2</number> action which is non-durative. <i>Muhílak siyag kusiun,</i> He will burst out crying if he is pinched. <i>Mumata mi sa alas singku káda buntag,</i> We wake up every morning at five. <i>Mutindug mi ug musulud siya,</i> We will get up if he comes in. <number>2a</number> added to nouns to form verbs of this meaning. <i>Mukaláyu ang kakugnan,</i> The grasslands will burst into flames. <number>3</number> <ix>added to verbs referring to state:</ix> come into [such-and-such] a state, become [so-and-so]. <i>Muabri ang pultahan,</i> The door will open (come open). <i>Mutúyuk ang galingan,</i> The mill will turn. <number>3a</number> <ix>added to adj.</ix>: become [adj.]. <i>Mugamay ímung láwas ug dì ka mukáun,</i> You will get thin if you don&apos;t eat. <i>Mupula ímung ngábil ug ímung lipistíkan,</i> Your lips will become red if you put lipstick on them. <number>3b</number> <ix>added to roots referring to measurements:</ix> become [so-and-so] much. <i>Ug mualas utsu na gánì, lakaw na lang,</i> If it gets to be eight o&apos;clock, just go on ahead. <i>Muduha na ka túig,</i> It is almost two years now. (Lit. It will become two years.) <i>Mutúhud ang túbig,</i> The water is nearly knee-deep (lit. will become knee-deep). <number>3c</number> <ix>added to verbs referring to capability:</ix> be capable of [do]ing. <i>Kining sakayána mukarga ug lima ka táwu,</i> This boat will hold five people. <i>Kining dyípa musakay ug dúsi ka buuk,</i> This jeep can carry a dozen people. <number>4</number> <ix>added to verbs or adjectives referring to manner:</ix> [do] in [such-and-such] a way. <i>Mukusug siyag katáwa,</i> He will laugh loudly. <i>Maáyu siyang mulútù,</i> He cooks well. <number>5</number> <ix>added to nouns referring to a place:</ix> go to [such-and-such] a place. <i>Mugráhi ang taksi run,</i> The taxi is headed for the garage. <i>Mulawud siya bísan magbagyu,</i> He will go to sea, even in the typhoon.

<p id=12631><form>múb</form> <pos>n</pos> move in chess and the like. <i>Ákù pang múb ha,</i> It&apos;s my move, all right? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> make a move. <i>Dugáya sad nímung mumúb, uy,</i> Heavens, how long does it take you to move?

<p id=12632><form>mubgas</form> <xr>= <sc>malubgas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12633><form>múbil</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>mobile patrol</tr>. <i>Pag-abut sa múbil nanágan ang mga sugarul,</i> When the mobile patrol arrived, the gamblers disappeared. <number>2</number> Mobil oil gasoline station. <form>{&mdash;|múbil} patrul</form> <xr>= <sc>múbil</sc>, <i>1.</i></xr>

<p id=12634><form>mubù</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>short</tr>, <tr>brief</tr>. <i>Mubù nga sirmun,</i> A brief sermon. <number>2</number> short in height or quantity. <i>Mubù si Napuliyun,</i> Napoleon was a short man. <i>Mubù ang mga sinínà karun,</i> Dresses are short nowadays. <number>3</number> <tr>low</tr>. <i>Mubù ang lamísa pára sa mga bátà,</i> The tables for the children are low. <number>3a</number> low in price, grade. <i>Pilía nang tinda nga mubù ra ug prisyu,</i> Choose low-priced goods. <i>Mubù ug grádu ang buluk,</i> The dull child got a low grade. <number>4</number> <ix>in phrases:</ix> having little. <form>{&mdash;|mubù} ug buut</form> in a bad mood. <i>Ayaw nag samuksamuka kay mubù run nag buut,</i> Don&apos;t disturb him because he is in a bad mood now. <form>{&mdash;|mubù} ug ginháwa</form> short-winded. <form>{&mdash;|mubù} ug idukasiyun</form> having little education. <i>Mubù siyag idukasiyun maung way batásan,</i> He&apos;s just ignorant. That&apos;s why he is ill-mannered. <form>{&mdash;|mubù} ug lánat</form> lacking endurance. <i>Mubù ra siyag lánat sa lánguy,</i> He cannot swim very far. <form>{&mdash;|mubù} ug lupad</form> like a prostitute. <i>Ang mga babáying mubù ug lupad tinámay sa katilingban,</i> Women of easy virtue are held in contempt by the community. <pb n=690><form>{&mdash;|mubù} ug paminsar</form> lacking thinking power. <i>Mubù nà siyag paminsar. Maung gigastu ang puhúnan,</i> He didn&apos;t think very hard and that is why he spent his capital. <form>{&mdash;|mubù} ug panlantaw</form> lacking foresight. <form>{&mdash;|mubù} ug pasinsiya</form> lacking patience. <form>{&mdash;|mubù} ug tinan-awan</form> nearsighted. <form>{&mdash;|mubù} ug tubul</form> sensitive, easy to take offense. <i>Kamubù nímug tubul uy. Dì man ka kakumidiyáhan,</i> You&apos;re too sensitive. It&apos;s impossible to make a joke with you. <form>{&mdash;|mubù} ug tul-an</form> having short limbs. <number>5</number> low in pitch. <i>Mubù siyag tíngug,</i> She has a low voice. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1; ab7]</itype> be brief, concise. <i>Mub-a ang ímung tubag,</i> Make your answer short. <number>2</number> <itype>[AB; b7c1]</itype> become low, make s.t. low. <i>Imubù (mub-a) lang pagtábas ang ákung sayal,</i> Just cut my skirt short. <i>Mub-i ning ákung buhuk dapit sa kílid,</i> Cut my hair short on the sides. <form>{ha-|hamubù}</form> <pos>a</pos> short. <form>{-g-|mugbù}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>short</tr> (plural). <i>Sa mugbù pa ang lubi,</i> In olden times (when the coconuts were still short). <form>{-in-|minubù}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>shortenings</tr>. <i>Ang yúbi mauy minubù sa University of the Visayas,</i> U.V. is short for the University of the Visayas.

<p id=12635><form>múda</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mode</tr>, current <tr>fashion</tr>. <i>Múda karun ang mugbù nga sinínà,</i> Short dresses are the style these days. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; c1]</itype> be in fashion.

<p id=12636><form>mudílu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>fashion model</tr>, one who poses for photographers or artists. <number>2</number> <tr>style</tr> or <tr>design</tr>. <number>3</number> model to emulate. <i>Mudílu sa maáyung pamatásan,</i> A paragon of good behavior. <number>4</number> a small copy, model of s.t. <i>Mudílu sa ayruplánu,</i> Model airplane. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> work as a model that poses.

<p id=12637><form>mudipikar</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> modify s.t. to adopt it for a new use. <i>Mudipikahun nátù ning silyang himúung tuwangtúwang,</i> Let&apos;s modify this chair to turn it into a rocking chair.

<p id=12638><form>mudiradur</form> <pos>n</pos> in the United Church of Christ in the Philippines (a merging of several Protestant sects), the executive head of a conference composed of several local congregations in a certain area. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> be the moderator.

<p id=12639><form>múdirn</form> <pos>n</pos> modern dance of the late sixties and seventies. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A23]</itype> dance a modern dance.

<p id=12640><form>mudirnu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>modern</tr>. <i>Mudirnung paági sa panguma,</i> Modern farming methods. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; a12]</itype> be, become modern; make s.o. or s.t. modern.

<p id=12641><form>mudista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>seamstress</tr>, usually one who sews very ordinary clothes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a12]</itype> be, become a seamstress.

<p id=12642><form>mudmud</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> press or bury one&apos;s face hard against s.t. <i>Mihilak siya ug mimudmud sa íyang nawung sa unlan,</i> She cried and buried her face in the pillow. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> put s.o. in a tight situation. <i>Gimudmud siya sa labihang kapit-us,</i> He was oppressed by extreme poverty.

<p id=12643><form>mudtu</form> <xr>= <sc>udtu</sc></xr> (except with <ix>hi&N;-</ix> and doubling).

<p id=12644><form>múdu</form> <pos>a</pos> liking as evinced by pleasant behavior. <i>Wà ka ba kamatngun nga si Kurdapya may múdu nímu?</i> Have you not noticed that Cordapia has a liking for you?

<p id=12645><form>mud-uk</form> <pos>a</pos> having an <tr>unsmiling</tr>, <tr>sour expression</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> have a sour look on the face from being in a bad mood. <i>Dílì giyud nang batáang makamaung mumud-uk bísag kasab-an,</i> That child never looks angry even when he is scolded. <form>{-un|mud-úkun}</form> <pos>a</pos> of an <tr>unsmiling</tr>, angry sort.

<p id=12646><form>múdus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>procedure</tr>, <tr>system</tr>. <i>Karáang múdus sa panguma ang íyang gigámit,</i> He uses old methods of farming. <i>Mau kanà ang ílang múdus pag-ílad sa táwu,</i> That is their procedure for swindling people. &dagger;

<p id=12647><form>mug-aw</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> feel lonely and empty when parted from a dear one. <i>Namug-aw sila pagkahibalu nílang gitában nag ílang anak,</i> They had a lonely and empty feeling when they heard that their daughter had eloped. <i>Namug-aw man lang tag hinulat nímu,</i> I felt so lonely waiting for you.

<p id=12648><form>mugmug</form> <xr>= <sc>limugmug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12649><form>mugnà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>create</tr>, bring into existence. <i>Kinsay nagmugnà sa kasámuk dinhi?</i> Who created a disturbance here? <i>Gimugnà sa Amirika ang mga mangilngig nga paági sa pagpatay,</i> America has created terrifying devices to kill people. <i>Gimugnáan ku níya ug usa ka kanta sa gugma,</i> He composed a love song for me. <pos>n</pos> <tr>creation</tr>. <i>Ang kalibútan mugnà sa Diyus,</i> The earth is God&apos;s creation. <form>{mag-r-|magmumugnà}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>creator</tr>. <form>{tig-|tigmugnà}, {tag-|tagmugnà}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>creator</tr>, originator of a certain thing. <i>Si Baldu ang tagmugnà sa pagpalusut sa mga kuntrabandu,</i> Baldo is the one who thought up ways of smuggling contraband goods.

<p id=12650><form>mugtuk</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>frowning</tr>, <tr>scowling</tr> of face. <i>Kinsay ganáhan makig-úban níya nga mugtuk kaáyug náwung?</i> Who cares for her company when she has such a frowning face? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> look gloomy, sad, pouting. <i>Nagmugtuk siya kay gipugus pagpatrabáhu,</i> He pouted because he was being forced to work. <i>Nagmugtuk ang íyang nawung kay gipapha siya sa trabáhu,</i> He has a dejected look because he was fired from his job.

<p id=12651><form>mug-ut</form> <xr>= <sc>mud-uk</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12652><form>*muhir</form> <form>babáying {&mdash;|muhir}</form> derogatory, but meaningless, reference to a woman (from the analogy of phrases of the form <ix>babáying</ix> [<ix>adj.</ix>], which mean &lsquo;woman doing s.t. improper&rsquo;&mdash;<pb n=691>e.g. <ix>babáying kiat</ix> &lsquo;flirt&rsquo;, whereas <ix>muhir</ix> [from Spanish] has no meaning by itself.) <i>Nía na pud magsamuksamuk nang babáying muhir,</i> Here comes that female again, making a nuisance of herself.

<p id=12653><form>muhun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> concrete land marker buried in the ground. <number>2</number> penis (humorous). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> post land markers.

<p id=12654><form>mukasin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>moccasin shoes</tr>, shoe that has no heel and is made of soft leather. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> wear moccasins.

<p id=12655><form>mukda</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b2]</itype> <number>1</number> suddenly realize s.t. so as to get startled. <i>Dihà na ku makamukda nga wà kuy kwarta pagbáyad nákù,</i> I suddenly realized I had no money when I was about to pay. <i>Namukdahan ku pagkadungug sa balità,</i> I was stunned by the news. <number>2</number> be caught in the act. <i>Himukdahan ang mga sugarul sa pulis,</i> The police caught the gamblers red-handed.

<p id=12656><form>múku</form> <pos><corr sic=v>n</corr></pos> variety of cooking banana, growing in bunches with fewer hands and shorter individual pieces than the <ix>kardába</ix>, but firm of flesh and round.

<p id=12657><form>*múkuy</form> <xr>= <sc>sagmúkuy</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12658><form>mul</form> <pos>n</pos> mould or pattern for making a hat the right size. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> use, make a head mould.

<p id=12659><form>múla</form> <pos>n</pos> large breed of horse, reddish-brown in color.

<p id=12660><form>mulásis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>molasses</tr>.

<p id=12661><form>muldi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>mold</tr> for forming s.t. <i>Muldi sa halublak,</i> Mold for making hollow blocks. <number>2</number> piece of s.t. shaped by a mold. <i>Pila ang muldi sa bibingka?</i> How much are the rice cakes apiece? <number>3</number> anything that is made in large quantities in the same size and shape, such as spare parts. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> mold for s.t., make s.t. with a mold. <form>muldihan</form> <xr>= <sc>muldi</sc>, <i>n1.</i></xr> <form>{-in-|minuldi}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>printing</tr>, <tr>block letters</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c16]</itype> print, write in block letters.

<p id=12662><form>mulignù</form> <xr>= <sc>karabalyas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12663><form>mulínu</form> <pos>n</pos> a small hand-cranked mill. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> grind s.t. in a grinder. <i>Maáyung mulinúhun dáyun ang kapi human ug sanlag,</i> You should grind the coffee beans immediately after roasting them.

<p id=12664><form>mulistiya</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <tr>molest</tr>, <tr>bother</tr> s.o. <i>Ipadakup kanang táwung nagmulistiya kanímu,</i> Have that man who molested you arrested. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; ac]</itype> inconvenience, bother s.o. asking a favor. <i>Ayaw kug mulistiyáhag hulamhúlam ug kwarta,</i> Don&apos;t you bother me by borrowing money. <i>Unsa na say ímung imulistiya nákù?</i> What are you going to bother me with this time?

<p id=12665><form>mulitsing</form> <xr>= <sc>muritsing</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12666><form>mulmul<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> general name given to parrot fish: <bio>Scarus spp</bio>.

<p id=12667><form>mulmul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> chicken feather coloration, ranging from light tan to reddish brown with a yellowish tinge.

<p id=12668><form>multa</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>fine</tr>. <i>Adúnay multa sa mangíhì dinhi,</i> Whoever urinates here will be fined. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> pay a fine. <i>Ngánung mumulta man ku nga wà man ku makalápas sa baláud?</i> Why should I pay a fine when I haven&apos;t broken the law? <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> impose a fine. <i>Multáhan ang muabsin sa parti,</i> Anyone who is absent from the party will be fined.

<p id=12669><form>multibaytamins</form> <pos>n</pos> multi vitamin tablets.

<p id=12670><form>multiplay</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> multiply, do the operation of multiplication. <i>Ang mga hay-iskul karun dì pa gihápun makamaung mumultiplay,</i> High school students nowadays don&apos;t even know how to do multiplication.

<p id=12671><form>multiplikar</form> <xr>= <sc>multiplay</sc>.</xr> <form>multiplikasiyun</form> <pos>n</pos> multiplication.

<p id=12672><form>multu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>ghost</tr> of a dead person. <i>Gipakítà siya sa multu,</i> The ghost appeared to him. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a2]</itype> for ghosts to appear. <i>Nagmultu ang kalag ni Krispin sa ikakwarinta díyas human siya mamatay,</i> The ghost of Crispin appeared on the fortieth day after his death. <i>Ang balay nga gimultúhan sa namatay,</i> The house where the soul of the deceased appeared.

<!-- TODO: is mud-ánun (mudmuluánun) to be expanded or not? --?

<p id=12673><form>mulù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; bc]</itype> complain about grievances or what one feels. <i>Nagmulù ang mga saup kay gagmay rag ílang mabáhin,</i> The tenants are grumbling because they got a small share. <i>Ayaw imulù nákù ang ímung sakit. Didtu sa duktur,</i> Don&apos;t tell me your complaints. Tell it to a doctor. <pos>n</pos> complaint about what one feels. <form>{mud-ánun|mudmuluánun}</form> <pos>a</pos> given to much complaining and grumbling.

<p id=12674><form>mulyi<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>pier</tr>, <tr>wharf</tr>. <i>Nagkargadur siya sa mulyi,</i> He is working as a stevedore at the pier. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a wharf, pier.

<p id=12675><form>mulyi<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>spring</tr>, tightly coiled wire that rebounds. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a]</itype> attach, use as a spring.

<p id=12676><form>mulyi<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> sharpen a thin-bladed instrument. <i>Kinsay mumulyi niíning bulang?</i> Who will sharpen this gaff? <i>Mulyíhun ta ning mga habulan nga bulang,</i> Let&apos;s sharpen the blades of these dull gaffs. <form>mulyihan</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. grindstone used to hone thin-bladed instruments.

<p id=12677><form>mulyínu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mill</tr> consisting of a large stone turned by a draft animal.

<p id=12678><form>mumhu</form> <pos>n</pos> little particles of cooked rice or corn that fall next to the plate when eating. <form>{ka-|kamumhu}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be full of morsels of rice. <form>mumhuun</form> <pos>a</pos> full of morsels of rice or corn.

<p id=12679><form>mumintu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>moment</tr>. <i>Mga mumintu sa kinabúhì nga dì níya hingkalimtan,</i> Moments in his life which he cannot forget. <ix>see also</ix> <pb n=692><xr><sc>unmumintu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12680><form>múmu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>muumuu</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear, make into a muumuu.

<p id=12681><form>mumù</form> <pos>a</pos> having as much of s.t. as one could want. <i>Mumù sa pagpanggà ang bugtung,</i> An only child has love lavished on him. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> get to have as much of s.t. as one would want. <i>Nagkamumù mi sa pagkáun sa nagkadatù mi,</i> We were getting to have all the food we want as we got richer.

<p id=12682><form>mùmù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> bump the mouth against s.t. <i>Nagdugù ang ngábil sa bátà kay namùmù sa lamísa,</i> The child&apos;s lip is bleeding because he bumped it against the table.

<p id=12683><form>múmug</form> <xr>= <sc>limugmug</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12684><form>múmuy</form> <pos>n</pos> pet name for a monkey. <i>Gipakáun níyag ságing ang múmuy,</i> He fed the monkey a banana.

<p id=12685><form>munamúna</form> <pos>a</pos> doing s.t. to the best of one&apos;s ability, with maximum effort. <i>Munamúna giyud nákung dágan apan wà giyud kung kaapas,</i> I ran as fast as I could but I couldn&apos;t overtake her. <i>Náay ákung tinígum apan munamúna sab nákung dagínut,</i> I have saved some money, but with great sacrifice.

<p id=12686><form>munarkíya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>monarchy</tr>.

<p id=12687><form>munastiryu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>monastery</tr>, <tr>nunnery</tr>.

<p id=12688><form>múnay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. bread made with more eggs and butter than ordinary bread and covered with a thin layer of beaten eggs which is baked onto it.

<p id=12689><form>mundu<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>baul mundu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12690><form>mundu<sub>2</sub>, munduy</form> <pos>n</pos> small, thin-skinned, but very full and compact variety of cooking banana.

<p id=12691><form>mungà</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mother hen</tr><corr>.</corr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> raise a mother hen. <i>Mungaa ang hingitlug,</i> Make the hens that are good layers into mother hens. <form>{-an(&larr;)|mungáan}</form> <xr>= <sc>himungáan</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>búnga</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12692><form>*mungálung</form> <form>{hi-|himungálung}/{ha-|hamungálung}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1236; b8]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>be aware</tr>. <i>Sa pagkahimungáwung nákug buut, nawálà na sila,</i> When I came to, they were gone. <i>Wà ku makahimungáwung nga nawálà ákung singsing,</i> I wasn&apos;t aware that my ring was gone. <number>2</number> remember a face vaguely. <i>Wà ku makahimungáwung sa íyang dagway,</i> I couldn&apos;t place his face. <number>3</number> get a good enough look at a face to recognize it. <i>Wà ku makahimungáwung sa íyang dagway kay ngitngit,</i> I couldn&apos;t recognize his face because it was dark. <form>{pahi-|pahimunálung}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> bring s.o. to his senses. <i>Ug wà makapahimungáwung nákù ang ákung mga anak, mapatay ku siya,</i> If my children hadn&apos;t brought me to my senses, I would have killed him.

<p id=12693><form>*mungawmúngaw</form> <form>{pa-|pamungawmúngaw}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> pretend not to know or be aware. <i>Nagpamungawmúngaw siyang wà kahibáwu nga nakadaug siya sa swipstik,</i> He pretended not to know that he had won a prize in the sweepstakes.

<p id=12694><form>*mungáwung</form> <xr>= <sc>*mungálung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12695><form>munggus</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mung bean</tr>, stewed like lentils or made into bean sprouts: <bio>Phaseolus aureus</bio>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b6]</itype> prepare a dish of mung beans. <i>Nindut munggusan ang bulad bulinaw,</i> Dried anchovies goes well if cooked with mung beans.

<p id=12696><form>mungha</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cenobite nun</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> <number>1</number> be a cenobite nun. <number>2</number> cloister oneself like a nun.

<p id=12697><form>munghi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cenobite monk</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be, become a monk.

<p id=12698><form>mungit</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> k.o. edible fish of the rocks of an unusually strong smell. <number>2</number> allusion to s.o. who smells bad. <i>Kalígù uy nanimáhù ka mang mungit,</i> Wash yourself, man. You smell like a <ix>mungit</ix> fish.

<p id=12699><form>mungkádu kuluni</form> <pos>n</pos> colony of members of a religious brotherhood, so called after their founder Hilario C. Moncado. <form>mungkadista</form> <pos>n</pos> a follower of Moncado.

<p id=12700><form>munha, munhi</form> <xr>= <sc>mungha</sc></xr>, <xr><sc>munghi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12701><form>*munisipal</form> <form>{hunta|hunta munisipal}, kunsíhu {&mdash;|munisipal}</form> <pos>n</pos> municipal board.

<p id=12702><form>munisipyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>municipal building</tr> in a town. <number>2</number> town not as big as a city. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> be, become a <tr>municipality</tr>.

<p id=12703><form>munitur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>monitor</tr>, a student chosen to help a teacher with order, attendance, and other non-teaching chores. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; a12]</itype> be, become a monitor, make s.o. the monitor.

<p id=12704><form>muntáda</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>mount</tr>, set s.t. up resting on s.t. <i>Nagmuntáda sila sa mga kanyun ibabaw sa kútà,</i> They are mounting the cannons on the upper walls of the fort. <number>2</number> <itype>[A]</itype> be mounted, put up s.w. <i>Nagmuntáda ang bátà sa kúna,</i> The baby is lying flat on the crib.

<p id=12705><form>munt&acaron;r</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> set s.t. up, install s.t. for use. <i>Wà pa ku makamunt&acaron;r sa utáwan,</i> I have not set the ironing board up yet. <i>Gimunt&acaron;r na ang ilibítur,</i> The elevator has been installed. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2]</itype> mount, get on a saddle. <i>Dì ku makamunt&acaron;r sa silyíta sa bisiklíta kay hábug,</i> I can not get on the bicycle seat because it&apos;s too high. <number>3</number> for male animals to copulate. <i>Dílì mumunt&acaron;r ang butù kay walà bigái,</i> The male won&apos;t mount because he isn&apos;t sexed up.

<p id=12706><form>munti<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>muntinglúpà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12707><form>munti<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>monte</tr>, k.o. card game. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2C; b6]</itype> play monte.

<p id=12708><form>muntinglúpà</form> <pos>n</pos> <corr sic=Muntinglupa>Muntinlupa</corr>, national penitentiary of the Philippines. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be sent to <corr sic=Muntinglupa>Muntinlupa</corr>.

<pb n=693>

<p id=12709><form>muntúra</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>saddle</tr>. <i>Lisud ang magkabayù nga way muntúra,</i> It&apos;s difficult to ride a horse without a saddle. <number>2</number> seat of a bicycle. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c]</itype> <tr>mount s.t. on s.t.</tr>, usually so as to put it in full view. <i>Kamira nga gimuntúra ibabaw sa lamísa,</i> A camera mounted on top of the table. <form>{pa-|pamuntúra}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3]</itype> place conspicuously s.w. <i>À, náa man giyus úna magpamuntúra, mu ra mag hárì,</i> Hm, how he dared take a seat right in the front, as if he were a king!

<p id=12710><form>munumintu</form> <xr>= <sc>munyumintu<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=12711><form>munyíka</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>doll</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; c6]</itype> play with dolls. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> obtain a doll. <number>3</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> make into a doll. <form>{&mdash;|munyíka} nga nuug</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>rag doll</tr>.

<p id=12712><form>munyumintu<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> monument. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; b(1)]</itype> set up a monument.

<p id=12713><form>munyumintu<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> small marker of cement to indicate the corners of land boundaries. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> put a cement marker up.

<p id=12714><form>múr</form> (from <ix>murtál</ix>) I <tr>swear</tr>, it&apos;s true. <i>Tinúud laging gipalitan kag sinínà, múr,</i> I swear to God, she bought you a dress. <form>{&mdash;|múr} pa</form> I swear, it&apos;s true.

<p id=12715><form>mura</form> <xr>= <sc>mau ra</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>mau</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12716><form>múra</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>muslim woman</tr>.

<p id=12717><form>murabya</form> <pos>n</pos> variety of banana.

<p id=12718><form>murádu</form> <pos>a</pos> reddish purple. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>amurádu</sc>.</xr> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> color s.t. reddish purple.

<p id=12719><form>mural</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>morale</tr>. <i>Makadáut sa mural sa sundáwu,</i> Can destroy the soldiers&apos; morale. <number>2</number> <tr>moral</tr> or moral lesson.

<p id=12720><form>muralidad</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>morality</tr>, moral conduct. <i>Mubù na kaáyu ang muralidad sa mga táwu karun,</i> The current generation does not conform to high standards of morality.

<p id=12721><form>muralista</form> <pos>n</pos> one who is a stickler for moral propriety.

<p id=12722><form>murdir</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a12]</itype> murder, corrupt a language, song. <i>Gimurdir ni Nína ang ispíling sa ákung ngálan,</i> Nena murdered the spelling of my name.

<p id=12723><form>murgi</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>morgue</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> be kept in a morgue. <i>Murgihun (imurgi) na lang ang minatay samtang maghulat kun kinsay mukúhà,</i> The body will be kept in the morgue while they wait for s.o. to claim it.

<p id=12724><form>murína</form> <xr>= <sc>murínu</sc></xr> (female).

<p id=12725><form>murínu</form> <pos>a</pos> brown or dark-brown in complexion. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B125]</itype> be, become brown in complexion.

<p id=12726><form>muritsing</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> be smeared, spotted with dirt, grimy. <i>Mauy nakamuritsing (nakapamuritsing) sa ákung sinínà ang úling nga ákung gidala,</i> The charcoal which I was carrying soiled my dress. <form>{ka-|kamuritsing}</form> <itype>[A13]</itype> be smeared all over. <i>Nagkamuritsing man lang nang nawung mu sa sikwáti,</i> Your face is all besmeared with chocolate.

<p id=12727><form>murkun</form> <pos>n</pos> dish made of ground meat mixed with spices and wrapped in the leaf fat or thinly sliced pork or beef, and boiled and then fried. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> make, have <ix>murkun</ix>.

<p id=12728><form>murpína</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>morphine</tr>.

<p id=12729><form>mursíku, mursíkus</form> <xr>= <sc>amursíku</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12730><form>murtal<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>mortal sin</tr>. <i>Ayawg pangáwat kay salà kanang murtal,</i> Do not steal because that is a mortal sin. <number>2</number> I swear, it&apos;s true. <i>Wà lagi ku mamakak, murtal (murtal sin) pa,</i> I am not lying, I swear. <form>{&mdash;|murtal} sin</form> <xr>= <sc>murtal</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr>

<p id=12731><form>murtal<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mortar cannons</tr>. <i>Murtal ang gamítun pagbungkag sa kaáway,</i> They use mortars to scatter the enemy. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> fire a mortar cannon on.

<p id=12732><form>murtar sin</form> <xr>= <sc>murtal<sub>1</sub></sc>, <i>a2.</i></xr>

<p id=12733><form>muru</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>pouting</tr>, <tr>unsmiling</tr> face. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B46; c1]</itype> having a sour face in displeasure. <i>Nagmuru ang babáying nasukù,</i> The angry woman is frowning.

<p id=12734><form>murumúru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> play in verse, dramatizing noble deeds of royalty, performed on an elaborate and lavish scale on the feast day of a patron saint. <number>2</number> s.t. put on merely as a show, not with serious purpose. <i>Usa lang nà ka murumúru ang imbistigasiyun sa kahugáwan sa Arsii,</i> The investigation of the Rice Administration scandals is all a big show. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> hold a Moro-Moro play.

<p id=12735><form>murun</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. torch made from a section of bamboo around 3 cm. in diameter with a neck and fuelled with kerosene. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> make, make into a torch of this sort.

<p id=12736><form>múrus</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>Muslim</tr> (derogatory reference). <number>2</number> unbaptized infant (humorous). <form>{-in-|minurus}, {-in-(&larr;)|minúrus}</form> <pos>a</pos> doing things like the Moros: <number>1</number> speak the language of the Moros. <number>2</number> fight, settle arguments like the Moros. <number>3</number> setting outrageously high prices. <number>4</number> traitorous, stabbing in the back. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> do s.t. like the Moros. <form>{ka-an|kamurusan}</form> <pos>n</pos> place where many Muslims live.

<p id=12737><form>murúsu</form> <xr>= <sc>amurúsu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12738><form>muryumuryu</form> <pos>n</pos> a notorious red light and slum district near the waterfront of Cebu City.

<p id=12739><form>mus</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. soil with heavy humus content used by florists.

<p id=12740><form>músa</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>muse</tr>, a <tr>beauty queen</tr>. <i>Si Bilin ang nahímung músa sa klási,</i> Belen became the class muse. <number>2</number> in a benefit dance where girls are auctioned off to dancing partners, the girl who gets the highest amount of money. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; a2]</itype> be, become a muse; make s.o. the muse.

<p id=12741><form>musgut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>pout</tr> and <tr>frown</tr> from annoyance. <i>Mimusgut siya nga ákung gisúgù,</i> She frowned when I sent her on an errand. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|musgutan}</form> <pos>a</pos> always frowning in countenance.

<pb n=694>

<p id=12742><form>musì</form> <pos>n</pos> name given to an edible k.o. pufferfish with no spines.

<p id=12743><form>musika</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>music</tr>.

<p id=12744><form>musikal</form> <pos><corr sic=a>n</corr></pos> <tr>musical film</tr>.

<p id=12745><form>musiku</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>music band</tr>. <i>Mitukar ang musiku ug usa ka martsa,</i> The band played a march. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b6]</itype> provide a band. <form>musikíra</form> <xr>= <sc>musikíru</sc></xr> (female). <form>musikíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>musician</tr>. <number>2</number> member of a band. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156]</itype> be a musician or member of a band.

<p id=12746><form>musimus</form> <pos>a</pos> being of the poorest and lowest class (derogatory term). <i>Musimus giyud nga pagkatáwu dì kahibawu mugámit ug kutsára,</i> He was born in a stable. He doesn&apos;t even know how to use a spoon. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be, become lowly and looked down upon. <i>Ug mutumpang ka ánang way grádu, mamusimus ka sad,</i> If you step into the gutter to fight with that ignoramus, you&apos;ll bring yourself down to his level.

<p id=12747><form>muskatil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>muscatel</tr> wine.

<p id=12748><form>muskit</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> a ship cook&apos;s helper. <i>Ang muskit mauy katábang sa kusiníru,</i> The ship cook&apos;s helper gives the cook assistance. <number>2</number> cook who is hired or just offers his services for a special occasion. <i>Mau nay ámung muskit káda pyista,</i> He is our cook every fiesta. <number>3</number> the one who is it (the server) in a game of <ix>takyan</ix> or marbles. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B136; a2]</itype> be, become a cook for a special occasion. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> make a person remain it for a long time. <i>Muskítun kug maáyu si Pidru. Lagyuun nákug pátid ang takyan,</i> I&apos;ll make Pedro be it for a long time. I&apos;ll kick the shuttlecock far away.

<p id=12749><form>muskitíru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mosquito net</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> put up, use a mosquito net; make into a mosquito net. <i>Magmuskitíru ta kay daghang namuk,</i> We have to put up a mosquito net because there are lots of mosquitoes. <form>{&mdash;|muskitíru} ug tabla</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> be dead (lit. wearing a wooden mosquito net). <i>Ug dì ka muhúnung ug ínum magmuskitíru kag tabla,</i> If you don&apos;t stop drinking, you will wind up in a coffin (wearing a wooden mosquito net).

<p id=12750><form>muskubádu</form> <pos>n</pos> raw, <tr>unrefined sugar</tr>.

<p id=12751><form>muskuládu, muskuláwu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>muscular</tr>, <tr>brawny</tr>. <i>Dì siya musúkul nímu kay muskuládu ka,</i> He won&apos;t fight with you because you are brawny. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be, become muscular.

<p id=12752><form>musmus</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> push s.o.&apos;s face hard against s.t. <i>Imusmus ku nang nawung mu sa bungbung,</i> I&apos;m going to push your face against the wall. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> fall down hard hitting one&apos;s face on s.t. <i>Nadalispang siya ug namusmus sa lápuk,</i> He slipped and fell down face first in the mud.

<p id=12753><form>mus na</form> <ix>short for</ix> <xr><sc>bámus na</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>bámus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12754><form>mustása</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mustard</tr>, commonly raised as a vegetable: <bio>Brassica integrifolia</bio>.

<p id=12755><form>mustra</form> <pos>n</pos> explanation by example, showing how s.t. is or works. <i>Mustra kun unsáun pagbúhat ang plánu sa balay,</i> A demonstration on how to make the plans of a house. <i>Mustra lang kini. Dílì ibaligyà,</i> This is just a sample for display. It is not for sale. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> demonstrate how to do s.t. <form>{-dur(&rarr;)|mustradur}</form> <pos>n</pos> mannequin or showcase used to display.

<p id=12756><form>músu</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b]</itype> hire oneself out to do a piece of work. <i>Bugas ang gisúhul sa nagmúsu ug gúna,</i> The man who did the weeding was given rice in compensation. <number>2</number> <itype>[c2]</itype> hire a work animal. <i>Íyang karabaw mauy átung imúsu (musúhan) sa dáru,</i> We will hire his carabao. <pos>n</pos> s.o. or s.t. hired out. <form>{pa-|pamúsu}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> hire s.o. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> hire one&apos;s work animal out to s.o. else.

<p id=12757><form>musulíyu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mausoleum</tr>.

<p id=12758><form>musyun</form> <pos>n</pos> motion in a meeting of a voting body. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> make a motion.

<p id=12759><form>mútà</form> <pos>n</pos> dried pus or mucous secretion in the eyes. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become this secretion in the eyes. <i>Ang abug sa mata mamútà,</i> If dust gets into the eyes it will turn into pus. <form>{(&rarr;)|mutà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B146; a4]</itype> be filled with this secretion. <i>Nagmutà (gimutà) ang mata sa gipiskat,</i> The man with the sore eyes has dried pus in his eyes. <form>{hi-|himútà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> remove the <ix>mútà</ix> from the eyes. <form>{pa&N;hi-|panghimútà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> remove pus from one&apos;s eyes. <form>{hi-an(&rarr;)|himutaan}</form> <pos>n</pos> the corner of the eye where the <ix>mútà</ix> is deposited. <form>{-un(&rarr;)|mutaun}</form> <pos>a</pos> full of <ix>mútà</ix>.

<p id=12760><form>mutíbu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>motive</tr>. <i>Pangabubhu ang mutíbu sa pagpatay,</i> Jealousy was the motive for the murder.

<p id=12761><form>mutil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>motel</tr> or <tr>cabins</tr>, usually used for illicit romance.

<p id=12762><form>mutimuti</form> <xr>= <sc>kamukámu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12763><form>mutsatsa</form> <xr>= <sc>mutsatsu</sc> (female), <ix>n, v1.</ix></xr>

<p id=12764><form>mutsatsu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>male servant</tr>, <tr>houseboy</tr>. <number>2</number> in children&apos;s games, the loser who serves out a penalty. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126; a2]</itype> be, become a <tr>servant</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A12]</itype> hire or have s.o. as a servant. <i>Nakamutsatsu mig kawatan,</i> We got a thief as a servant. <form>{pa-|pamutsatsu}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> hire oneself out as a servant. <i>Didtu siya sa Manílà magpamutsatsu,</i> He worked as a servant in Manila. <form>{paka-|pakamutsatsu}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> consider, treat like a houseboy.

<p id=12765><form>mutsu</form> <pos>a</pos> being temporarily rich (colloquial). <i>Daghan kug amígu basta mutsu ka,</i> You will have lots of friends as long as you&apos;re in the clover. <form>{&mdash;|mutsu} diníru</form> having lots of money. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> have lots of money. <i>Mamutsu lang tag tingswildu,</i> We are rich only on payday.

<p id=12766><form>mutu, mutù</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mound</tr>, <tr>hill</tr>. <i>Túa sa luyung <pb n=695>mutu ang ámung balángay,</i> Our town lies beyond that hill.

<p id=12767><form>mut-uk</form> (from <ix>but-uk</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b2]</itype> be dumbfounded, be struck speechless because of the sudden impact of words or events. <i>Hingmut-ukan (namut-ukan) ku sa ímung nutisya kay mu rag dì katuúhan ang nahitabù,</i> I was struck dumb by your news because it sounded unbelievable.

<p id=12768><form>mutùmútù<sub>1</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>tumùtúmù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12769><form>mutùmútù<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; a12]</itype> <tr>estimate</tr>, <tr>calculate approximately</tr>. <i>Mutùmutúa lang unsa kadaghana ang gikinahanglan,</i> Just estimate how many we need.

<p id=12770><form>mutun</form> <pos>n</pos> block, a metal or wooden case containing a pulley or pulleys. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a2]</itype> attach a block to s.t.; haul out s.t. by means of a block.

<p id=12771><form>mutung</form> <pos>a</pos> for an animal in a group or flock to be fierce and domineering over the others. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1]</itype> gain supremacy over others. <i>Ang sunuy nagmutung sa pultri,</i> The cock is the boss of the chicken yard. &dagger;

<p id=12772><form>mutur</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>engine</tr>, <tr>motor</tr>. <i>Nadáut ang mutur sa tiprikurdir,</i> The motor of the tape recorder got broken. <number>2</number> <tr>motorcycle</tr>. <number>3</number> corn or rice mill. <i>Túa siya sa mutur nagpagaling ug mais,</i> He is at the corn mill to have the corn milled. <form>{-bayik|muturbayik}, {-saykul|mutursaykul}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>motorbike</tr>, <tr>motorcycle</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[c]</itype> put s.t. as an engine; use s.t. as an engine. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> go by motorcycle. <form>{di-|dimutur}</form> motorized, having a motor. <form>{-ista|muturista}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>motorist</tr>, <tr>driver</tr>.

<p id=12773><form>mutursaykul, mutursiklu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>motorcycle</tr>.

<p id=12774><form>mutyà</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> precious gem with magical properties. <i>May mutyà nà siya búsà dílì dutlan,</i> He has a charm and so he is invulnerable. <number>1a</number> <formx>{&mdash;|mutyà} sa ságing tinduk</formx> <pos>n</pos> in folk belief, a precious stone which falls from the blossom of a <ix>tinduk</ix> banana when it opens at midnight on a moonless night. Supernatural beings in the form of powerful monsters watch for this stone to fall. If a man obtains this stone, he is endowed with magical powers but he must wrest it from the supernatural beings who are also after it. <number>2</number> anything precious or valued highly. <i>Ang bugtung níyang mutyà dinhi sa kalibútan mau ang íyang anak,</i> Her only treasure here on earth is her child. <number>2a</number> <formx>daw may {-ng|mutyang} gisapnay, nagsapnay ug {&mdash;|mutyà}</formx> being extraordinarily careful in handling s.t. (as if one were carrying a precious gem). <i>Ampíngi ang ímung dungug sáma sa mutyang sinapnay,</i> Guard your honor like a jewel. <number>2b</number> <tr>treasured</tr>, most <tr>valued</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|mutyà} sa mga mata</form> apple of one&apos;s eye. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; b(1)]</itype> possess a precious gem having a charm. <form>{paka-|pakamutyà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> consider, treat as a precious gem.

<p id=12775><form>muu</form> <xr>= <sc>mau</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12776><form>múuk</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> be asleep soundly. <i>Magmúuk ug katúlug ang bátà human digúa,</i> A baby sleeps soundly after you bathe it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1; b(1)]</itype> stay in bed due to inactivity. <i>Magmúuk lang siya kanúnay sa banig bísag udtu na,</i> She is always staying in bed, even if the sun is up. <number>3</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> be so that air cannot get at it. <i>Ug magmúuk ang ímung samad, dílì mamaáyug dalì,</i> If your wound is wrapped up so air cannot get at it, it will take a long time to get better. <form>muukmúuk ug katáwa</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b3]</itype> roll with laughter, suppressing the sound. <i>Nagmuukmúuk mi pagkatáwa sa ámung maistrung wà makapamutúnis,</i> We practically exploded with laughter at our teacher because he hadn&apos;t buttoned his pants. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|muukan}, {pala-|palamúuk}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>sleepyhead</tr>.

<p id=12777><form>muung</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. cardinal fish: name given to numerous small, red, lightly-scaled fish of the family <bio>Apogonidae</bio>.

<p id=12778><form>muut, múut</form> (from <ix>buut</ix>) <pos>a</pos> <tr>funny</tr>, extremely <tr>laughable</tr>. <i>Muut kaáyu si Dulpi mudala ug kumidiya,</i> Dolphy is very funny in a comedian&apos;s role. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B12; a2]</itype> be <tr>funny</tr>, <tr>hilarious</tr>. <i>Muúta nang ímung mga líhuk arun mangatáwa sila,</i> Make your actions funny so that they will laugh. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be, become amused at s.t. funny. <i>Namuut ku sa íyang kumidiya,</i> I was amused at her jokes. <form>{para-(&larr;)|paramúut}</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>funny</tr>, <tr>laughable</tr>. <i>Ang mga salída ni Dyíri Líwis pulus paramúut,</i> Jerry Lewis&apos;s films are all funny.

<p id=12779><form>muwaybuway</form> <xr>= <sc>buraybúray</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12780><form>muy</form> <number>1</number> <ix>exclamation initial to a sentence:</ix> My! How very. <i>Muy hináya pud nímu nga musulat!</i> How slow you write! <number>2</number> exclamation expressing deep disgruntlement or dissatisfaction. <i>Muy! Ug magsígi ning gastúha, makapútu,</i> My! If these expenses go on, it will make us go bankrupt.

<p id=12781><form>mùy</form> <xr>= <sc>muy</sc>, <i>2.</i></xr>

<p id=12782><form>*muyù</form> <form>{hig-|higmuyù}/{hag-|hagmuyù}</form> <xr>= <sc>{hisag-|hisagmuyù}/{hasag-|hasagmuyù}</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>sagmuyù</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12783><form>mwiblis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>furniture</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> get furniture.

<p id=12784><form>mwilyi</form> <xr>= <sc>mulyi</sc><sub>1, 2, 3</sub>.</xr>

<p id=12785><form>mwistra</form> <xr>= <sc>mustra</sc>.</xr> <form>{-dur|mwistradur}</form> <xr>= <sc>mustradur</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12786><form>myápi</form> <xr>= <sc>pyápi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12787><form>myáus</form> <xr>= <sc>mayáus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12788><form>myimbru</form> <xr>= <sc>mimbru</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12789><form>myintras</form> <xr>= <sc>mintras</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12790><form>Myirkulis</form> <xr>= <sc>mirkulis</sc>.</xr>

<p id=12791><form>myúsik</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> piece of music being played. <i>Dúnay myúsik sa intirmisyun sa sini,</i> There&apos;s music during the intermission in the movies. <number>2</number> music as a course. <number>3</number> go, word uttered <pb n=696>by a conductor of a passenger vehicle to signal the driver to drive off. <i>Dihang misinggit ang kunduktur ug myúsik, mipabulhut dáyun ang draybir,</i> When the conductor shouted &lsquo;music, maestro&rsquo;, the driver immediately took off.



</body>
</text>
</TEI.2>
