<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN" [

<!ENTITY larr       CDATA "&#x2190;"            -- leftwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY rarr       CDATA "&#x2192;"            -- rightwards arrow -->
<!ENTITY glots      CDATA "&#x0294;"            -- glottal stop -->

<!ENTITY amacr      CDATA "&#x0101;"            -- a with macron -->
<!ENTITY imacr      CDATA "&#x012B;"            -- i with macron -->
<!ENTITY umacr      CDATA "&#x016B;"            -- u with macron -->

<!ENTITY mgrave      CDATA "m&#x0300;"            -- m with grave -->

<!ENTITY amacrgra   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0300;"    -- a with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY imacrgra   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0300;"    -- i with macron and grave -->
<!ENTITY umacrgra   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0300;"    -- u with macron and grave -->

<!ENTITY amacracu   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0301;"    -- a with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY imacracu   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0301;"    -- i with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY umacracu   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0301;"    -- u with macron and acute -->
<!ENTITY Umacracu   CDATA "&#x016A;&#x0301;"    -- U with macron and acute -->

<!ENTITY amacrcir   CDATA "&#x0101;&#x0302;"  -- a with macron and circumflex -->
<!ENTITY imacrcir   CDATA "&#x012B;&#x0302;"  -- i with macron and circumflex -->
<!ENTITY umacrcir   CDATA "&#x016B;&#x0302;"  -- u with macron and circumflex -->

<!ENTITY Acaron     CDATA "&#x01CD;"            -- A with caron -->
<!ENTITY acaron     CDATA "&#x01CE;"            -- a with caron -->
<!ENTITY Icaron     CDATA "&#x01CF;"            -- I with caron -->
<!ENTITY icaron     CDATA "&#x01D0;"            -- i with caron -->
<!ENTITY Ucaron     CDATA "&#x01D3;"            -- U with caron -->
<!ENTITY ucaron     CDATA "&#x01D4;"            -- u with caron -->

<!ENTITY schwa      CDATA "&#x0259;"            -- schwa (turned e) -->
<!ENTITY N          CDATA "N"                   -- N symbol (as used in this dictionary) -->

<!ENTITY prime      CDATA "'"            -- prime -->
<!ENTITY Prime      CDATA "''"            -- double prime -->

]>

<TEI.2 lang=en>
<teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
        <titleStmt>
            <title>A Dictionary of Cebuano Visayan</title>
            <author>John U. Wolff</author>
        </titleStmt>
    </fileDesc>
    <profileDesc>
        <langUsage>
            <language id=en>English</language>
            <language id=en-US>English (United States)</language>
            <language id=ceb>Cebuano</language>
        </langUsage>
    </profileDesc>
</teiHeader>
<text>
<body>
<pb n=1120>
<div1 type=Letter id=letter.w n=W>
<head>W</head>

<p id=20584><form>wá<sub>1</sub></form> expression of mild <tr>disappointment</tr> uttered when s.o. fails to do what one wanted him to do. <i>Wá, kaláin dì man diay maná sa sini!</i> Gosh, why aren&apos;t you taking me to the movies with you! <i>Wá, kini ray ímung ihátag!</i> Gosh! Is this all you&apos;re giving me?

<p id=20585><form>wá<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>wala</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20586><form>wâ</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>walà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20587><form>wáay<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> raise a weapon preparatory to striking. <i>Giwaáyan níya sa bunal ang irù,</i> He raised the club at the dog.

<p id=20588><form><corr>*</corr>wáay<sub>2</sub></form> <form>{&mdash;|wáay} gid</form> <xr>= <sc>waray gid</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <sc>waray<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p id=20589><form>wábul</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B5; b6]</itype> <tr>shake</tr>, <tr>wobble</tr>, move in an irregular and jerky movement. <i>Kusug kaáyung muwábul ning awtúha básig náay dipirinsiya niíni,</i> This car wobbles a lot. S.t. must be wrong with it. <pos>a</pos> shaking, wobbling. <pos>n</pos> wobbling motion.

<p id=20590><form>wadwad</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> <number>1</number> break the soil, as in tilling. <i>Unsay itanum niánang dapíta nga inyung giwadwáran (giwadwad)?</i> What are you going to plant in the area you have plowed? <number>1a</number> for a pig to dig around in s.t. with its snout. <i>Giwadwad sa bábuy ang linadlad,</i> The pig dug around on the clothes put out to bleach. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> take s.t. out of a container to display it. <i>Ákung iwadwad (wadwárun) ang ákung mga butang arun nímu makit-an ug nía ba dinhi ang ímung gipangítà,</i> I&apos;ll take my things out so you can see if what you are looking for is here. <number>3</number> <itype>[A2; b]</itype> <tr>work hard</tr> (slang). <i>Kinahanglang muwadwad ug maáyu ang draybir arung kabawì sa ábang,</i> A passenger jeepney driver has to work like hell to make enough to recover his rent.

<p id=20591><form>wagas</form> <pos>n</pos> pure <tr>gold</tr>, not worked into jewelry. <pos>a</pos> <tr>pure</tr>, <tr>unmixed</tr> (literary). <i>Wagas nga kamatuúran,</i> The pure, unvarnished truth.

<p id=20592><form>wagat</form> <pos>a</pos> for root crops to be watery and somewhat lumpy to eat. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for root crops to become watery and lumpy. <i>Muwagat (mawagat) ang pálaw ug linghud pa,</i> <ix>Palaw</ix> is watery and lumpy when it is cooked too young.

<p id=20593><form>wagtang</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>lose</tr> s.t. <i>Diin man ka. Nawagtang ka man,</i> Where were you? You disappeared! <i>Ayaw giyud nag wagtánga ang ímung bulpin!</i> Don&apos;t lose your ball-point pen! <number>2</number> <itype>[AP; a]</itype> drive away, make s.t. vanish. <i>Álak ray makawagtang sa ákung kaguul,</i> Only liquor can drive away my sorrows.

<p id=20594><form>wagut</form> <pos>n</pos> fibrous, inedible portion of jackfruit. <pos>a</pos> for sweet potatoes to be small and fibrous. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> come out small and fibrous. <i>Mawagut ang kamúti ug linghud pa kaáyu,</i> Very young sweet potatoes are small and fibrous. <form>{-un|wagutun}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having a lot of fibrous inedible portions. <number>2</number> being small and fibrous.

<p id=20595><form>wagwag<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; c6]</itype> <tr>spill</tr> s.t. out of a container. <i>Nawagwag ang harína kay nabutbut ang sáku,</i> The flour spilled because the bottom came out of the sack. <number>1a</number> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> rip or puncture a container so the contents spill. <i>Ikaw diay nagwagwag sa sáku kay ímu mang gidahik,</i> You made the sack rip because you dragged it. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>divulge</tr> information. <i>Miwagwag hinúun ku sa tanan kung nasayran báhin níya,</i> I spilled everything I knew about her. <number>3</number> <itype>[A]</itype> go about with penis dangling freely. <i>Walà giyud kay úwaw kun magwagwag kang mulakaw sa karsáda,</i> You sure are shameless if you can walk down the street with your penis waving in the breeze. <pos>n</pos> secret that has become known.

<p id=20596><form>wagwag<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a variety of white paddy <tr>rice</tr> with strong panicles maturing late and giving a heavy yield.

<p id=20597><form>wáhì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> brush, push s.t. aside to clear the way or view. <i>Ang nag-una mauy miwáhì sa mga sangang nagbabag sa agiánan,</i> The guide <tr>brushed aside</tr> the branches which blocked the way.

<p id=20598><form>wahig</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>river</tr>.

<p id=20599><form>wáhig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> move s.t. attached to s.t. aside or out of the way. <i>Kamuy muwáhig sa mga bangkù nga nag-ali sa agiánan,</i> You move the benches aside that are in the way. <i>Siyay nagwáhig sa kurtína,</i> He pushed the curtains aside. <form>wahigwahig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>scatter</tr>, <tr>strew</tr> s.t. around. <i>Kinsa bay miwahigwahig niíning mga papil sa sála?</i> Who strewed these papers all over the living room? <i>Basakang nawahigwahig sa dakung pátag,</i> Rice fields scattered over the broad plain.

<p id=20600><form>wáhing</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> move s.t. to the side without lifting it entirely. <i>Iwáhing (wahínga) ang kurtína arun makalìlì ta,</i> Pull the curtain to the side so we can peek. <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; c6]</itype> lay one&apos;s work aside. <i>Muwáhing siya sa íyang gitrabáhu kun náay magkinahanglan níya,</i> He will lay whatever he is working aside if s.o. needs him. <form>wahingwáhing</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c1]</itype> flip through pages.

<pb n=1121>

<p id=20601><form>wáis</form> <xr>= <sc>wayis</sc> (slang).</xr>

<p id=20602><form>wait</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>lip</tr> (not used in romantic contexts). <i>Mga libakíra nga dagkù, nanipis na lang ang mga wait,</i> They are a bunch of gossips with their thin lips. (Gossipers are said to have thin lips.) <number>2</number> lip-like <tr>edge</tr>, <tr>brim</tr>. <i>Dúnay buak sa wait sa bangà,</i> There is a nick on the lip of the jar.

<p id=20603><form>wak</form> <pos>n</pos> word used in writing to represent the sound of a whack.

<p id=20604><form>wákag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> <tr>scattered</tr> all over not too large an area. <i>Kun kit-an sa mga bátà ning mga duwáan wakágun (iwákag) dáyun ni sa hawanan,</i> If the children get hold of these toys, they&apos;ll scatter them all over.

<p id=20605><form>wákal</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> be, become <tr>unintelligible</tr> in one&apos;s speech. <i>Wakálun (iwákal) gánì nímug sulti dì ka hisabtan námù,</i> If you <tr>mumble</tr> your words we won&apos;t understand you. <pos>a</pos> unintelligible, <tr>mumbling</tr> in speech.

<p id=20606><form>*wákang</form> <form>{insik|insik wákang}, tsíbay {&mdash;|wákang}</form> expression used to tease Chinese. <i>Insik wákang káun kalibang,</i> Ching chong Chinaman, eat and shit.

<p id=20607><form>wakanga</form> expression said to be used by Chinamen in anger or surprise.

<p id=20608><form>wákat</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> <tr>scatter</tr>, put in <tr>disarray</tr>. <i>Nagwákat lang ang mga butang sa íyang kwartu,</i> Junk is scattered all over her room. <number>2</number> <itype>[B6C3]</itype> <tr>intertwine</tr>, be <tr>intertwined</tr>. <i>Nagwákat ang mga gamut sa bakhaw sa katunggan,</i> The roots of the mangroves in the swamps are scattered about in an intertwining maze. <pos>n</pos> the prop roots of mangroves, so called because they scatter out in every direction, intertwining and forming an impenetrable mass.

<p id=20609><form>wakay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ornamental fern that has large leaflets having a fine serrated margin, used to cleanse pots: <bio>Cyclosorus sp</bio>. <form>wakaywakay</form> <xr>= <sc>lukdulukdu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20610><form>wakis</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>lift</tr> a cover up or <tr>push</tr> it sideways. <i>Hángin ang miwakis sa ákung sayal,</i> The wind blew my skirt up. <i>Magwakis nà siyang matúlug,</i> Her skirt rides up her legs as she sleeps. <i>Wakisa (iwakis) ang kurtína arun makasulud ang ínit,</i> Pull the curtain aside to let the sun in.

<p id=20611><form>waklay</form> <pos>a</pos> tall and thin. <i>Mikalit siyag túbù maung waklay,</i> He grew fast. That&apos;s why he is lanky. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12; b6]</itype> become tall and thin. <i>Káun ug túda kay nagkawaklay ka,</i> Eat a lot because you are getting tall and thin.

<p id=20612><form>wakli</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> push, brush s.t. away from one. <i>Giwakli níya ang pagkáung gidúnul,</i> He brushed the food they handed him aside. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> drive out from the mind (literary). <i>Iwakli ang mga hunàhúnà mung way hinungdan,</i> Cast aside your foolish ideas. <number>3</number> <itype>[c6]</itype> give away s.t. of little value to oneself. <i>Usáhay waklíhan pud mi níya madiyut,</i> Sometimes he tosses a little something our way. <pos>n</pos> action of pushing s.t. aside. <i>Sa usa ka wakli nahapaúmud ang íyang kuntra,</i> One brush of the arm sent his enemy sprawling.

<p id=20613><form>wakling</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> push s.t. aside, usually causing it to topple over. <i>Wà ka giyud makawakling ánang mga kartun nga nakasámuk sa ímung lamísa,</i> Why haven&apos;t you pushed those boxes aside since they are in your way as you work at the table? <i>Ayaw nà waklínga (iwakling) arun dì mahúlug,</i> Don&apos;t push that aside or it will fall over.

<p id=20614><form>wakwak<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>bird</tr> which comes out at night, so called from its call. Its call signifies the presence of a vampire (<ix>unglù</ix>) or in some beliefs, it is a form the vampire takes himself. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13]</itype> for the <ix>wakwak</ix> to be about. <number>2</number> <itype>[a12]</itype> victimize s.o. with vampire activity. <form>{pa&N;-|pangwakwak}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> go about engaging in vampire activity. <form>{-un|wakwakun}</form> <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>unglù</sc>, <ix>n</ix>.</xr>

<p id=20615><form>wakwak<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> the West piece of mahjong <xr>= <sc>wisti</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20616><form>wala</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>left hand</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>left side</tr>. <i>Likù paingun sa wala,</i> Turn to the left. <form>{&mdash;|wala} ug tuu</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>spending right and left</tr>. <i>Wág tuu mugastu mu rag <corr sic="unásis">Unásis</corr>,</i> Spending money right and left like Onassis. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be at the left side. <number>2</number> <itype>[a2]</itype> do s.t. with the left hand. <i>Walha pagkuput kay tuu may ímung ipakang,</i> Hold it with the left because you strike it with the right. <i>Ug makigtínis ka nákù walhan ta ra ka,</i> If you play tennis with me, I&apos;ll give you the advantage by playing only with the left. <form>{pa-|pawala}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> go or <tr>keep to the left</tr>. <i>Sa Inglatíra magpawala ang sakyanan,</i> In England they drive on the left. <form>walhun</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>left-handed</tr>. <number>2</number> implement for s.o. who is left-handed. <i>Awtung walhun,</i> Automobile designed for driving on the left side. <form>walhun nga tikì</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>southpaw</tr> (humorous and derogatory from the phrase <ix>walhung tikì tuuhung mangíhì,</ix> &lsquo;He&apos;s a southpaw <ix>tikì,</ix> but he uses his right hand to piss&rsquo;). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B12]</itype> become left-handed.

<p id=20617><form>walà</form> <ix>short forms:</ix> <bx>wà, wâ</bx>. <tr>no</tr>, <tr>not</tr>. <number>1</number> <ix>preceding verbs:</ix> <tr>did not</tr>, <tr>is not doing</tr>. <i>Walà níya lutúa,</i> He did not cook it. <i>Wà ku matúlug,</i> I <tr>wasn</tr>&apos;t asleep. <form>{&mdash;|walà} madúgay</form> <tr>not long after</tr>. <i>Walà madúgay miabut ang amahan,</i> Not long after, the father arrived. <form>{&mdash;|walà} sukad</form> <tr>never up to that time</tr>. <i>Walà sukad aku makadungug ánà,</i> I had <tr>never before</tr> heard that. <number>2</number> <tr>not be in a place</tr>. <i>Walà dinhi ang maistru,</i> The teacher is not here. <i>Walà pa (wap-a) sa Sámar ang bagyu,</i> The storm hasn&apos;t reached Samar yet. <number>2a</number> not be in a certain condition. <pb n=1122><i>Walà siya sa maáyung buut,</i> He is not in a good mood. <i>Walà ra siya sa kumingking itandì nákù,</i> He is nothing compared to me (lit. he is not even up to my little finger). <number>2b</number> <formx>{&mdash;y|walay}</formx> there isn&apos;t, wasn&apos;t any. <i>Walay táwu,</i> There wasn&apos;t anyone. <i>Walà nay (wan-ay) túbig,</i> There&apos;s no more water. <number>2b1</number> <formx>{-y|walay} <r>[<ix>noun</ix>] [<ix>nom.</ix>]</r></formx> [nom.] does not have any [noun]. <i>Way kwarta si Huwan,</i> Juan has no money. <i>Walà ku árun,</i> I don&apos;t know anything about this. <number>2b2</number> <ix>phrases with walay:</ix> <form>wà tay amígu</form> you&apos;re not my friend (baby talk). <form>{-y|walay} báli, kásu <r>[<i>dat.</i>]</r></form> it doesn&apos;t matter to [dat.]. <i>Way báli nákù ug mabuak,</i> <tr>I don&apos;t care</tr> if it breaks. <form>{&mdash;|walà} pay</form> before there was any, before it got to be. <i>Sa wà pay gíra,</i> Before the war. <i>Wà pa gániy úras,</i> It hasn&apos;t even been an hour. <form>{-y|walay} láin kun dílì</form> <tr>none other than</tr>. <i>Ang mukanta way láin kun dì si Bin Abilyána,</i> Our singer is none other than Ben Abellana. <number>2b3</number> <formx>{-y|walay} <r>[<ix>doubled verb base</ix> or <bx>Culu-</bx><ix>verb base</ix>]</r></formx> <tr>without doing</tr>. <i>Milakaw siya sa walay pupananghid (walay tingugtíngug),</i> He left without excusing himself (saying anything). <number>2b4</number> <formx>{-y|walay} <r>[<ix>verb base</ix> + (&rarr;)]</r></formx> <tr>without having done</tr>. <i>Bátang way ligù, way sudlay,</i> An unwashed, uncombed child. <i>Ulan nga way bugtù,</i> Rain without letup. <form>{(&larr;)|wálà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB12; a12b4(1)]</itype> <tr>lose</tr> s.t., be <tr>lost</tr>. <i>Nakawálà kug libru,</i> I lost s.o.&apos;s book. <i>Nawálà ag ákung pitaka,</i> I lost my pocketbook. <i>Kustumbring nagkawalà,</i> Customs that are <tr>disappearing</tr>. <i>Ayawg wad-a (waláa) nang lapísa,</i> Don&apos;t lose that pencil. <i>Nawad-an ku sa pagsálig,</i> I lost confidence. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> lose one&apos;s way. <i>Nawálà kus lasang,</i> I got lost in the forest. <form>{tag-(&larr;)|tagwálà}, {tig-(&larr;)|tigwálà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>misplace</tr>, <tr>lose track of</tr> s.t. <i>Natagwaláan nákù ang papílis,</i> I have misplaced the documents. <i>Ug dílì katigwaláan nákù ning nagsunud nákù, madakpan ku,</i> If I can&apos;t <tr>shake off</tr> these people following me, I&apos;ll get caught. <number>2</number> <tr>get lost</tr> s.w. <i>Nadúgay mi kay gitagwaláan mi sa dálan,</i> We were delayed because we lost our way. <form>{pahinga-|pahingawalà}, {paka-|pakawalà}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> <i>dì, walà {&mdash;|pahingawalà}</i> <tr>be without</tr>. <i>Ang palasikwáti dì magpahingawalà (magpakawalà) ug tablíya,</i> Those addicted to chocolate drink cannot be without chocolate tablets. <form>walàwálà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> occur, <tr>come off and on</tr>. <i>Nagwalàwálà ang ákung hilánat,</i> My fever <tr>comes and goes</tr>. <form>{ka-an|kawaláan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>void</tr>, <tr>space</tr>. <i>Unyà mibálik ang lalum nga tíngug sa kawaláan,</i> Then a deep voice came again from the void. <form>kawalad-un</form> <pos>n</pos> utter, <tr>abject poverty</tr>.

<p id=20618><form>walay</form> <number>1</number> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>walà</sc>, <i>2b.</i></xr> <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>waray<sub>2</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=20619><form>waldas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3; b5]</itype> move the hands or s.t. held in the hands above the head. <i>Nahadluk kus hubug kay nagwaldas sa íyang pinútì,</i> I was scared of the drunk because he was waving his sword in the air. <form>waldaswaldas</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <xr>= <sc>waldas</sc>.</xr> <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>gesticulate</tr> while speaking. <i>Daw búang siya nga nagwaldaswaldas sa íyang mga kamut,</i> He waves his arms around like a madman when he speaks. <number>3</number> <itype>[A1; c6]</itype> spend money wastefully, <tr>squander</tr> money. <i>Nagwaldaswaldas siyag kwarta nga dílì íyang hinagúan,</i> He just squanders money that he didn&apos;t lift a finger for.

<p id=20620><form>wáli</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sermon</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>lecture</tr> read to s.o. who has done s.t. wrong. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> deliver a sermon. <number>2</number> <tr>lecture</tr> s.o. <i>Ayaw gánì akug walíhi dihà arun dì ka masípà,</i> Read me a lecture, woman, and your head will crack like it never cracked before. <form>{mag-r-(&rarr;)|magwawali}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>preacher</tr>.

<p id=20621><form>wáling</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AP; c1]</itype> <tr>move</tr> s.t. to the side without lifting. <i>Ang nagwáling (nagpawáling) sa mga lingkuránan mau puy mag-úlì,</i> Whoever pushed the chairs to the side will have to put them back. <i>Walínga (iwáling) kanang mga basahun kay básig náa sa luyu,</i> Push the books aside. Maybe it&apos;s behind them. <i>Walínga ímung ilung ug kit-an nímu,</i> <tr>Follow your nose</tr> around the first bend (lit. turn your nose) and you&apos;ll see it. <form>walingwáling</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>turn over</tr> from side to side. <i>Giwalingwáling sa ditiktib ang minatay arun pag-ila,</i> The detective turned the corpse from side to side to identify him. <number>2</number> <tr>flip pages</tr> of a book.

<p id=20622><form>walingwaling</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>orchid</tr>, grown ornamentally: <bio>Vanda sanderiana</bio>.

<p id=20623><form>walis</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[AB26; c1]</itype> <tr>push</tr> a flexible covering aside. <i>May kamut nga miwalis sa kurtína,</i> A hand pulled the curtain aside. <number>1a</number> for the lips to turn up in a smile. <i>Nawalis (niwalis) ang íyang mga ngábil sa usa ka maanindut nga pahíyum,</i> Her lips turned up in a sweet smile. <number>1b</number> <formx>{&mdash;|walis} ang kahílum</formx> <itype>[B26]</itype> for silence to break. <number>2</number> <itype>[B126]</itype> in volleyball, for the hand to be knocked back and fail to return a ball that was hit with force.

<p id=20624><form>walts</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>waltz</tr> music or dance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC]</itype> dance the waltz.

<p id=20625><form>walu</form> <ix>numeral</ix> <tr>eight</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>tulu</sc>.</xr> <form>waluwálu</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> wind and rain in heavy torrents for eight successive days. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>tagiwálu</sc>.</xr> <form>{ka-|kawalu}, {maka-|makawalu}</form> <tr>eight times</tr>. <form>{ika-|ikawalu}</form> <tr>eighth</tr>. <form>{tag-(&larr;)|tagwálu}</form> eight at a time. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> do in multiples of eight. <form>{tagi-(&larr;)|tagiwálu}</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. snake that is said to stay eight days on dry land and eight days in the sea alternately.

<p id=20626><form>walug</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>valley</tr>. <number>2</number> <formx>{&mdash;|walug} sa ginluháan, pag-antus</formx> <tr>vale of tears</tr> (the world). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> become a valley. <form>{kina-an|kinawalugan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <pb n=1123>the lowest place of a valley.

<p id=20627><form>walup, wálup</form> (not without <ix>l</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>wallop</tr>, strike with a hand blow. <i>Lisud sagngun ang íyang sirbisyu kay kusug kaáyung muwálup (muwalup),</i> It&apos;s hard to return his serve because he really wallops it. <pos>n</pos> wallop.

<p id=20628><form>walwag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> insert s.t. long in an opening and work it around. <i>Walwaga nang nakasampung sa túbu,</i> Work s.t. around in the pipe to get out whatever is blocking it.

<p id=20629><form>walwal</form> (from <ix>diwalwal</ix>) <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> for the tongue to hang out in panting, or figuratively, for s.t. to hang out like the tongue. <i>Muwalwal ang dílà sa irù ug hiinitan,</i> The dog pants with his tongue hanging out when he is in the sun. <i>Nagwalwal ang kinatáwu sa hubug,</i> The drunk&apos;s penis is hanging out of his pants.

<p id=20630><form>wánang</form> <pos>n</pos> wide or roomy space, esp. a flat place. <i>Dakug wánang ang ílang sála,</i> They have a <tr>spacious</tr> living room. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; a2b2]</itype> be, become <tr>flooded</tr> with. <i>Nawánang ang plása sa túbig sa kusug nga ulan,</i> The plaza became flooded in the heavy rain. <form>{ka-an|kawánangan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>outer space</tr>. <i>Misutuy ang rákit ngadtu sa kawanángan,</i> The rocket ship shot into <tr>space</tr>.

<p id=20631><form>wan-an-ihap</form> <pos>a</pos> a one-and-a-half storey house. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; c6]</itype> be a one-and-a-half storey house.

<p id=20632><form>wan-aydyak</form> <pos>n</pos> the jacks of hearts and spades, which are shown with only one eye. <pos>a</pos> blind in one eye (humorous).<i> Magdarkglásis bísag gabíi kay wan-aydyak man,</i> So that&apos;s why he wears dark glasses even at night, because he is blind in one eye. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> become blind in one eye.

<p id=20633><form>wandag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; a2]</itype> <tr>roam</tr>, <tr>wander</tr> from place to place. <i>Dì makapuyù nang tawhána muwandag giyud,</i> He never stays put, but he wanders from place to place.

<p id=20634><form>wandas</form> <xr>= <sc>waldas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20635><form>wandirin dyú, wandiring dyú</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. ornamental spreading <tr>herb</tr> with purple, acuminate leaves: <bio>Setcreasea purpurea</bio>.

<p id=20636><form>wandug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> move <tr>unsteadily</tr> as from fatigue, drunkenness. <i>Wà ka wandúgi sa trák?</i> Didn&apos;t it seem to you that bus was swaying? <form>wandugwandug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB3; c1]</itype> move unsteadily, <tr>stagger</tr> or <tr>sway</tr> while moving; cause s.t. to do so. <i>Miwandugwandug ang sakayan tungud sa dagkung balud,</i> The boat rocked from side to side in the big waves.

<p id=20637><form>wanggu</form> (word play on <ix>gúwang</ix>&mdash;slang. <xr><ix>see</ix> <sc>gúlang</sc>.</xr>) <pos>n</pos> <tr>old man</tr>.

<p id=20638><form>wangì</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>bend</tr>, <tr>displace</tr> s.t. without moving it entirely. <i>Akuy muwangì sa tabla ug kuúta ang búla sa ilálum,</i> I will bend back the plank and you reach for the ball inside. <i>Kinsay nagwangì sa úbas sa sagángat?</i> Who bent one of the tines of the spear? <number>2</number> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> <tr>break off</tr> a piece of s.t. long, get broken off. <i>Muwangì kug sangang pára ilatigus kabáyù,</i> I&apos;ll break off a branch to use for a horsewhip. <i>Muwangì (mawangì) ang ákung mga pánit sa ngilit sa kuku usáhay,</i> The skin on the sides of the nail sometimes breaks. <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>displaced</tr>. <number>2</number> broken off. <i>Wanging kuku,</i> <tr>Hangnail</tr>. <form>wangìwángì</form> <pos>n</pos> corners of the mouth at the lips. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> hit s.o. at the corners of the mouth. <i>Wangìwángía (iwangìwángì) siya pagkurit,</i> Pinch her at the edge of her lips.

<p id=20639><form>*wángis</form> <form>{pa&N;-|pangwángis}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> for a pig&apos;s canines to grow long because of age. <i>Nangwángis na ang ámung bábuy apan dì pa mangasáwa ang ámung ulitáwu,</i> Our pig has grown long canines but our young man doesn&apos;t want to get married yet.

<p id=20640><form>wangkata</form> <pos>n</pos> shape of one&apos;s body (slang&mdash;word play on <ix>katawan</ix>, Tagalog for &lsquo;body&rsquo;). <i>Mau nay wangkata. Pambátug banggà,</i> My! What a body! A sure winner in a beauty contest!

<p id=20641><form>wanglùwanglù</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>stagger</tr> in one&apos;s walk, esp. of one who is drunk.

<p id=20642><form>wangsà</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>bucktoothed</tr>, with the upper teeth sticking out and the mouth half-open. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1; b6]</itype> have this sort of characteristic. <i>Ábi nímug gwápu ka? Nagwangsà lang ang nawung mu,</i> Do you think you are handsome, you and your <tr>buck teeth</tr>?

<p id=20643><form>wangsat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A3P; c1]</itype> <tr>grin</tr> broadly (exposing the teeth). <pos>n</pos> <tr>broad grin</tr>. <i>Dakù kaáyug wangsat kay daúgan man,</i> He&apos;s grinning broadly because he won.

<p id=20644><form>wangsì</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> having one or both the lips turned up such that it is impossible to close the mouth. <number>2</number> partly opened due to a cut with a side drawn up. <i>Wangsì kaáyu ang íyang samad,</i> She has a very wide cut. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6]</itype> <number>1</number> get a wide cut or for s.t. to get upturned. <i>Nawangsì ang tibuuk kung kuku,</i> My whole fingernail got turned up. <number>2</number> get opened, <tr>ajar</tr>. <i>Muwangsì (mawangsì) ang sira kun maluag ang bisagra,</i> The shutter won&apos;t close tight if the hinges are loose. <number>3</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> tear s.t. off, loose. <i>Giwangsì níya ang bungbung,</i> He tore off the wall boards.

<p id=20645><form>wangtigu</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>old man</tr> (word play on <ix>tigúwang</ix>&mdash;slang. <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>gúlang</sc></xr>).

<p id=20646><form>wangut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> chew s.t. with the gums. <i>Magwangut gánì ang masúsu sa bibirun sa átù pa katul na ang lagus,</i> When an infant chews the nipple, it means that his gum <pb n=1124>itches. <i>Wangutun (iwangut) sa ákung apuhan ang maskáda,</i> My grandfather chews his tobacco with the gums.

<p id=20647><form>wangwang</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; b5]</itype> <tr>enlarge</tr> an opening by cutting or pushing two things apart, be <tr>dilated</tr>, widely opened. <i>Wangwángun sa mananabang ang agiánan sa bátà inigpanganak,</i> The midwife dilates the passage for the baby during delivery. <i>Ayaw wangwánga (iwangwang) pag-abli ang gít arun way makasulud nga bábuy,</i> Do not open the gate wide or stray pigs will come in. <pos>n</pos> wide opening made by pushing two things apart.

<p id=20648><form>wani</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12; c6]</itype> be put in a wrong place, be <tr>mislaid</tr>. <i>Ayaw nà siya padad-ag paypay. Iwani na pud unyà nà,</i> Don&apos;t give her a fan to bring with her. She&apos;ll just misplace it again.

<p id=20649><form>*wani</form> <pos>n</pos> <form>mangga {&mdash;|wani}</form> k.o. wild mango that bears long fruit with a peculiar smell: <bio>Mangifera odorata</bio>.

<p id=20650><form>wanklik</form> <pos>a</pos> in one instant, without any delay. <i>Wanklik ra ning laytíra. Síga dáyun,</i> With one click this lighter lights. <i>Wanklik ra nang bayhána. Way daghang hangyù,</i> That woman can be had instantly, no fuss and bother. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> do s.t. in one <corr sic=full>fell</corr> swoop. <i>Giwanklik lang ang íyang swildu sa súgal,</i> He lost all of his money in one fell swoop in gambling.

<p id=20651><form>wantáyim</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> do s.t. just for once. <i>Muwantáyim giyud kug palit niánà bísag mahal,</i> I&apos;ll buy it even if it is expensive, just this one time. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b5]</itype> do s.t. all at one time. <i>Wantaymun (wantayman) ta lag hákut arun usa ra ka byáhi,</i> Let&apos;s take it all at once so we only have to make one trip. <pos>a</pos> s.t. done just once or done all at one time.

<p id=20652><form>wantid</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> needed for employment. <i>Wantid kaáyu ang trabahadur sa kunstruksiyun,</i> They need a lot of workers on the construction. <number>1a</number> want ad. <number>2</number> one <tr>wanted</tr> for a crime. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A3; a1]</itype> be in need of an employee. <i>Kinsa kahay nagwantid ug tindíra?</i> Where was it they were needing a salesgirl? <number>2</number> <itype>[B126; a1]</itype> become wanted for a crime.

<p id=20653><form>wan tu tri</form> call sounded out in games to indicate player is ready for the next thing to be done. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> escape or get away from paying for s.t. (slang). <i>May gats giyud ka kun makawan tu tri kas Bisáyan,</i> You&apos;ve got to have guts if you eat without paying at the Visayan Restaurant. <number>2</number> do service poorly and hurriedly. <i>Dì ka makawan tu tri ug tupi basta istriktu,</i> You can&apos;t cut hair poorly and hurriedly if the customer is fussy.

<p id=20654><form>wanwi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>one-way street</tr>, trip. <i>Dì ta makaági dihà kay wanwi nà,</i> We can&apos;t go that way because it&apos;s a one-way street. <number>2</number> a mode of betting in jai-alai using two digits wherein only one specific combination wins (as opposed to the <i>lyábi<sub>2</sub></i>). <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; c1]</itype> be, become one-way. <number>2</number> <itype>[A13; ac]</itype> bet on s.t. one way and not in a combination (<i>lyábi<sub>2</sub></i>).

<p id=20655><form>waping</form> <xr>= <sc>uwaping</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20656><form>wápir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wafer</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> make, have wafers.

<p id=20657><form>warak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> <number>1</number> throw s.t. or s.o. down with force so that it breaks. <i>Íya na untà nga iwarak ang kúlun sa kalágut,</i> She was about to smash the pot to the ground in anger. <number>2</number> spike a ball in volleyball. <pos>n</pos> a spike in volleyball.

<p id=20658><form>warakwarak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> scold continuously and loudly. <i>Kusug kaáyung muwarakwarak si Mama ug madúgay ming mupaúlì,</i> Mother scolds us continuously if we come home late. <pos>n</pos> things said in scolding.

<p id=20659><form>waraswáras</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> <number>1</number> go back and forth. <i>Nagwaraswáras pa ra ba giyud atubángas bisíta, nanimáhù ra ba!</i> She walked back and forth in front of the visitors, and to think that she had B.O.! <number>2</number> go in all directions hastily. <i>Miwaraswáras si Kuring pagpangítà sa puldir nga nawálà,</i> Coring went around in a dither looking for the lost folder.

<p id=20660><form>warawára</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wave the hands or s.t. held in the hands back and forth. <i>Miwarawára siya pagpahúnung sa awtu,</i> He waved his hand to stop the car.

<p id=20661><form>Waray<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> the language of Samar and Eastern Leyte, so called from the form <ix>waray</ix> used in most dialects of this language analogously to the Cebuano <ix>walà</ix> and <ix>walay</ix>. <number>2</number> one who comes from the Waray-speaking region. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B126; b6]</itype> be, become a <ix>Waray</ix>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> speak Waray. <form>{-in-|Winaray}, Waraywáray</form> <xr>= <sc>waray</sc>, <i>n1,</i> <pos>v</pos>.</xr> <form>{-nun|Waraynun}</form> <xr>= <sc>waray</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr>

<p id=20662><form>waray<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> be gone, not in existence (colloquial). <i>Waray na tay pagkáun,</i> We have no more food. <i>Ayaw na lang tu pangitáa, waray na tu,</i> Don&apos;t look for it anymore. It&apos;s already lost. <form>{&mdash;|waray} gid</form> none at all (humorous for <ix>walay gayud</ix>&mdash;from Samar-Leyte Bisayan <ix>waray</ix> and Hiligaynon <ix>gid</ix>). <i>&lsquo;Pilay kwarta mu?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Waray gid!&rsquo;</i> &lsquo;How much money have you got on you?&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Not a red cent!&rsquo;

<p id=20663><form>ward</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>hospital ward</tr>. <ix>see also</ix> <xr><sc>píward</sc></xr> and <xr><sc>príward</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20664><form>wardabáhu</form> <ix>warning shouted when s.t. heavy is going to fall:</ix> timber! gangway!

<p id=20665><form>wardámids klím</form> <pos>n</pos> war damage claim.

<p id=20666><form>wardas</form> <xr>= <sc>waldas</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20667><form>wardin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>warden</tr>, a chief or principal keeper of a prison. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; a2]</itype> be, become a warden.

<pb n=1125>

<p id=20668><form>wardiwardi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <tr>squander</tr> wealth, spend money thoughtlessly. <i>Maáyu lang kamung muwardiwardi sa kwarta nga wà ninyu hagúi,</i> It&apos;s easy for you to squander money which you didn&apos;t work for.

<p id=20669><form>wargung</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> go <tr>gallivanting</tr> around. <i>Ug muwargung mu, kanang mahuman na ug iksámin,</i> You can go gallivanting around after the examination.

<p id=20670><form>warì</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; ac1]</itype> give up a possession. <i>Iwarì ku lang ang ákung yútà kay nagkinahanglan kug kwarta,</i> I will give up my lands because I need the money. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give up one&apos;s job. <i>Muwarì ku ning trabahúa ug may mas maáyu pa kung hikit-an,</i> I&apos;ll leave this job if I find a better one.

<p id=20671><form>wárì</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a2]</itype> <tr>confuse</tr> s.o. and <tr>mislead</tr> him. <i>Waríun nátù ang mga bátà arun dílì makabantay inigpanlákaw nátù,</i> Let us mislead the children so they won&apos;t notice it when we leave. <number>2</number> <itype>[B1256]</itype> lose one&apos;s way. <i>Mawárì giyud kus dawuntawun magabíi,</i> I <tr>get lost</tr> downtown at night. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|warian}</form> <pos>n</pos> in the game of <ix>tubigtúbig</ix>, the line drawn where the defensive players stand (where the offensive team is confused as to how to get through).

<p id=20672><form>warm-ap</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <tr>warm up</tr> an engine. <number>2</number> [A; a 12] <tr>warm up</tr> for sports or other activities.

<p id=20673><form>warning</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> give a <tr>warning</tr> prior to punishment. <i>Warníngan ka úsà. Dílì ka multáhan dáyun,</i> You&apos;re given a warning first. You&apos;re not fined the first time. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> ring a warning bell in school. <i>Nagwarning na ba?</i> Has the warning bell rung? <number>3</number> <itype>[A]</itype> be two points away from winning in pingpong. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> warning given not to do s.t. again. <number>2</number> warning bell in school. <number>3</number> player two points away from winning in pingpong. <form>{&mdash;|warning} bil</form> <pos>n</pos> warning bell in school.

<p id=20674><form>warung</form> <pos>a</pos> <tr>dishevelled</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; c1P]</itype> be dishevelled. <form>{(&larr;)|wárung}, {ka-(&larr;)|kawárung}</form> <pos>v</pos> [A 13] be very dishevelled. <i>Mu ra kag si Ayinstayin, nagwárung (nagkawárung) ang buhuk,</i> You look like Einstein with your hair going every which way.

<p id=20675><form>*wasa</form> <form>{hi-|hiwasa}</form> <xr>= <sc>aliwása</sc>.</xr> <form>wasawasa, wasawása</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c16]</itype> <tr>scatter</tr>, <tr>strew</tr> all about, not over a large area. <i>Asúkar nga nawasawasa na sa yútà,</i> Sugar scattered all over the ground.

<p id=20676><form>wása</form> (from <ix>asáwa</ix>&mdash;slang) <pos>n</pos> <tr>wife</tr>.

<p id=20677><form>wasag, wásag</form> <xr>= <sc>watag</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20678><form>wasak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>scatter</tr>, put s.t. in <tr>disarray</tr>. <i>Giwasak sa bátà ang mga inutaw,</i> The baby scattered the ironed clothes. <number>2</number> <tr>shatter</tr>, break into many pieces. <i>Nawasak ang básu sa simintu,</i> The tumbler fell and shattered on the cement floor. <form>wasakwasak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[ANB12; c1]</itype> <tr>scatter</tr> all over the place, be scattered in disarray.

<p id=20679><form>was-anwir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wash-and-wear</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; b6]</itype> wear wash-and-wear.

<p id=20680><form>wásay</form> <pos>n</pos> large <tr>axe</tr>. <form>{(&rarr;)|wasay}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a1]</itype> cut or chop with an axe. <i>Kawatan puy nagwasay sa aparadur arun maabli,</i> Some robbers also hacked the cupboard open with an axe. <form>wasaywasay</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> name of <tr>bivalves</tr> which are shaped like the head of an axe, e.g. some kinds of <tr>hammer oysters</tr>. <number>2</number> general name for small <tr>dragonflies</tr>. <form>wasaywásay</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>hatchet</tr> with a blade that is at right angles to the hatchet, the back of which is even with the handle.

<p id=20681><form>wasdak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> hurl s.t. down. <i>Ug ikaw muwasdak ánang lubi mabuak giyud,</i> If you throw the coconut down, it will surely break.

<p id=20682><form>wasi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a3]</itype> <tr>diverge</tr> from a path, go <tr>astray</tr>. <i>Nawasi ang íyang dálan. Mauy katungdánan ta ang paglamdag kaníya,</i> He has <tr>strayed</tr> from the path of righteousness. It is our duty to enlighten him. <form>wasiwasi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB1; c]</itype> <tr>scatter</tr> things; be scattered. <i>Ang iring mauy nagwasiwasi sa inutaw,</i> The cat scattered the newly-ironed clothes.

<p id=20683><form>wásì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B126]</itype> for the lips or a similar opening to be cut from violent impact. <i>Nawásì ang ákung wait nga naigù sa bátir,</i> I got an ugly cut in my lips because they were hit with the baseball bat.

<p id=20684><form>wasigwasig</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[APB1; c1]</itype> <tr>scatter</tr> s.t. small all around; be scattered all around. <i>Nagkawasigwasig ang mga bugas sa pagkayabu,</i> The rice was scattered all over the floor when it spilled.

<p id=20685><form>wásing</form> <pos>n</pos> one who is a helper around a passenger bus, helping loading, washing, or whatever needs to be done. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B156; c1]</itype> be a helper around a passenger bus. <number>2</number> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> wash a vehicle.

<p id=20686><form>waslik<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; b6(1)]</itype> push s.t. aside with an abrupt movement of the hands, throw s.t. hurriedly down. <i>Gíkan sa iskuylahan muwaslik lang dáyun siya sa íyang libru dáyung dágan sa gawas,</i> As soon as he gets home from school he throws his books down and runs out to play. <number>2</number> <itype>[AN; b(1)]</itype> give s.t. as if it had no value. <i>Usáhay muwaslik (mangwaslik) pud siyag diyisun nákù,</i> Sometimes he tosses a ten-spot at me. <pos>n</pos> pushing away with a rapid motion of the hands. <form>{&mdash;|waslik} sa tabuk</form> expression uttered upon hearing s.o. sneezing (lit. go away to the other side of the river).

<pb n=1126>

<p id=20687><form>waslik<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wife</tr> (slang). <i>Batan-un siyag waslik,</i> He has a young wife.

<p id=20688><form>wasngà</form> <xr>= <sc>wangsà</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20689><form>wasngì</form> <xr>= <sc>wangsì</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20690><form>waswas<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> rinse off soap and dirt with clear water in doing the laundry. <i>Waswási úsag maáyu úsà ihayhay,</i> Rinse it well before you hang it out to dry. <form>{-l-an(&rarr;)|walaswasan}</form> <pos>n</pos> clothes to be rinsed.

<p id=20691><form>waswas<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> rip off clothes, bedding or anything covering the body. <i>Ug inítan ka, waswása (iwaswas) ang ímung hábul,</i> If you feel hot, kick your blanket off.

<p id=20692><form>waswas<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wife</tr> (slang&mdash;from <ix>wása</ix>).

<p id=20693><form>waswit</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wife</tr> (slang&mdash;from <ix>wása</ix>).

<p id=20694><form>wát</form> command to make a water buffalo halt. (from <ix>huwat</ix>. <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>hulat</sc>.</xr>)

<p id=20695><form>watag, wátag</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB1; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> scatter s.t. fairly good-sized causing a great disorder, not over a large area. <i>Nagwátag ang papil sa salug,</i> Pieces of paper are strewn all over the floor. <number>2</number> for money to be dispersed without one realizing it. <i>Mawatag lang ang átung kwarta ug magbiyáhi ta,</i> Your money goes like water when you travel.

<p id=20696><form>watakwatak</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB; c1]</itype> scatter s.t. or splatter so that large splotches result, be scattered or splattered. <i>Nagwatakwatak ang tái sa bátà,</i> The baby&apos;s feces are splattered all over the place.

<p id=20697><form>wataswatas</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB12; a12]</itype> <number>1</number> tear s.t. to small pieces, usually cloth or some fairly strong material; be, become torn to pieces. <i>Ang mapintas nga hángin miwataswatas sa atup,</i> The violent wind tore the roofing to pieces. <number>2</number> break a large bill. <i>Dílì lang mahibaw-ang mahurut ang ímung bayintihun kun mawataswatas na ni,</i> Once you break your twenty-peso bill, it will just disappear without your even noticing how it goes.

<p id=20698><form>wati<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>earthworm</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4]</itype> be infested with earthworms.

<p id=20699><form>wati<sub>2</sub></form> <xr>= <sc>ulat<sub>1</sub></sc> (slang).</xr>

<p id=20700><form>wating</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b8]</itype> hit s.o. behind one&apos;s back by accident in lifting a machete or axe preparatory to striking. <i>Paháwà dihà. Tingálig hiwatingan ka,</i> Get out of there. I might hit you with my machete.

<p id=20701><form>*wátir</form> <form>{&mdash;|wátir} kan</form> <pos>n</pos> rectangular gasoline container with a handle, holding <measure reg="18.93 liters">five gallons</measure>. <form>{&mdash;|wátir} kúlur</form> <xr>= <sc>wutir kúlur</sc>.</xr> <form>{&mdash;|wátir} mílun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>watermelon</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|wátir} pam</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>water pump</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> install a water pump. <form>{&mdash;|wátir} puls</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>waterfall</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|wátir} sil</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>water-seal toilet</tr>, made of cement. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> use water-seal toilets.

<p id=20702><form>watsamára</form> <tr>what&apos;s the matter?</tr> (humorous). <i>Watsamára? Ngánung mihukyab mug pangatáwa?</i> What&apos;s the matter? Why did you burst into laughter?

<p id=20703><form>watsinanggu</form> <xr>= <sc>gwatsinanggu</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>gwatsi</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20704><form>watsir</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> one who proctors an exam. <number>2</number> poll watchers. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; b(1)]</itype> be a <tr>proctor</tr>.

<p id=20705><form>watsumára</form> <xr>= <sc>watsamára</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20706><form>watsung</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>homely</tr> looking. <number>2</number> of inferior quality or workmanship. <i>Watsung ning pagkagamáa kay wà maáyung pagkasipilya,</i> This was poorly done because it was not <corr sic=well-planed>well-planned</corr>. <number>3</number> not very bright, easily fooled. <i>Ayaw pangumprag ikaw rang usa, kay watsung kaáyu ka,</i> Don&apos;t go shopping without bringing s.o. along because you are not bright enough. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B1256; b6]</itype> become homely. <number>2</number> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> come out inferior in quality or workmanship. <number>3</number> <itype>[B12; a2]</itype> turn out to be simple, not very bright.

<p id=20707><form>watúsi</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>watusi dance</tr>. <number>2</number> k.o. small <tr>firecracker</tr> that crackles and sparkles when stepped upon. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> do the <tr>watusi</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|watúsi} bam</form> <xr>= <sc>watúsi</sc>, <i>n2.</i></xr>

<p id=20708><form>watwat</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> <number>1</number> open up s.t. that opens into a slit. <i>Akuy muwatwat sa ímung mata arun makúhà ang puling,</i> I&apos;ll open up your eyes to remove the speck. <i>Nawatwat ang gamayng lungag sa bungbung kay anhà man sila magsígi ug lìlì,</i> The slit in the wall got quite wide because they keep peeping through it. <number>2</number> open up s.o.&apos;s secrets for the whole world to know. <i>Giwatwat ang íyang makauúlawng kagahápun,</i> They opened up her shameful past to public knowledge. <number>3</number> <tr>recount</tr> s.t. in detail. <i>Giwatwat níya ang pagtákas sa Hapun,</i> He <tr>described</tr> the landing of the Japanese.

<p id=20709><form>waw</form> <tr>wow</tr>! an exclamation of great delight, admiration. <i>Waw, ligs!</i> Wow, legs! <form>{&mdash;|waw} sabaw</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>sabaw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20710><form>wáwa</form> <pos>n</pos> in combos, an electrical device in an amplifier which produces the sound <ix>wáwa</ix> when the guitar is strummed.

<p id=20711><form>wàwà</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AB26; c1]</itype> make a wide opening pushing s.t. aside. <i>Wàwáa ang pultahan kay isulud ang aparadur,</i> Open the door wide because we are going to get the dresser inside. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> wide opening between two things. <number>2</number> <tr>straits</tr> between two bodies of land.

<p id=20712><form>wawug</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>bent</tr>, <tr>curved</tr>, <tr>warped</tr>. <i>Wawug ang linya,</i> The line is <tr>crooked</tr>. <i>Ang wawug nga tabla dì maáyung himúung hagdan,</i> A <tr>twisted</tr> board does not make a good stair. <number>2</number> wobbly, unsteady in walk. <i>Wawug ang linaktan sa hubug,</i> A drunk walks unsteadily. <pos>n</pos> <tr>bend</tr>, <tr>curve</tr>. <i>Tuluy wawug sa káhuy. Dì magsilbi pára halígi,</i> The tree has three bends. It won&apos;t do for a post. <i>Ang wawug sa búla,</i> The curve of a ball. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; a2]</itype> be, become <pb n=1127><tr>bent</tr>, <tr>curved</tr>, <tr>warped</tr>. <pos>n</pos> bow. <form>wawugwáwug</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> moving in a <tr>zigzagging</tr> fashion. <i>Nagwawugwáwug ug dágan kay gisunud sa bála,</i> Running in a zigzagging fashion because he was being chased by gunfire.

<p id=20713><form>wayà</form> <xr>= <sc>walà</sc> (dialectal).</xr>

<p id=20714><form>wayawaya</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>mosquito wrigglers</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[a4b4]</itype> have mosquito wrigglers in it.

<p id=20715><form>way gid</form> <xr>= <sc>waray gid</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <sc>waray<sub>2</sub></sc>.

<p id=20716><form>wáyir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>electrical wire</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|wáyir} gíds</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wire gaug</tr>e. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A]</itype> measure with a <tr>wire</tr> gauge.

<p id=20717><form>wayis</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>sly</tr>, <tr>crafty</tr>. <i>Wayis si Baúhay kay nagpahilakhílak dihang lumsan untà,</i> How sly the turtle was when he pretended to cry when he was threatened with drowning. <number>2</number> <tr>sly</tr>, <tr>cheating</tr>. <i>Wayis kaáyu ang mga tindíra sa Karbun. Kusug manayúpì,</i> The vendors in the market are quite sly. They love to cheat. <number>3</number> <tr>wise</tr>, <tr>in the know</tr>. <i>Wayis kaáyu siya. Dílì patuntu,</i> He&apos;s very clever. You can&apos;t put one over on him. <form>{&mdash;|wayis} gay</form> <pos>a</pos> <xr>= <sc>wayis</sc>, <i>3.</i></xr>

<p id=20718><form>wayit drágun</form> <xr>= <sc>ispíhu</sc>, <i>n3.</i></xr>

<p id=20719><form>wayit guld</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>white gold</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>latex</tr>.

<p id=20720><form>wayit sayidwul</form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>white sidewall tires</tr>. <number>2</number> <tr>white sidewall haircut</tr>, hair cut white on the sides. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> wear such a haircut.

<p id=20721><form>waypir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>windshield wiper</tr>.

<p id=20722><form>wayring</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>electrical wiring</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> install electrical :wiring.

<p id=20723><form>wayway</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B6; c1]</itype> :dangle loosely. <i>Miwayway ang buktun nga natikbasan,</i> The arm that was hacked dangled loosely. <i>Ayaw iwayway ang panaptun sa bintánà,</i> Do not hang the cloth over the window.

<p id=20724><form>wíb<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> in boxing, wave the body to evade a blow. <number>2</number> in basketball, zigzag dribbling the ball. <form>{-ing|wíbing}</form> <pos>n</pos> waving to avoid blows or zigzagging in dribbling.

<p id=20725><form>wíb<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> waves in the hair. <pos>a</pos> wavy hair. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for hair to become wavy. <form>pinggir {&mdash;|wíb}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>finger waving</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c1]</itype> do finger waving. <form>{-ing|wíbing} lusyun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>cold-wave lotion</tr>.

<p id=20726><form>wíb<sub>3</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> a pattern of weaving, a weaving design.

<p id=20727><form>*wíding</form> <form>{&mdash;|wíding} anibirsari, dris, kík, ring</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wedding anniversary</tr>, dress, cake, ring.

<p id=20728><form>wídir byúru</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>Weather Bureau</tr>.

<p id=20729><form>wídu</form> <xr>= <sc>uwídu</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20730><form>wig</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wig</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> wear a wig.

<p id=20731><form>wígik</form> <xr>= <sc>uwígik</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20732><form>wígun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>station wagon</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> ride a station wagon. <form>istisyun {&mdash;|wígun}</form> <xr>= <sc>wígun</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20733><form>wik-ind</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>week-end</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> do s.t. on week-ends.

<p id=20734><form>wiktan</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>witik</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20735><form>wilding</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <tr>weld</tr>. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> set a dislocated bone in place (humorous). <form>{-in-an(&rarr;)|winildingan}</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>welded joint</tr>.

<p id=20736><form>wilga</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>strike</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; ab(1)]</itype> <tr>go on strike</tr>. <i>Giwilgáhan níla ang kumpaníya,</i> They went on strike against the company. <form>wilgista</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>striker</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be a striker. <i>Dì na makabalik sa trabáhu ang nawilgista,</i> Those who had been on strike cannot return to their jobs.

<p id=20737><form>wíli</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256; b3(1)c5]</itype> feel sad at leaving s.t. or for the loss of s.t. gone. <i>Nawíli siya nga mibíyà sa íyang hinigugma,</i> He felt sad upon leaving his beloved. <i>Wà kuy kawid-an (kawilíhan) ning kalibútan,</i> I won&apos;t <tr>miss</tr> anything in this world (when I die). <form>{&mdash;|wíli} sa tuguntúgun</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> take a long time to leave a place for an errand or to get s.t. accomplished. <i>Kadúgay nímung nakalakaw! Nawíli ka sa tuguntúgun?</i> Why can&apos;t you leave right away? What&apos;s holding you? <form>{pa&N;-(&rarr;)|pangwili}, {panga-(&rarr;)|pangawili}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> having a feeling of sadness because of a loss or s.t. left behind. <i>Nagpangwili (nagpangawili) siya nga mugíkan,</i> He is leaving, but not without a feeling of sadness. <form>{ka-|kawíli}</form> <pos>n</pos> sad <tr>nostalgia</tr>, <tr>sense of loss</tr>. <form>mawilíhun</form> <pos>a</pos> sad and reluctant to leave. <i>Mawilíhun siya nga nananghid sa pagpaúlì,</i> He said good-night with reluctance. <form>{maka-r-|makawiwíli}</form> <pos>a</pos> engendering a feeling of irreparable loss.&dagger;

<p id=20738><form>wilik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b6(1)]</itype> remove s.t. from oneself with a motion of rapid shaking. <i>Nangwilik (miwilik) siya humag hunaw,</i> He shook the water off his hands after washing. <pos>n</pos> action of flicking s.t. off of oneself. <i>Giwilik níya ang íyang itsay nga mikulabyun níya,</i> He shook off his girl as she was clinging to his shoulders.

<p id=20739><form>*wilkam</form> <form>{&mdash;|wilkam} adris</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>welcome address</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|wilkam} parti</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>welcome party</tr>.

<p id=20740><form>wiltsir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wheelchair</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; a12]</itype> ride or convey s.o. in a wheelchair.

<p id=20741><form>wilwig<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> <number>1</number> <tr>sprinkle</tr> s.t. on s.t. <i>Walà ku makawilwig sa tanum,</i> I haven&apos;t gotten around to sprinkling the plants yet. <i>Wilwígi (wilwigi) únà ug diyútayng klinsir únà kuskúsa,</i> Sprinkle a little bit of cleansing powder over it before you scrub it. <number>1a</number> hand around money for bribes. <i>Kun walà pa muwilwig ug kwarta dílì untà makadaug sa iliksiyun,</i> If he had not tossed money around, he would not have won the election.

<p id=20742><form>wilwig<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> smash s.o. in the face hard enough to distort it. <i>Ayaw na lag supaksupak dihà kay wilwígun ku run nang nawung mu,</i> You&apos;d better stop talking back like that or I&apos;ll smash your face so no one can recognize it.

<p id=20743><form>winblun</form> <pos>n</pos> windblown hairstyle, cut and curled so that the ends turn outward and to the front. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A13; c16]</itype> wear the hair or fix it <pb n=1128>in the windblown style.

<p id=20744><form>wind</form> <xr>= <sc>bintus</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20745><form>windusyáping</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b(1)]</itype> go <tr>window-shopping</tr>.

<p id=20746><form>wíngig</form> <pos>a</pos> deflected, crooked line or row. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; c1]</itype> for a line to be deflected. <i>Muwíngig (mawíngig) ang linya kun tandugun ang rúlir,</i> The line will be deflected if the ruler is nudged. <number>2</number> <itype>[B26; c1]</itype> knock the face with a force hard enough to turn it to one side, be knocked. <i>Muwíngig (mawíngig) giyud nang ímung nawung ug ákung hisagpaan,</i> Your head will spin if I slap your face.

<p id=20747><form>wings</form> <pos>n</pos> well-developed muscles in the region around the scapula, toward the sides under the arm. <i>Dagkug wings si Mistir Amirika,</i> Mr. America has well-developed muscles on his back under his arms. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A12]</itype> get good-sized muscles in this region.

<p id=20748><form>wingwing</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> push the sides of s.t. apart forcefully with both hands to make an opening. <i>Átung wingwíngun (iwingwing) ang bàbà sa bátà ug dì muinum sa tambal,</i> Let&apos;s force the child&apos;s mouth open if he refuses to take the medicine.

<p id=20749><form>winirwínir<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>dodge ball</tr> game with two teams. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AC; b]</itype> play dodge ball.

<p id=20750><form>winirwínir<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a12]</itype> <tr>mistreat</tr>, <tr>step all over</tr> (humorous for <ix>daugdáug</ix>&mdash;<ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>daug</sc></xr>). <i>Ábi pubri man ku, ímu lang kung winirwinírun,</i> Just because I&apos;m poor, you step all over me.

<p id=20751><form>winsild</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>windshield</tr>.

<p id=20752><form>wintirgrin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>oil of wintergreen</tr>. <form>{pa&N;-|pangwintirgrin}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2]</itype> apply oil of wintergreen on oneself.

<p id=20753><form>wir-anwír</form> <pos>a</pos> garment that has been worn for some time without being washed (humorous&mdash;play on <i>was-anwír</i>).

<p id=20754><form>wíraw, wirawwiraw</form> <xr>= <sc>líraw</sc>, <sc>lirawliraw</sc>.</xr> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>líraw</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20755><form>wiris</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> hit the volleyball with a spin. <i>Walúpa ang búla, ayawg iwiris,</i> Hit the ball squarely. Don&apos;t put a spin on it. <pos>n</pos> hit the volleyball with a spin. <form>wiriswiris</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c1]</itype> <tr>scribble</tr>, write or draw squiggly lines. <i>Adris nga giwiriswiris sa papil,</i> An address scribbled on a piece of paper. <i>Giwiriswirisan ku ang íyang ritrátu sa kalágut,</i> In my anger I scribbled all over his picture.

<p id=20756><form>wiriwiri</form> <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B; b6]</itype> for a light to <tr>flicker</tr> or for the vision to be blurred, as when one is dizzy. <i>Nagwiriwiri ang ákung panan-aw sa pagtindug nákù,</i> I kept <tr>seeing stars</tr> when I stood up. <i>Hángin ang nakawiriwiri (nakapawiriwiri) sa sígas sugà,</i> The gust of wind caused the light to flicker. <number>2</number> <itype>[A1]</itype> twisting and wriggling like worms, wrigglers. <i>Ug ayúhun pagtan-aw daghang nagwiriwiri sa súkà,</i> If you look at the vinegar closely you&apos;ll see lots of wriggling things in it. <pos>a</pos> <tr>wavering</tr>, <tr>flickering</tr> vision or light. <pos>n</pos> wriggling things, e.g. mosquito wrigglers. <form>{(&larr;)|wiriwíri}</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2S; c1]</itype> move s.t. to and fro with a quick, jerky or shaking motion. <i>Ig-abut nákù muwiriwíri dáyun ang íkug sa ákung irù,</i> As soon as my dog sees me it <tr>wags</tr> its tail immediately.

<p id=20757><form>wis baskit</form> <xr>= <sc>wist baskit</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20758><form>wisdam</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b(1)]</itype> have wisdom teeth. <i>Pagkabátà pa nímu giwisdáman ka na?</i> You have a wisdom tooth at your age? <form>{&mdash;|wisdam} tut</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wisdom tooth</tr>.

<p id=20759><form>wisik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> make s.t. fly off in all directions. <i>Nawiskan kug lápuk pag-ági sa trák,</i> I got mud splattered all over me when the truck sped by.

<p id=20760><form>wisiwísi</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a]</itype> <number>1</number> shake s.t. violently in all directions to get it loose. <i>Manuk nga nagwisiwísi sa úlud,</i> A chicken pulling and shaking at a worm. <i>Nakawisiwísi ang irù sa íyang láwas gíkan kining nagkahúmud sa kanal,</i> The dog shook its body after it got all wet in the canal. <number>2</number> be violently <tr>mauled</tr>, bested as if shaken violently. <i>Platun sa kaáway nga giwisiwísi sa átung sundáwu,</i> An enemy platoon that was mauled by our soldiers.

<p id=20761><form>wiski</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>whisky</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13; a12]</itype> have whisky.

<p id=20762><form>wislayin</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>waistline</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1]</itype> have a waistline of a certain dimension.

<p id=20763><form>wislik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[AN; b2c]</itype> <tr>flick</tr> s.t. away with the hands, esp. to the sides. <i>Ayaw iwislik ngari ang ímung singut,</i> Don&apos;t flick your sweat on me.

<p id=20764><form>wispúwin</form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. <tr>khaki</tr> fabric used for uniforms (from the brand name West Point).

<p id=20765><form>wist<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> west piece, the name of one of the winds (<ix>bintus</ix>). <number>2</number> the third player opposite the dealer. <number>3</number> third round in a game (<ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>ráwun</sc></xr>).

<p id=20766><form>*wist<sub>2</sub></form> <form>{&mdash;|wist} baskit, kan</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wastebasket</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[A12; c1]</itype> make, use a wastebasket. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; a]</itype> throw into the wastebasket. <i>Mawist baskit nang ímung aplikasiyun ug wà kay bákir,</i> They&apos;ll throw your application in the wastebasket if you don&apos;t have s.o. backing you.

<p id=20767><form>wisti</form> <xr>= <sc>wist<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=20768><form>wistirn</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>western movie</tr>.

<p id=20769><form>wist layin</form> <xr>= <sc>wislayin</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20770><form>wist púwin</form> <xr>= <sc>wispúwin</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20771><form>witik</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b]</itype> <number>1</number> strike s.t. with a <tr>flick</tr>. <i>Wikti sa latigu ang lángaw nga náa sa bukubuku sa kabáyù,</i> Take your whip and flick away the flies that are on the horse&apos;s back. <i>Wiktan ku nang dunggan mu,</i> I&apos;ll flick you one on the ears. <number>1a</number> sprinkle with a flicking motion. <i>Wiktig túbig úsà utawa,</i> Sprinkle water on it before you iron it. <number>1b</number> <itype>[A; c]</itype> throw a <pb n=1129>basketball by flicking it (putting a spin to it). <number>2</number> <itype>[A2; bc]</itype> give a <tr>hint</tr>. <i>Ákung wiktan ang íyang dáang pawuntin pin inigpalit níyag bag-u,</i> I&apos;ll drop some hints for him to give me his old fountain pen when he buys a new one. <number>2a</number> make indirect, insulting remarks. <i>Abusádu siya. Maáyung wiktan panagsa,</i> He thinks he&apos;s so important. He needs a few digs every so often to keep him in line. <number>3</number> <itype>[AN2; c]</itype> give s.t. away of little value to oneself. <i>Nakadaug ka man sa madyung. Wikti sab mi dihà bi,</i> How about tossing some of your extra mahjong winnings our way? <number>3a</number> <itype>[AN; c]</itype> <tr>bribe</tr>. <i>Mihílum na lang ang pulis kay giwiktan (giwitikan) man ug singku,</i> The policeman kept quiet because he was given a fiver. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> blow with a flicking action. <number>1a</number> toss of a ball with a flicking action. <number>2</number> a <tr>hint</tr> or biting <tr>allusion</tr>.

<p id=20772><form>wíting<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> in cards or mahjong, be in a position where one needs only one more piece or card to get mahjong or rummy. <number>2</number> one whose days are numbered because of an incurable condition (humorous). <i>Ubang tigúlang nga wíting mupalit dáag lungun,</i> Some old folks that are just waiting to die buy themselves a coffin in advance. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B136]</itype> get to be in the <ix>wíting</ix> situation. <number>2</number> <itype>[b5]</itype> be the card or piece one needs to win. <i>Wà mugawas ang kartang ákung giwíting (giwitíngan),</i> The card I was waiting for simply refused to turn up. <pos>n</pos> <xr>= <sc>{-an(&rarr;)|witingan}</sc>.</xr> <form>{-an(&rarr;)|witingan}</form> <pos>n</pos> card or piece one is waiting for.

<p id=20773><form>wíting<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> k.o. gambling games with a roulette having 37 numbers, where the wheel is rolled twice and the gamblers bet on the winning combination (either <ix>istrít</ix> in the first and second or <ix>istrít íkis</ix> on the first and second in either order).

<p id=20774><form>wíting lis</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>waiting list</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[c6]</itype> be put on the waiting list. <i>Wà pay bakanti. Iwíting lis ta lang ka,</i> There are no vacancies. I&apos;ll just put you on the waiting list.

<p id=20775><form>wíting syid</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>waiting shed</tr>, place where passengers take shelter while waiting for a vehicle.

<p id=20776><form>wítir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>waiter</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B156; a2]</itype> be, become a waiter.

<p id=20777><form>witkan</form> <ix>see</ix> <xr><sc>witik</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20778><form>witris</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>waitress</tr>. <i>Ngánung nangasáwa siya niánang witris?</i> Why did he marry nothing but a waitress? <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16; b(1)]</itype> be, become a waitress.

<p id=20779><form>witwit</form> <pos>a</pos> drooping of lips, with the lower lip hanging down. <pos>v</pos> <number>1</number> <itype>[B6; b6]</itype> get droopy lips. <number>2</number> <itype>[A; c6]</itype> <tr>chirp</tr>. <i>Langgam nga nagwitwit sa mga kakahúyan,</i> Birds chirping in the trees. <number>3</number> <itype>[A1; c2]</itype> <tr>complain</tr> about s.t., <tr>criticizing</tr>. <i>Wà kuy kawitwítan (ikawitwit) sa ímung ági,</i> I can find nothing to <tr>complain about</tr> in your work. <number>4</number> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> spread bad things about others. <i>Ang giwitwítan, miwitwit pud. Dì nahibáwu ang tanan,</i> Whoever received the gossip passed it on, so eventually everybody learned of it. <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> <tr>chirping</tr> of the birds. <number>2</number> <tr>senseless talk</tr>. <i>Ang íyang isturya pulus witwit,</i> Her story is all so much <tr>idle chatter</tr>. <form>{-an(&rarr;)|witwitan}</form> <pos>a</pos> <number>1</number> given to complaining and criticizing. <number>2</number> given to passing on gossip.

<p id=20780><form>wìwì</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; a1]</itype> push the sides apart to create an opening or to widen an opening. <i>Wìwía ang bugang arun makaági ta,</i> Push the grass aside so we can go through.

<p id=20781><form>wudrus</form> <pos>n</pos> a vine that grows in thickets or cultivated to grow on fences: <bio>Merremia tuberosa</bio>.

<p id=20782><form>wukatun</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>walking contest</tr>.

<p id=20783><form>wuk-áwut</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A2; b6(1)]</itype> stage a <tr>walkout</tr>. <i>Muwuk-áwut ang mga maistra ug dílì usbáwan ug swildu,</i> The teachers will <tr>stage a walkout</tr> if they don&apos;t receive their salary increase.

<p id=20784><form>wúking</form> <pos>n</pos> walking, a violation in basketball where a player takes more than two steps while holding a ball. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B1256]</itype> be guilty of committing this violation.

<p id=20785><form>wúkir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>men&apos;s briefs</tr> (from the brand name, <ix>Walker</ix>). <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear <tr>briefs</tr>.

<p id=20786><form>wukitúki</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>walkie-talkie</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c1]</itype> communicate with a walkie-talkie.

<p id=20787><form>wúl<sub>1</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>woolen cloth</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A13]</itype> wear s.t. made of <tr>wool</tr>.

<p id=20788><form>wul<sub>2</sub></form> <pos>n</pos> <number>1</number> one&apos;s hand in mahjong. <number>2</number> <xr>= <sc>payil<sub>1</sub></sc>.</xr>

<p id=20789><form>wulpláwir</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>wallflower</tr> <corr sic=in>at</corr> a dance. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[b16]</itype> wind up being a wallflower and not asked to dance.

<p id=20790><form>wungwung</form> <xr>= <sc>yungyung</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20791><form>wurding</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>lyrics</tr> to a song. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A1; c]</itype> write the lyrics to a song.

<p id=20792><form>wurking</form> <pos>n</pos> student who works his way through school. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[B16]</itype> be, become a working student. <i>Dúgay kang mahuman basta magwurking ka,</i> It will take you a long time to finish if you are a working student. <form>{&mdash;|wurking} istyúdint</form> <xr>= <sc>wurking</sc>.</xr>

<p id=20793><form>wuswús</form> <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; c]</itype> dance with s.o. in a wild swaying manner. <i>Nalípung ku kay giwuswús ku níyag sáyaw,</i> I got dizzy because he danced wildly with me.

<p id=20794><form>*wútir</form> <form>{&mdash;|wútir} kúlur</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>water color</tr>. <pos>v</pos> <itype>[A; b6]</itype> color with water colors. <form>{&mdash;|wútir} prup</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>waterproof fabric</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|wútir} ripílint</form> <pos>n</pos> <tr>water repellent fabrics</tr>. <form>{&mdash;|wútir} sarásay</form> <pos>n</pos> coconut palm toddy (slang).

<p id=20795><form>wuyuwuyu</form> <xr>= <sc>wayawaya</sc>.</xr>


</body>
</text>
</TEI.2>
